Staff recommends that the Board of Supervisors conduct Budget Hearings beginning at 9:00 a.m. on June 23, 2016 and approve
an Adopted Budget at the conclusion of the hearings. During the hearings, the Board will be requested to consider increasing
and/or funding additional positions, investments in technology and County facilities, contributions to non-county agencies, reserves
and the use of one-time funds received in FY2015/16.
As Solano County slowly emerges from the Great Recession, County Departments work to maintain a balance between service
delivery and fiscal sustainability. The FY2016/17 Recommended Budget reflects a collaborative effort to balance increasing labor
costs, while continuing to address the Board of Supervisors priorities. Although the County’s economy continues to show signs of
improvement, several key dedicated program revenue sources are growing more slowly than associated costs of programs. With
the ongoing use of the Board adopted Budget Strategies and sound financial practices, departments have continued their
commitment and efforts to contain costs, leveraging technology, partnerships, and State and federal funding where feasible. The
result is a balanced budget which provides for delivery of services to our residents, clients and businesses and provides the
resources necessary to make Solano County a great place to live, learn, work and play.
The FY2016/17 Recommended Budget includes a section dedicated to the County Statistical Profile. This section provides key
information on Solano County’s current economic outlook and captures indicators of the County’s achievements and challenges.
Solano County had its strongest jobs growth in 2015 since the start of the Great Recession. Solano County continues to generate
modest growth in jobs, receive new residents and see rising incomes. Our population growth rate remains modest at 1.1% over
2015 with all State and federal signs pointing to an economy that continues to slowly improve. According to the California
Employment Development Department, overall employment in California continues to improve, and has done so for the past six
years. The unemployment rate in Solano County as of March 2016 stands at 5.7%, down from 6.8% in 2015 and in-line with the
State average of 5.6%. Although Solano County ranks as the third lowest in per capita income when compared to benchmark
counties, our growth rate in per capita income outpaced the State, increasing by 4.5% in 2014 (See County Statistical Profile
Section).
We must continue to pay careful attention to the State and local economic indicators. We have recent negative financial impacts
from the drought to the agricultural industry including production and employment. We continue to face reduced funding for streets
and roads due to unsuccessful efforts with both federal and State transportation legislation and a lingering 10% poverty rate in
Solano County which translates to nearly one in four residents (29.5%) requiring some form of public assistance. State Realigned
programs and mandated services have been and must remain the focus of our spending and staffing priorities if we are to increase
“work ready” and employed clients; keep families together and children safe and out of the “foster care” system; reduce recidivism
of those previously incarcerated; help seniors and the disabled to remain living independently; and assist with access to healthcare,
mental health and healthy food. Although our departments remain optimistic, implementation of many of the State and federal
mandated programs in the past 5 years have not been without challenges. Operationally, the County had to staff appropriately,
change departmental operations, implement new technology, develop new policies and procedures and focus on outcomes,
despite having downsized because of the Great Recession.
Included in this budget message are the following budget-related sections: 1) Budget Overview; 2) Financial Summary; 3) Funded
and Unfunded Obligations and Liabilities; 4) Overview of the federal and State Budgets; 5) FY2016/17 General Fund
Recommended Budget; 6) Economic Risks; 7) General Fund and Fiscal Projection; 8) Pending Issues and 9) Summary of
Recommendations.

The FY2016/17 Recommended Budget for Governmental Funds is balanced and totals $947,899,193 (Schedules 1 and 2). The
total budget represents a decrease of $6 million or 0.6% when compared to the FY2015/16 Adopted Budget and relies on local,
State and federal revenues, and the use of fund balances with limited draws from reserves.
The most significant change is reflected in the Capital Project Funds, which decreased by $21.9 million due to construction costs
for the SB 1022 Sheriff training project which are not reflected in the FY2016/17 Recommended Budget but will be carried forward
and reflected in the FY2016/17 Adopted Budget. The increases in the Special Revenues Funds of $14.8 million are primarily due
to increases in cost of labor for Public Safety and Health & Social Services funds. Increases in Special Revenues Funds in the
FY2016/17 Recommended Budget are offset by a reduction in the Road Fund as a result of less available federal funded project
activity and in the completion of the Winter Bridge. The increase in the General Fund of $0.8 million reflects increased labor costs
and increased General Fund contributions to both Health and Social Services and Public Safety, offset by reductions in Services
and Supplies and reduced transfers to reserves when compared to FY2015/16 Adopted Budget. Finally, Debt Service Funds
increased by $0.4 million as a result of increased bond redemption costs. Overall, the FY2016/17 Recommended Budget for All
Governmental Funds has a modest decrease of 0.6% when compared to the FY2015/16 Adopted Budget.
The FY2016/17 Recommended Budget uses projected 6/30/16 fund balances in several departments with dedicated revenues
and draws down $9.3 million from committed fund balances to meet County obligations. One-time General Fund revenues from
FY2015/16 are recommended to be used to offset one-time costs and to fund increased liabilities for employee-related benefits
for the projected PERS employer rate increases and as contributions toward capital renewal reserves for the maintenance of the
County buildings.
The Recommended Budget provides for a workforce of 3,015.85 FTE positions, excluding extra help positions. This reflects a net
increase of 74.85 FTE from FY2015/16 Adopted Budget of which 58.9 FTE were added during FY2015/16. The net difference of
15.95 FTE results from the addition of 22.95 FTE included in the Recommended Budget, offset by the deletion of 7.0 FTE expiring
limited terms. The year-over-year increase in the workforce reflects staffing needs to address new mandates and associated
services, operational changes, and workload demands primarily in Public Safety, Health Services and Public Assistance.

This Budget Summary narrative is accompanied by a series of budget tables that are intended to describe the budgeted
expenditures and associated revenue used to fund the programs and services outlined in the respective budget units. The
individual Department Recommended Budget narratives provide the following information: the purpose; function and
responsibilities; significant challenges and accomplishments as identified by the Department Head; workload indicators (where
pertinent and relevant); a summary of significant adjustments to the operation or budget; summary of position changes; and
identification of pending issues and policy considerations as identified by the Department Head.
The budget is balanced and relies on continuance of State and federal funding for State and federally mandated programs and
strategic use of the County’s General Fund. Of note, in FY2016/17, the Recommended Budget relies on the use of one-time
funding to cover known revenue/operating shortfalls in Behavioral Health. Efforts are underway to find a means to pay for
mandated Behavioral Health Services beyond FY2016/17. If those efforts are unsuccessful, the County could face a new General
Fund cost exposure in FY2017/18 for this mandated realigned program.

The County’s FY2016/17 Recommended Budget for the General Fund of $246.5 million is balanced with revenues of $212.6
million, drawdowns from committed fund balances of $1.0 million for Accrued Employee Leave Payoff, $2.8 million for Capital
Renewal Reserve, $2.0 million for Employer PERS Rate Increase as previously planned, and use of Fund Balance ($28.2 million).
The Recommended Budget for General Fund reflects an increase in revenues of $9.7 million when compared to the FY2015/16
Adopted Budget of $202.9 million. The increase in revenues is attributed to an anticipated increase in Tax Revenues of $6.5 million
due to improved property values and an increase of $2.7 million for charges for services for various permits and services.
The Recommended Budget reflects increased General Fund appropriations of $246.5 million when compared to FY2015/16
Adopted Budget of $245.8 million. The net increase of $0.8 million is primarily due to increased labor costs and a modest increase
in staffing to address mandates and increased demands for services, offset by reductions in services and supplies and reduced
transfers to reserves when compared to FY2015/16 Adopted Budget.

Supplemental Budget: The Recommended Budget document was prepared early in the month of May to facilitate a May release
and longer review period prior to Budget Hearings in June. To accommodate the earlier release, the departmental budgets reflect
only the known and approved State and federal programs changes as of May 12, which will take effect July 1, 2016.
Historically, the County Administrator’s Office prepares a Supplemental Budget document following the completion and distribution
of the Recommended Budget, as more of an administrative function, primarily to address accounting notations. To the degree
possible, the Supplemental Budget may reflect additional program and service changes including possible reductions that can be
expected based on the Governor’s May Revision and ultimately approved legislation including budget Trailer Bills.
AB 403 Continuum of Care Reform (CCR): Fiscal impacts related to legislative changes under AB 403 are unknown and may
result in future cost increases for children’s services. AB 403, the Continuum of Care Reform (CCR) legislation from 2015, is a
broad legislative attempt to reform the Child Welfare system. AB 403 proposes to create local, community based therapeutic
foster care homes as an alternative to long term placement for children and youth in out of home group placement. This group
includes juveniles under Probation’s supervision as well. The fiscal consequences of this reform effort are uncertain. While there
may be some cost neutrality of shifting care for a child from a residential model to a community based model, many of the children
and youth served may also require more hospitalization and crisis services and community based services. Because the intensity
of the services required, costs may be more expensive to the mental health system to serve. Additionally, changes in the criteria
for other mandated services like Katie A. could result in increased service demand and/or case discovery. The Health & Social
Services Department is participating in a State Workgroup to better anticipate these impacts in advance.
Affordable Care Act: Since implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) in October 2013, Health & Social Services programs
and services has undergone significant change. This effort continues with the expansion of Medi-Cal eligibility to single low-income
adults and undocumented children and the implementation of the Medicare Waiver 2020. Medi-Cal enrollment has grown 58%
from 77,600 individuals in June 2013 (pre-ACA) to 122,899 individuals as of March 2016 in Solano County. This increase in Medi-
Cal clients presents significant challenges to our Family Health Clinics and eligibility and enrollment processes. Health Services
is experiencing a shortage of primary care providers which negatively impacts clinic revenues and efforts are underway to continue
improving Clinic productivity and workflow efficiency.
Proposition 172 Revenue: The projection of Proposition 172 revenue to Public Safety Departments may decrease due to a pending
State correction to the Proposition 172 formula to counties resulting from a recent audit of the State’s allocation of sales tax. The
State Board of Equalization is currently working on a plan to correct errors in the over-allocation of funds.
The Safe Neighborhoods and Schools Act – Proposition 47: Proposition 47 is a ballot initiative passed by California voters on
November 4, 2014. Proposition 47 reduces certain non-serious and nonviolent property and drug offenses from wobblers or
felonies to misdemeanors, reducing penalties to offenders who have not committed certain severe crimes including murder, and
certain sex and gun crimes. Based on the increase workload required to implement Proposition 47, additional resources have
been allocated by the Board in the District Attorney’s Office, the Public Defender’s Office and the Alternate Defender’s Office. The
County Administrator in coordination with County Departments and the Courts will continue to monitor the workload impacts of
Proposition 47.
2011 Public Safety Realignment/AB 109 Funding: The Recommended Budget reflects the County’s share of the estimated total
AB 109 base and growth funding allocations statewide. The Solano County FY2016/17 allocations represent increases over
FY2015/16 resulting from recent allocation formula changes issued by the Realignment Allocation Committee (RAC), one-time
funding augmentations and increased funding statewide. The budget recommended by the Solano Community Corrections
Partnership (CCP) included minimal increases in the appropriation of AB 109 funds over FY2015/16 and departments remain
focused on a continuation of the programs and services previously supported by the CCP. The Recommended Budget includes
the continued use of one-time carry forward funding from prior years’ unspent allocations to fund these programs previously
approved by the Board under the 2011 Solano Public Safety Realignment Act Implementation Plan. AB 109 Growth funding, which
is based on statewide revenue estimates is subject to change pending the final state revenue figures. County staff is continuing
to monitor the State allocation of AB 109 funds as departments address the mandated changes resulting from the implementation
of 2011 Public Safety Realignment. While one-time carry forward funds will provide necessary funding for FY2016/17, the
continued use of unspent carry forward to balance the budget in future years is unsustainable. To maintain the existing level of
AB 109 programs and services in FY2017/18 and beyond, the Community Corrections Partnership will need to increase revenue
or decrease appropriations. Departments are currently working to evaluate existing programs and services and will return to the
Board in the Fall 2016.
Property Tax Appeals: As of May 13, 2016 there are 397 active property tax appeals on file with the County Clerk representing
$11.046 billion (cumulative over 12 years) in assessed value. This is a significant amount given that the total annual valuation of
Solano County is only $46.4 billion. The final resolution of these appeals may have a significant impact on the County’s property
tax revenues in the future. Efforts continue by the Assessor, with assistance from County Counsel, to address and resolve appeals
and reduce the number and value of outstanding appeals to address the uncertainty.
Capital Renewal and Major Maintenance – County Roads and Bridges: As required by law, the Board adopted a 5-Year Capital
Investment Plan for Roads and Bridges on January 26, 2016 which shows an estimated $31.8 million in unfunded road
maintenance and bridge replacement projects. The Board’s existing policy has been for the County to secure State and federal
funds for large projects, such as bridge replacements and major road reconstruction, and to use the local Road Fund to provide
for all other required maintenance. As State and federal funding for this area of responsibility shrinks in the near term, other options
and further consideration regarding adequate sustaining maintenance on Roads and Bridges will be necessary. (Refer to Public
Ways budget)