The FY2014/15 Recommended Budget for Governmental Funds is balanced and totals $826,255,908 (Schedules 1 and 2). The
total budget represents a decrease of $42.9 million or 4.9% when compared to the FY2013/14 Adopted Budget and includes
modest increases in revenues, uses fund balances, and draws from committed reserves.

The most significant change is reflected in the Capital Project Funds due to the majority of construction of the new AB 900-
funded Stanton Correctional Facility being completed in FY2013/14. The decrease in the General Fund is primarily due to
reduced Fund Balance available anticipated at year-end, offset by higher property tax revenues, increased labor costs and
increased General Fund contributions to Public Safety. The increases in the Special Revenues Funds are primarily due to
growth in Federal and State mandated programs in the Public Safety and Health & Social Services funds. The increases in
these two program funds are attributed to new service level requirements as a result of 2011 Public Safety Realignment (AB
109), including mental health, and the FY2013/14 implementation of the Federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
(ACA). Both of these areas of County government are anticipating the need for increases in staff to provide services to meet the
requirements of ongoing mandates.
The FY2014/15 Recommended Budget uses fund balances and draws down $6.1 million from committed fund balances to meet
County obligations. Any one-time revenues in excess of what was projected at Third Quarter from FY2013/14 are recommended
to be used to help pay for increased unfunded liabilities for employee-related costs, including accrued leave payoff and
projected PERS employer rate increases, and contributions toward deferred maintenance for County buildings.
The Recommended Budget provides for a workforce of 2,804.75 FTE positions, excluding extra help positions. This reflects an
overall net increase of 71.1 FTE when comparing Adopted Budget FY2013/14 and Recommended Budget FY2014/15. In
FY2013/14 51.55 FTE were added to address a variety of program service needs primarily in Public Safety and Health and
Social Services. The FY2014/15 Recommended Budget includes requests for a net increase of 19.55 FTE positions. The yearover-
year increase in the workforce reflects staffing needs to address new mandates and associated services related to AB 109
Public Safety Realignment, ACA, as well as cost avoidance measures and some changes in operational needs discussed in the
departmental budget narratives. However, the budget does not restore or enhance general government or other program areas
due to limited growth in discretionary revenues.
This Budget Summary narrative is accompanied by a series of budget tables that are intended to describe the budgeted
expenditures and associated revenue used to fund the programs and services outlined in the respective budget units. The
individual Department Recommended Budget narratives provide the following information: the purpose; function and
responsibilities; significant challenges and accomplishments as identified by the Department Head; workload indicators (where
pertinent and relevant); a summary of significant adjustments to the operation or budget; summary of position changes; and
identification of pending issues and policy considerations as identified by the Department Head.
The FY2014/15 Recommended Budget addresses known revenue challenges and proposes reductions and adjustments in
operating expenditures to address these challenges, while allowing for some continued investments in technology, training, and
capital renewal. The Recommended Budget includes funding for technology refresh, training and support for employee
development in many areas as well as succession planning, updates to County facilities and information systems to keep pace
with changing needs and aging computer systems. The Budget anticipates continued collaboration with outside agencies and
small investments with our community partners to leverage available Federal and State funds. The Budget includes some onetime
funding of $5.0 million for projected PERS employer rate increases, $2.4 million for Deferred Maintenance, and $1.6 million
for the Mental Health Services Act (See Schedule 4).
Local impacts of several statewide issues are not yet known and will be addressed as the year progresses, including the next
stages of implementing the Affordable Care Act and the expanded services under Medi-Cal. Another unknown is the State’s
proposal for accelerated sentencing credits to address prison overcrowding and the ripple effect on the realigned local public
safety responsibilities. Also unclear is the Governor’s Budget Plan that addresses some of the unfunded mandates and other
overdue payments due to the counties in conjunction with the State’s efforts to reduce its “Wall of Debt.” While there is some
uncertainty in current funding streams and potential new costs, what is clear is that County Department Heads and the Board
can anticipate the need for continued discussions and the ongoing reviews of county programs and services in FY2014/15.

The County’s FY2014/15 Recommended Budget for the General Fund of $212.8 million is balanced with revenues of $184.5
million, drawdowns from committed fund balances of $800,000 for Accrued Employee Leave Payoff, $3.3 million for Deferred
Maintenance, $2 million for Employer PERS Rate Increase and the remainder being funded by Fund Balance.
The Recommended Budget for General Fund reflects an increase in revenues of $8.4 million when compared to the FY2013/14
Adopted Budget of $176.1 million. The increase in revenues is primarily attributed to an anticipated increase in Tax Revenues of
$8.8 million due to increased property values, offset by reductions in fines and fee revenues.
The Recommended Budget reflects reduced General Fund appropriations of $212.8 million when compared to FY2013/14
Adopted Budget of $227.9 million. The net decrease of $15.1 million is primarily due a reduction of nearly $20 million in one-time
transfers to committed fund balances, offset by increasing costs associated with the implementation of AB 109 public safety
activities.

PENDING ISSUES:
Supplemental Budget: The Recommended Budget document was prepared early in the month of May to facilitate a May release
and longer review period prior to Budget Hearings in June. To accommodate the earlier release, the departmental budgets
reflect only the known and approved Federal and State programs changes as of May 19, which will take effect July 1, 2014.
Historically, the County Administrator’s Office prepares a Supplemental Budget document following the completion and
distribution of the Recommended Budget, as more of an administrative function, primarily to address accounting notations. To
the degree possible, the Supplemental Budget may reflect additional program and service changes including possible reductions
that can be expected based on the Governor’s May Revision. Unfortunately, the speed in which the California State Legislature
will act on the Governor’s proposals in the May Budget Revision is unknown. With the passage of Proposition 30 – the temporary
sales tax measure- the State has received some financial relief. However, as the implementation of the Affordable Care Act
continues, there remains a lot of uncertainty and unknowns at the State level that could significantly distress the County’s
FY2014/15 Budget (e.g. 1991 Realignment and AB 109 formula) and several other operational budgets. If this materializes in the
coming weeks, the CAO and County Departments will return to the Board with additional budget recommendations.
Affordable Care Act: After the first wave of enrollments in the various insurance options under the Affordable Care Act, the
number of individuals relying on Medi-Cal in Solano County increased from around 72,000 residents to more than 89,000 due in
large part to expanded eligibility criteria. Operationally, there are also expansions of mental health and substance use disorder
services to individuals formerly ineligible for MediCal, such as single childless adults. While Federal and State funding programs
appear to address short-term funding needs of these programs, there are potential long-term funding demands that may put the
County’s General Fund at risk to address future funding gaps.
AB109 Growth Factor: The budget recommended by the Solano Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) included no
increase in the appropriation of AB 109 growth funds based on a yet-to-be released allocation from the Realignment Allocation
Committee (RAC). The proposed allocation is still under evaluation by the RAC and is yet to be finalized. While the Recommend
Budget projects no change in the AB109 growth allocation over FY2013/14, the potential exists that the final allocation will
decrease. The costs associated with implementing AB 109-related programs have increased, and in the County is relying on
one-time carry forward funding from prior years’ unspent allocations to fund these programs previously approved by the Board
under the 2011 Solano Public Safety Realignment Act Implementation Plan. County staff is continuing to monitor the State
allocation of AB 109 funds as Departments address the mandated changes resulting from the implementation of 2011 Public
Safety Realignment.
Property Tax Appeals: Currently there are 771 active property tax appeals on file with the County Clerk representing $10.59
billion (cumulative over 11 years) in assessed value. This is a significant amount given that the total annual valuation of Solano

County is only $41 billion. The final resolution of these appeals can have a significant impact on the County’s property tax
revenues in the future.
Capital Renewal and Major Maintenance – County Roads and Bridges
As required by law, the Board adopted a 5-Year Capital Investment Plan for Roads and Bridges on January 14, 2014 which
shows an estimated $8 million in unfunded road maintenance and bridge replacement projects. The Board’s existing policy has
been for the County to secure Federal and State funds for large projects, such as bridge replacements and major road
reconstruction, and to use the local Road Fund to provide for all other required maintenance. As Federal and State funding for
this area of responsibility continue to diminish, other options and further consideration regarding this area of liability and
responsibility will be necessary. (Refer to Public Ways budget.)