On behalf of the Sonoma County staff, I am pleased to deliver the FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget. The
budget implements the Board of Supervisors’ policy guidance, and works to achieve the Board’s Strategic Plan
goals: Safe, Healthy & Sustainable Communities; Economic & Environmental Stewardship; Invest in the Future;
and Civic Services & Engagement.
The County governing board and staff have demonstrated strong financial management, by annually adjusting
programs and implementing service delivery efficiencies to close a structural deficit between revenues and
expenses. The efforts have resulted in year-end savings each of the last 5 years. Because of this consistent fiscal
discipline and the county family willingness to work together by accepting some important sacrifices, we have
been able to weather thus far the effects of the “Great Recession” without severely impacting our community.
Many economic forecasts agree the economy is building steam, and Sonoma County is outpacing the state’s
metropolitan areas in job growth. I am encouraged by the positive signs. Looking forward, I see FY 2013-14 as an
opportune year to capitalize on the lessons learned from the recession, develop focused investments guided by the
Board’s Strategic Plan goals, address countywide unmet or deferred needs, and prepare for the future.
The “Great Recession” has made us more fiscally disciplined and reinforced our ingenuity and innovation.
The FY 2013-14 Budget allows us to strengthen our infrastructure and deliver superior public services that enrich
our residents’ quality of life.
This memorandum provides a summary of the Recommended Budget through the following:
I. Budget Financial Overview
II. Significant Unmet/Deferred Needs
III. Positions Summary
IV. Strategic Plan, Outcomes, Measures, and Board Priorities
V. State Budget Potential Impacts
VI. Next Steps in Budget Process
VII. Acknowledgements
County of Sonoma
FY 2013-2014 Adopted Budget
Executive Summary
County of Sonoma
FY 2013-2014 Adopted Budget
Executive Summary
I. BUDGET FINANCIAL OVERVIEW
The recommended County budget totals $1.3 billion, a $14.4 million increase from FY 12-13. This growth comes
predominately from the special revenue funds which are increasing $23.8 million due to state and federal funding
allocations primarily for state Realignment funding. The General Fund totals $382 million, which is a decrease of
$11.8 million. This is due to the prior year $8 million one-time contribution towards Roads Infrastructure and a
reduction of $3.8 million mostly due to debt service reduction. Fortunately, despite the reduction, all general fund
budgets were able to maintain funding levels similar to FY 12-13 and in some cases achieve an enhancement in
services. As of this writing, additional FY 13-14 recommendations are under development, which will be included
in final budget hearings materials. In anticipation of a long term Roads Infrastructure funding plan, Supplemental
Budget recommendations will identify potential funding sources to continue one time support into the new year.
The Enterprise funds budgets reflect $7 million in increased appropriations mainly associated with transit services
equipment purchases. Lastly, Special District funds $16 million reduction is primarily due to completing Water
Agency and Sanitation zones/districts common facilities projects in FY 12-13. The following table summarizes
total expenditures in the Recommended Budget.
This year’s budget document reflects continued investments in the County’s Strategic Plan and Board priorities.
The four Strategic Plan Goal Areas are: Safe, Healthy and Caring Community; Economic and Environmental
Stewardship; Investment in the Future; and Civic Services and Engagement. The outcomes we are trying to
achieve in each of these areas are shown briefly below.
Departments are doing more to establish and maintain measures to assess how the fiscal investment reflected in
the budget moves progress in tangible ways to support the Strategic Plan Goals and Board’s priorities. The
outcomes listed below are examples of outcome or performance measures in use by departments or agencies.
Additional information about departmental outcome measures can be found within each specific department budget narrative.
Community members are safe in their homes and communities; are sheltered and socially supported; and
have access to clean air, water, and safe, reliable solid and liquid waste management systems.
 Community development and planning promote improved health, safety, and quality of life.
 Community is prepared and responds appropriately to emergencies and natural hazards; and supports
overall heath beginning with the healthy development of children.

Protect, maintain and manage parks, public lands and open space systems that promote recreation, health,
agricultural viability and protect watersheds, promote biodiversity and contribute to the economic vitality.
 A strong, diverse, and sustainable economy that supports job retention and job growth for all residents.
 Agricultural resources are preserved, valued for food and for maintaining links to our County’s heritage.
 A water and energy plan that maximizes renewable energy, reduces water use and green house gas
production and supports the economy.
 A growing diversification and enrichment of economic base.

A community that is proactive in mitigating and adapting to the causes and impacts of climate change to
safeguard the environment, human health, and the economy.
 A well maintained transportation and facility network that promotes mobility, health and safety,
connectivity and convenience.
 Sustainably managed local resources.
 Strategic investment in prevention-focused policies and interventions that reduce poverty and increase
equal opportunity for quality education and good health in nurturing home and community environments.

Increased access and greater citizen participation in County government.
 A community that understands and supports the services provided by the County.
 Increased or enhanced community based partnerships.
 A professionally managed County organization that is accessible, transparent, fiscally responsible, and
accountable to the public.

The Board of Supervisors has identified priorities for 2013 which are summarized below. These priorities align
with the County Strategic Plan Goal areas. Identified expenditures included in this budget in support of the
Board’s 2013 Priorities and other Priority Projects are displayed below in relation to the four Goal Areas.

This budget is being provided on May 24, 2013 in order for the public to review the document in advance of the
Budget Hearings. The hearings are scheduled to begin on June 10, 2013 at 8:30 a.m. and may be continued from
day to day as needed for a maximum of 14 calendar days per state law. The Board will adopt the budget,
containing such revisions as the Board of Supervisors determines at the conclusion of the hearings.
At the beginning of the public hearings, the Board will be presented with a supplemental package containing
additional information and recommendations as necessary to provide up to date FY 13-14 budget programming
needs, which were not included in the main recommended budget document given the information was not
available at the time. At the conclusion of the public hearings, the Board of Supervisors will be asked to adopt the
budget as modified per the Board’s direction and the budget will serve as the operating plan for Fiscal Year 201314.
After the State of California adopts its budget and/or as needs arise after the close of the property tax roll and the
County’s Fiscal 2012-13 books, staff will return with a collection of budget adjustments for the Board of
Supervisors’ consideration.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS AND THANK YOUS
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget plan will not be possible without the input and collaboration of extremely
professional department and agency heads and their respective talented staff. Department Heads and fiscal staff
have spent months scrutinizing programming needs, reviewing available resources, and developing thoughtful
budget recommendations to construct a balanced budget, which operationalizes the Board’s priorities and carries
out our County’s Strategic Plan.
In particular, David Sundstrom, the Auditor-Controller-Treasurer-Tax Collector, and his staff, many of whom
(once again) took on new roles this year, provided great support in developing the budget document. Information
Systems, including John Hartwig and his staff, offered technical assistance and systems support to maximize
capacity features from the Human Resources Management System and, as always, Reprographics provided
excellent customer service in a timely fashion.
Most notably, I want to appreciate the dedicated professionals working in County Administrator’s Office who put
this document together. Those individuals include Mike Gossman, Jim Leddy, Joanna Lutman, Lori Norton,
Jennifer Milligan, Jennifer M. Murray, Joe Plaugher, Christina Rivera, Terri Saunders, Don Schwartz, Karen
Spitler, Chris Thomas, and Christine Williams. They all contributed their particular expertise to build the 2013-14
Recommended Budget. To each and every one I offer my gratitude for their excellent work.
It is the employees of the Sonoma County organization, who bring the budget to life by doing the work of the
County day in and day out, and achieving positive results for our community. Without them, the Recommended
Budget would not have significance. I wish to thank them for their commitment to making this a great place to
live, learn, work, and play. I look forward to a working with them this budget year to implement the programs and
services that will truly enrich the quality of life in Sonoma County.
Finally, the work of the budget could not be done without the support of the Board of Supervisors. It is their
vision, mission, goals, and work plan that establish the framework of the budget. It is due to their leadership that
this document takes shape and can be easily implemented throughout the 2013-14 fiscal year.