I am proud to submit the second fiscal year (FY) 2016-2017 budget of the County’s first two-year budget plan totaling $1.6 billion. The FY 2016-2017 budget plan supports our County‘s vision to invest in beautiful, thriving, and sustainable communities for all and advances programs and initiatives tied to the County’s Strategic Plan goals: Safe, Healthy & Sustainable Community; Economic & Environmental Stewardship; Invest in the Future; and Civic Services & Engagement.
During the recession we challenged the organization to continue to provide essential services to the community with greatly reduced means. Through the difficult work of the Board of Supervisors, County Department Heads, and staff, we were able to reset the County’s fiscal position. This budget builds upon continued economic recovery, making targeted investments while maintaining our fiscal health. Additional funding is recommended in a number of Board priority areas, including workforce housing, effective and efficient countywide fire services, and the annexation of Southwest Santa Rosa.
The recommended budget also includes additional funding for our County’s labor force – recognizing the most recent labor contracts which provided cost of living increases and addressed the high cost of health care for County employees. Investing in the County’s workforce respects the sacrifice employees made during the recession by accepting pay cuts to avoid more significant reductions in services and brings compensation to 95 percent of market, keeping the County competitive with other local government agencies.
A mix of additional funding due to expected growth in property tax and sales tax revenue, increases in state and federal allocations, and resourceful cost saving measures instituted by departments enable this balanced recommended budget. Adherence to the County’s adopted fiscal principles ensures that all proposed budgets are presented in the context of long term operational sustainability.
New this year, as part of our shared commitment to transparency, open government, and citizen engagement, and in furtherance of the Board’s outreach and engagement priority, I am proud to introduce a new budget tool that has been developed to facilitate the public’s review of the Recommended Budget. The online application presents the County’s operating budget in a visual style to help promote an understanding of how the budget is structured and where the County is dedicating available resources. The SoCo Budget link is http://budget.sonomacounty.ca.gov/#!/year/default.
The 2016-2017 Recommended Budget represents a structurally balanced operating and strategic investment plan, and provides the needed resources to continue delivering high quality public services that enrich our residents’ quality of life. This summary provides the following: I. Budget Financial Overview; II. Positions Summary; III. 2015 Board Priorities; IV. Budget Next Steps; and V. Acknowledgements. The rest of this budget sets out individual departmental budgets organized by functional group under each tabbed section, which looks to help the reader navigate to specific areas of interest.


The second year FY 2016-2017 total budget is $1.6 billion, representing a $23 million, or 1.4%, increase from the FY 2015-2016 Revised Budget. The total budget is financed with $1.46 billion in revenues and $177.6 million in use of fund balances.
The FY 2016-2017 projected revenues are practically unchanged at 0.5% less than the FY 2015-2016 adopted budget. While the General Fund budget includes tax revenue growth, the Special Revenue funds depict revenue reduction due an accounting change. The accounting adjustment eliminates revenue transfer appropriations between budget units to cover program costs, and establishes reimbursements as negative appropriations in order to accurately reflect net expenses in year-end financials.
The table below provides a comparison of total expenditure and revenue appropriations, and permanent positions between the first year FY 2015-2016 budget adopted a year ago in June 2015, and the second year revised FY 2016-2017 Recommended budget to be reviewed by the Board starting on June 13, 2016
This first two-year FY 2015-2016 & 2016-2017 Budget was reviewed, adopted, and approved on June 16, 2015. The Year 2, or FY 2016-2017 Revised Recommended Budget is to be available for public review by June 3, 2016. Budget Hearings are scheduled to begin on June 13, 2013 and may be continued from day to day as needed for a maximum of 14 calendar days. Per State law, the Board will adopt the second year FY 2016-2017 Budget, containing such revisions as the Board of Supervisors determines at the conclusion of the Hearings.

At the beginning of the public hearings, the Board will be presented with a supplemental package containing additional information and recommendations as necessary to update those FY 2016-2017 programming needs which were not included in the revised budget recommendations.
At the conclusion of the public hearings, the Board of Supervisors will be asked to adopt the second year FY 2016-2017 Budget as modified per the approved Supplemental Recommended Budget Adjustment and additional Board direction during the hearings.
After the State of California adopts its budget and/or as needs arise after the close of the property tax roll and the County’s Fiscal 2015-2016 books, staff will return with a collection of budgetary adjustments for the Board of Supervisors’ consideration.
The 2016-2017 Recommended Budget plan resulted from a collaborative development process between the County Administrator’s Office (CAO) and the County’s agencies and departments to ensure the preparation of a balanced budget for the coming fiscal year. All budget requests are reviewed through the following lenses: Board of Supervisors’ policy direction, available financing, state and federal policies, changes in the cost of doing business, capital asset needs, Strategic Plan goal areas, and the Board of Supervisors’ annually-established policy priorities.
This effort benefited from many partnerships. In particular, those with former Auditor-Controller-Treasurer-Tax Collector David Sundstrom, appointed Auditor-Controller-Treasurer-Tax Collector Donna Dunk and Budget Accountant-Auditor Olena Chandler, who verified overall account balancing and accuracy; Information Systems Director John Hartwig and the IT team, who quickly addressed CAO staff’s requests to keep the Hyperion budget system operating smoothly under sustained peak demand; and Director of Human Resources Christina Cramer, whose professional team members Ans Van Egmond and Tamara Kallhoff processed position changes and verified Board-approved position allocations.
The County Administrator’s Office team warrants a special thanks for the development of the second year FY 2016-2017 budget as they managed to analyze and develop processes helping the organization complete a two year budget plan, which took a bit of brain twisting given the two-year view of data. In particular, I wish to thank Christina Rivera, Deputy County Administrator and the County’s Budget Manager, who kept the CAO Team focused on achieving a balanced two year budget and led the overall budget process. The CAO team includes Michelle Arellano, Caluha Barnes, Mary Booher, Natalie Brunamonte (Hyperion Administrator), Peter Bruland, Hannah Euser, Lois Hopkins, Nikolas Klein, Sita Kuteira, Robert Lawton (interim Deputy County Administrator), Joanna Lutman (lead Budget document coordinator), Liz Parra, Karen Spitler, Rebecca Wachsberg (Deputy County Administrator), Terri Wright, and Diana Wilson. I am honored and thankful to have a CAO team who maintain a positive attitude and strong teamwork in the completion of this important process.
Once a budget is adopted, it is Sonoma County’s employees who bring it to life through their work in our community. Therefore, I want to express my appreciation to each member of the County staff for their dedication to public service. Only with such a workforce can we fulfill our mission to enrich the quality of life in Sonoma County.
My deepest gratitude goes to Sonoma County’s Board of Supervisors. Their leadership and guidance always takes into account the best interests of our residents while constantly challenging County staff to remain creative and innovative. Thank you for your service, and thank you for the unparalleled public service opportunity you have given me.

