On behalf of the Sonoma County staff, I am pleased to provide you the $1.4 billion FY 14-15 Recommended Budget. The budget reflects our County’s disciplined approach to fiscal management and is consistent with the Board’s Strategic Plan goals: Safe, Healthy & Sustainable Communities; Economic & Environmental Stewardship; Invest in the Future; and Civic Services & Engagement.
Sonoma County’s innovation and collaborative approach has helped guide us through seven years of challenging economic times. With the Board of Supervisors’ leadership, the County has implemented efficiencies, expanded federal and state revenue sources, and developed new approaches to business and service delivery. The recommended budget reflects a movement toward modernization and continued fiscal discipline. This movement is perhaps best represented by replacement of the County’s 27 year old financial system and beginning the implementation of a 2-year budget plan.
The recommended FY14-15 budget is the County’s first step towards a 2-year budget plan. With the help of County departmental staff and concurrence from all department heads, the FY 14-15 budget, for the most part, maintains status quo programming. The FY 13-14 budgeted appropriations and allocated positions approved by the Board during the year were rolled forward into FY 14-15. The exceptions are: (1) adjustments to base revenues and grant sources; (2) changes in salaries and benefits to recognize the negotiated 1% cost of living adjustment and updated benefits cost; (3) first-year cost allocation of the Enterprise Financial System Phase I investment; (4) exclusion of one-time costs budgeted in FY 13-14 for systems and infrastructure investments; and (5) programming of multiyear capital projects. The Supplemental Budget package presented at the beginning of the Budget hearings will contain recommendations for program changes received beyond baseline which align with the County’s Strategic Plan as well as the 2014 Board policy established priorities.
The first full 2-year budget, FYs 15-16 and 16-17, will improve program projections and alleviate resources dedicated to the annual budget book construction, and will continue to include quarterly budget updates and annual Board adoption. The County Administrator will collaborate with the Auditor-Controller-Treasurer-Tax Collector to continue the County’s 19-year history of receiving the Government Finance Officers Association Distinguished Budget Award.
The FY 14-15 Recommended Budget is balanced and provides the needed resources to strengthen our internal systems and to continue delivering innovative public services that enrich our residents’ quality of life. This memorandum provides a summary of the Recommended Budget through the following:
I. Budget Financial Overview
II. Significant Unmet/Deferred Needs
III. Positions Summary
IV. Strategic Plan, Outcomes, Measures, and Board Priorities
V. State Budget Potential Impacts
VI. Next Steps in Budget Process
VII. Acknowledgements Adopted Budget Fiscal Year 2014-2015 3 Executive Summary
I. BUDGET FINANCIAL OVERVIEW
The Recommended County Budget totals $1.4 billion, a $60.4 million or 4.4% increase from FY 13-14 Adopted Budget. The changes are the result of excluding one-time costs mostly for capital investments and infrastructure improvements combined with growth in Internal Service Funds (ISF). The ISF $94.5 million growth is due to Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB) changes requiring the establishment of appropriations in a separate fund to record employer contributions to the Sonoma County Employee Retirement Association system and pension obligation debt service payments.
The General Fund totals $390 million, or a $16.9 million (4.1%) decrease. This is due to the prior year $8 million contribution toward Roads infrastructure (of which $7 million was one-time); and a decrease of $9 million transferred to the Reinvestment & Revitalization (R&R) program. The R&R program was established by the Board on May 12, 2013 to fund the completion of community projects previously financed under the County’s former Redevelopment Agencies. The FY 13-14 Adopted Budget designation for the R&R transfer included accumulated funds from the Redevelopment Agency’s dissolved asset liquidation proceeds.
The recommended Special Revenue budget of Health & Human Services and Roads program totals $508.5 million. This is a $24 million decrease from FY 13-14 associated with redirection of Health Realignment pass-through funds that are now directed to the state consistent with Medi-Cal expansion under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
The Enterprise budget reflects a $25 million decrease as a result of one-time capital investments included in the prior year adopted budget for Roads and Airport infrastructure, as well as Transit services equipment.
The FY 14-15 Recommended Budget maintains core services, but it does not completely address countywide needs that have been deferred. The following is the updated list of priority items with estimated costs not included in the Recommended Budget and/or yet to have a funding path in place. Note the list of items below is not exhaustive.

The table below illustrates the change since FY 12-13 in full-time equivalent (FTE) positions by department. The Recommended Budget increases allocations by 103 FTE from the prior year adopted budget due to FY 13-14 position adjustments. Total positions increased 282 FTE from the FY 12-13 Adopted Budget to a total of 4,009 FTE as a result of increased positions primarily in Health and Human Services and in Information Systems department for systems implementation. During FY 12-13 and 13-14 positions were added driven by caseload increases and to implement Affordable Health Care Act Reform.
This year’s budget document reflects continued investments in the County’s Strategic Plan and Board priorities. The four Strategic Plan Goal areas are: Safe, Healthy and Caring Community; Economic and Environmental Stewardship; Investment in the Future; and Civic Services and Engagement. The outcomes we are trying to achieve in each of these areas are shown briefly below.
Departments continue to establish and maintain measures to assess how the fiscal investment reflected in the budget moves progress in tangible ways to support the Strategic Plan Goals and Board’s priorities. The outcomes listed below are examples of outcome or performance measures in use by departments or agencies.
SAFE, HEALTHY, AND CARING COMMUNITY ($604 MILLION)
 Community members are safe in their homes and communities; are sheltered and socially supported; and have access to clean air, water, and safe, reliable solid and liquid waste management systems.
 Community development and planning promote improved health, safety, and quality of life.
 Community is prepared and responds appropriately to emergencies and natural hazards; and supports overall heath beginning with the healthy development of children.
Protect, maintain and manage parks, public lands and open space systems that promote recreation, health, agricultural viability and protect watersheds, promote biodiversity and contribute to the economic vitality.
 A strong, diverse, and sustainable economy that supports job retention and job growth for all residents.
 Agricultural resources are preserved, valued for food and for maintaining links to our County’s heritage.
 A water and energy plan that maximizes renewable energy, reduces water use and green house gas production, and supports the economy.
 A growing diversification and enrichment of economic base.

A community that is proactive in mitigating and adapting to the causes and impacts of climate change to safeguard the environment, human health, and the economy.
 A well maintained transportation and facility network that promotes mobility, health and safety, connectivity and convenience.
 Sustainably managed local resources.
 Strategic investment in prevention-focused policies and interventions that reduce poverty and increase equal opportunity for quality education and good health in nurturing home and community environments.
Increased access and greater citizen participation in County government.
 A community that understands and supports the services provided by the County.
 Increased or enhanced community based partnerships.
 A professionally managed County organization that is accessible, transparent, fiscally responsible, and accountable to the public.

This budget is being provided on June 5, 2014 in order for the public to review the document in advance of the Budget Hearings. The Hearings are scheduled to begin on June 16, 2014 and may be continued from day to day as needed for a maximum of 14 calendar days per state law. The Board will adopt the budget, containing such revisions as the Board of Supervisors determines at the conclusion of the hearings.
At the beginning of the public hearings, the Board will be presented with a supplemental package containing additional information and recommendations as necessary to provide up to date FY 14-15 budget programming needs, which were not included in the recommended budget document. Given the roll forward budget approach department staff submitted program changes beyond baseline to their CAO Analyst, which included analysis of the resulting public service value and Strategic Plan and/or Board Policy Priority alignment.
At the conclusion of the public hearings, the Board of Supervisors will be asked to adopt the budget as modified per the approved Supplemental Recommended Budget Adjustment and additional Board direction during the hearings.
After the State of California adopts its budget and/or as needs arise after the close of the property tax roll and the County’s Fiscal 13-14 books, staff will return with a collection of budgetary adjustments for the Board of Supervisors’ consideration. Adopted Budget Fiscal Year 2014-2015 15 Executive Summary

The FY 14-15 Recommended Budget plan is one of the County’s best examples of collective efforts. With the input, and collaboration of department and agency heads and their respective staff, the budget is a more complete and thorough document that County residents deserve. Department Heads and fiscal staff were flexible and willing to implement the roll forward budget approach and developed thoughtful budget recommendations to account for one-time revenues and/or expenses. The collective and innovative effort allowed County Administrator staff to produce a balanced budget without excessively drawing on department/agency staff resources, while still constructing an operating plan that implements the Board’s policy guidance and carries out our County’s Strategic Plan.
Many partnerships are required for this work effort. In particular, David Sundstrom, the Auditor-Controller-Treasurer-Tax Collector, and Olena Chandler, Budget Accountant-Auditor, provided essential support in reconciling budget recommendations and producing the required state financial schedules. Information Systems Director John Hartwig and Mary Bucher, Senior Programmer, offered technical assistance while at the same time implementing Phase I of the new financial system. Director of Human Resources Wendy Macy provided professional team members, Ans Van Egmond and Marion Angiuli, to process position changes and verify Board approved position allocations. In addition, Reprographics kept frequent communications with our office and prioritized the Budget document reproduction in a timely fashion.
The dedicated professionals working in the County Administrator’s Office are to be specially recognized for the development of the FY 14-15 budget. Innovation and willingness to go the extra mile was the glue that kept this effort together. The CAO team includes Mary Booher, Roxanne Epstein, Joanna Lutman, Jennifer Milligan, Jennifer M. Murray, Christina Rivera, Peter Rumble, Terri Saunders, Don Schwartz, Karen Spitler, Chris Thomas, Rebecca Wachsberg, and Christine Williams. To each of them I extend my gratitude for their consistently excellent work.
The Sonoma County employees’ daily performance of duties and continued engagement are the key to a successful budget year measured by achieving positive results for our community within the Recommended Budget programmed resources. I want to thank each County employee for his/her commitment to making this a great place to live, learn, work, and play.
Most importantly, budget planning relies on the Board of Supervisors’ discipline and established budget policies. I wish to thank the Board of Supervisors for their collective vision and focus to enrich the quality of life in Sonoma County through superior public services. This vision provides the framework for the Recommended Budget before you.
