It has been the tradition for several years now to weave meaningful quotes into the
County’s Budget Message. As I sat down to draft this message, the quote that kept
coming to mind is our County vision statement. Many of our current County employees
may not even be aware of this vision statement that was established over a decade
ago, although many may be familiar with our closely related motto, “Striving to be the
best.”
Our vision is one of the things I’ve held onto tightly through all the changes we have
experienced over the past five years. We have lost great leaders in Chief Executive
Officers Monica Nino, and Richard Robinson before her, but our County leadership
team is stable, focused and extremely talented. We are fortunate to have a Board of
Supervisors who work well together and are committed to the success of the
organization and service to our community.
Our vision has substance. I encourage each of our employees to look at this vision in a
fresh way every day. Together, let’s ask ourselves what we can do to help our County to
be the best in America. Sometimes you’ll find that answer in innovation, and sometimes
you’ll find that answer in a small, random act of kindness provided to a client or fellow
employee. And as we pursue this ideal, not only does our organization become greater,
but our personal satisfaction grows as well.

This is what I see in the work of our employees every day. I see a commitment and
passion for the organization which cannot be manufactured. And while “striving to be
the best” is an ideal we may never reach, it causes us to stretch toward something
greater. It’s about the journey we take through life.
I am genuinely humbled to take the helm as Interim Chief Executive Officer. While I do
not know what the future holds, I do know this - our County has weathered a
tremendous storm and the ship is steady and getting stronger every day. This is due in
great part to the tremendous employees of this organization. Their dedication, focus
and commitment through these challenging times have revealed the strength of their
character. Together, we will continue our journey toward being “respected for our
service in the community” as we strive to become one of the best counties in America.
I am pleased the financial state of our County is showing modest signs of improvement.
In the following pages we will examine a number of elements in this Final Budget
document that speak to our financial status and the outlook for our future.
External Assessment/Issues
Economic Outlook:
Regional economists are projecting a “sluggish” recovery in the Central Valley for 2013.
The Bay Area and San Jose are expected to surpass the national economic recovery in
2013 and job growth is expected to move inland to the Sacramento and Stockton
Metropolitan Statistical Areas in 2014. We are hopeful we will see improvements in
Stanislaus County during this period.
The unemployment rate in Stanislaus County has decreased significantly since its
recent highs in 2010. However, we continue to face the challenges of an
unemployment rate higher than the State and nearly double the national average for
unemployment. Stanislaus County’s recent unemployment trends are:


On a positive note, median home prices and sales tax revenues are inching up slightly,
and for the first time in four years County assessed property tax values increased.
Property tax and sales tax are two of the biggest discretionary revenue sources for the
County’s General Fund and even mild growth is welcomed in these areas where we
have experienced significant decreases as a result of the recession.

State Impacts:
The State budget has consistently been a source of uncertainty and pain for the County
since the early 1990s. Cuts to local funds and the taking and shifting of funds have
wreaked havoc on local government budgets. The State’s “borrowing” of local property
taxes several times over the past ten years challenged counties to fill the multi-million
dollar gaps created by the State’s actions or reduce important programs and services.
Also, the State’s strategy of slashing funding to counties in order to balance the State
budget was commonly used. However, the adverse effects of the State budget climate
appear to have momentarily changed as a result of voter action in the fall of 2012.
The State had built up nearly $35 billion of short-term debt, which Governor Brown
referred to as a “wall of debt” when he called for a tax initiative to raise revenue for
State coffers. The Governor’s Proposition 30 initiative was passed by the voters in the
fall of 2012. The proposition increases sales taxes by .25% for four years and personal
income tax for seven years on those who earn more than $250,000 per year. The
initiative primarily raises funds for education, but appears to have prevented significant
additional budget cuts for counties. In January 2013, the Governor submitted a
balanced budget proposal including the new revenue and called upon the legislature to
exercise fiscal restraint as new revenue was beginning to come in to the State. Since
the adoption of the County’s Proposed Budget, the State Controller has reported the
total revenues for the State’s fiscal year ending June, 2013 at $100.1 billion, topping
budget estimates by $2 billion. This continues to underscore the call of the Governor for
fiscal prudence in the State legislature and helps prevent the State from making cuts to
county budgets. However, there is still a significant fiscal threat to counties in the State
budget, primarily in the implementation of the State’s Medi-Cal Expansion and Health
Care Reform, and its potential impact on county budgets as well as the criminal justice
realignment entering its third year in 2013-2014.
Realignment:
Public Safety Realignment began in October 2011, as the State passed historic
legislation to decrease the number of offenders in State prisons. Under Realignment,
low-level offenders that are newly convicted are no longer sentenced to State prison;
instead, they are sentenced to serve time in County jail. Overall, the diversion of lowlevel
offenders and parole violators to county jails has decreased the State prison
population by 17%.
With the shifting of State prisoners to counties, came a shift of revenue to counties.
Unfortunately, Stanislaus County was on the unfavorable end of a multi-year funding
formula for Realignment. For example, Stanislaus County in September 2012 was
receiving an allocation per offender of $9,447 versus Contra Costa County at $31,461
per offender. County staff continues to advocate a change in the funding methodology
as well as seeks to influence any methodologies that impact new Realignment funding
sources.
Health and Human Services:
We continue to see a significant growth in the health and human services departments.
Stanislaus County has historically experienced unemployment running twice the
national average, higher than average poverty and more than one-third of our residents
on some form of public assistance. We have experienced significant program
expansion in our Community Services Agency as State and Federal funds are used for
hiring additional staff to support programs.
Health Care Reform and State health changes will materially impact the County. There
are two key dates which are quickly arriving; on October 1, 2013, Medi-Cal eligibility
changes will take place statewide and on January 1, 2014, the Medi-Cal expansion will
become operative.
There are many variables in play with this subject and the County has the added
challenge of not just being an employer who must implement the plan, but also as a
health provider for tens of thousands of patients. The final impacts of Health Care
Reform are not yet known and we view this topic as a significant challenge for the
organization. The Governor indicated in his May Revise Budget document that the
State will begin recouping health savings from local government 1991 Realignment
funds as soon as January 2014. Since the Adopted Proposed Budget, it has been
confirmed that the Governor is targeting recoupment of $300 million of healthcare
savings for Fiscal Year 2013-2014, $900 million for 2014-2015 and $1.3 billion for 2015-
2016. Counties have the ability to decide between two methodologies for calculating
savings that will go to the State.
Budget Outlook & Strategy
The 2013-2014 Recommended Final Budget reflects $1,042,987,731 in appropriations
and $1,005,839,769 in revenue. This compares to the 2013-2014 Adopted Proposed
Budget which totaled $1,010,298,044 in appropriations and $989,027,163 in revenue.
The Recommended Final Budget is focused on various strategies including maintaining
core services for the public and cost containment. County departments were issued the
same net county cost as in the prior fiscal year with an adjustment for any one-time
funding. This approach will require departments to absorb increases in retirement
costs, utilities, services and supplies and more.
This year’s budget is impacted by two major areas in particular: Roads and Bridges with
the inclusion of $44 million for two significant road projects (Kiernan Interchange and
Claribel Road Widening Project) and more than $46 million of increases in our
Community Services Agency (CSA). These two areas alone constitute $90 million of
budget growth. The increases in the CSA budget come with corresponding State and
Federal revenue for various social services programs. The Kiernan/State Route 99
Interchange and the Claribel Road Widening were budgeted at $49 million in last year’s
budget. Bids for the Kiernan project have come in $5 million less than projected, thus
accounting for the $44 million in this year’s Adopted Proposed Budget.

Discretionary Revenue is projected to increase by 4% or $6 million when compared to
the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Budget as adjusted for one-time revenue. This number
reflects a 4% increase of property tax revenue in contrast to the cumulative drop of
approximately 22% in the assessment roll over the past five years. We also project
nearly a 9% increase in forecasted Sales and Use Tax revenue over Fiscal Year 2012-
2013 actuals.
The County will be using fund balance and retained earnings in several areas to
balance the Final Budget. The General Fund portion of the Final Budget at $257 million
is balanced through the use of $6.6 million in Unassigned Fund Balance and $14.8
million of department carryover funds. Special Revenue funds will be using $10.3
million of fund balance in their $628 million budget and Enterprise Funds will be using
$4.7 million of retained earnings to balance their $67 million budget. Internal Service
Funds will use $1.2 million of retained earnings to balance their nearly $91 million
budget.
Staffing includes an overall increase in the position allocation count of 23 positions from
the 2013-2014 Adopted Proposed Budget; this includes 10 positions added through
separate agenda items: one for the Public Safety Center AB900 Phase II/Jail Expansion
Project and nine for the Community Corrections Partnership Plan. The position
allocation will increase 13 positions as recommended in the 2013-2014 Recommended
Final Budget. Community Services Agency is requesting to increase their allocation
by 28 positions, with 27 as a result of direct and indirect impact of the Health Care
Reform. Due to Medi-Cal expansion programs legislated by the State of California
reducing the indigent population an estimated 85%, the Health Services Agency
requests a transfer of 13 positions to CSA to shift the workload from the Indigent Health
Care Program (IHCP), as well as the deletion of eight positions between January - April
2014. One of the positions being deleted is currently filled, which will result in a
Reduction-in-Force effective January 11, 2014. This leaves 10 positions remaining in
IHCP to service the smaller indigent population.
The County has used a combination of reductions in force coupled with changes in
compensation and benefits structure over the past five years as a cost cutting and cost
containment strategy. The County had a high of more than 4,600 allocated positions in
the 2007-2008 Fiscal Year and decreased this by nearly 1,000 positions over the next
four years. The County also implemented salary cost deductions, furlough days,
increased the employee share of health insurance costs in the 2010-2011 Fiscal Year
and employee salary deductions of 6% in the 2012-2013 Fiscal Year. These types of
actions helped the County maintain fiscal stability and affirm its credit rating with
Moody’s in 2012 at an A1 with an outlook of stable. In 2012, the County also increased
its Standard & Poor’s rating up to an A+ with a stable outlook, even while during the
same period rating agencies downgraded 580 municipal ratings. Since the Adopted
Proposed Budget, the Board of Supervisors approved a 1% restoration of the current
6% salary deduction and a corresponding reduction of eight hours of Special Accrued
Leave Time (SALT) for County employees. It is estimated the restoration will have an
impact of $2.8 million in expense to all funds and $1 million in additional cost to the
General Fund.
Employer retirement costs continue to be a significant exposure and on March 5, 2013,
the Board of Supervisors approved a Fiscal Year 2013-2014 employer retirement
contribution increase averaging 16% over Fiscal Year 2012-2013 rates. This will be an
increase of $3.3 million in the current fiscal year.
As the organization moves forward with financial recovery, a central goal is to begin to
build back reserves to the level they were prior to the economy’s downturn in order to
maintain structural fiscal strength through the ups and downs of local government
funding, which is sure to continue into the future. This action will reinforce the Board of
Supervisors policy of maintaining a Contingency Reserve of 8% of the three-year
average Discretionary Revenue budget. Replenishing the fund balance is vitally
important to help the County during economic downturns or unforeseen financial
challenges in the future.
Looking Forward
County leadership continues to implement a multi-year budget strategy. One of the
elements of the strategy involves paying down debt early in order to create capacity for
future cost exposures, even as far out as the 2017-2018 Budget Year. Since the
Adopted Proposed Budget, on July 16, 2013, the Board authorized the refinancing of
the 2004 Series A Certificates of Participation (COP) for the Gallo Center for the Arts
and the 2004 Series B for the 12th Street Office and Parking Garage and the Salida
Library. This type of planning allows us to most effectively allocate taxpayer dollars,
prepare for economic downturns or unexpected expenses and to also be prepared for
capital needs or program expansions.
With contracts for all 12 County Labor Associations scheduled to expire June 30, 2014,
the County will need to start to prepare for negotiations in late 2013 and start meeting
with labor associations in early 2014. Because of the number of groups, it is anticipated
labor negotiations will last into the start of the Fiscal Year 2014-2015.
Health program funding is anticipated to continue as a challenge for the County’s
General Fund. Our medical self-insurance program has effectively reduced cost
increases compared to the retail market, yet organizational expenses are still trending
higher than originally anticipated and projected to grow annually. Also, the future
financial impact on the County as a health provider working under Health Care Reform
is unclear and we need to be prepared for possible financial exposures. Growth of
social services programs, and the County’s responsibility for them, continues to be a
challenge and we anticipate this continuing into the future. We have seen significant
budget increases in social services over the past several budget cycles and we are
closely watching any State and Federal action in these areas.

The annual $11.4 million payment of the County’s Pension Obligation Bond will be
retired after Fiscal Year 2013-2014. Strategically, this will free up these funds for other
County obligations in the 2014-2015 Budget Year and beyond. However, we are
anticipating more cost increases in the County’s pension program in future years and
consider this a future challenge for which to prepare.
We are actively underway on a number of construction projects. The old Honor Farm
on Grayson Road was closed on August 1, 2013 and the new Honor Farm Replacement
Facility will be dedicated on September 10th and occupied immediately thereafter.
Significant work continues on the AB 900 Phase II major jail expansion which includes
384 new maximum security beds, a 72 bed Medical Mental Health Facility and an Intake
Release and Detention Administration Facility all projected to be completed in 2016-
2017.
Conclusion
“…a county that is respected for its service in the community and is known as the best in
America”
Collectively, I call on all of our County staff to move into the future committed to this
purpose. It remains a fundamental core of this organization and lays the framework for
what we do. It channels passion and fosters excellence.
Our future looks stronger each day and we must remain committed to our values and
stay true to this foundation as we strive to serve and gain the respect of our community
each day.