The serenity of the autumn foliage, the Sutter Bypass, and the Sutter Buttes as shown on
the cover of this budget book is in contrast to the region’s economic condition. The
Great Recession has become the Long Stagnation. Although the recession officially
ended in June 2009, unemployment remains high, new job creation is scarce, and
property values are bumping along in a trough.
When will it end? Although California’s coastal counties are seeing modest increases in
property values and job creation, inland counties such as Sutter are still lagging behind
the State and the nation economically.
According to the Center for Strategic Economic Research, job growth in the Sacramento
region “has shown an upward pattern since the summer of 2011 and is currently
experiencing only modest annual job losses.” They project that, following a brief period
of continued negative job growth, “the region will again see job gains on a consistent
basis, nearly two full years after the state and the nation shifted back to positive territory
and following 54 straight months in negative territory.”1
Sutter County’s unemployment rate has stayed stubbornly high, rising from 13.4% in
March 2008 to 22.0% in March 2010, and remaining above 20% ever since.2 The chart
below shows unemployment rates as of March of each year:
Sutter County’s saving grace, as has been noted in previous budget messages, is that
during the good times, Sutter County resisted the siren call to dramatically ramp up
programs and services. Instead, the County prudently built up its reserves. By FY 2008-
09, the County’s total Reserves and Designations stood at $27.3 million for the General
Fund. It is generally recommended that a public entity retain 15% of its total budget for a
fund in reserves. At that time, Sutter County’s held a healthy 34.9% of its total General
Fund budget in reserves.
Since then, however, the County has had to draw down on its reserves four years in a row
to balance the budget. By FY 2011-12, the reserves stood at approximately half of what
they had been a just two years earlier. Despite some significant budget-cutting (to be
described in more detail in the following pages), we will need to draw down on reserves a
fourth time to balance the budget for FY 2012-13.

Reserves are one-time savings that cannot underwrite ongoing expenditures forever, so
we are forced by the economy and current circumstances to make significant cuts in our
budget. Nevertheless, the budget cuts being felt in Sutter County have been nowhere
near as draconian as those experienced by other inland counties. In February, our office
estimated a $4.0 million budget deficit in the County’s $61.0 million General Fund status
quo needs for FY 2012-13. This compares positively to a $14.3 million deficit estimated
a year earlier.
Because of the ongoing deficit, however, we instructed departments to submit budget
scenarios representing a 10% reduction in General Fund contributions from the status quo
level of funding. This has been very difficult for both our department heads and our
employees, since we are now imposing budget cuts on top of two previous years of
budget cuts. In developing the Recommended Budget, CAO staff has approached it with
three goals: (1) minimize impacts in public services, (2) minimize staffing reductions,
and (3) minimize the draw downs on reserves.

Summary of Recommended Budget
The Recommended Budget for FY 2012-13 totals $247.8 million. The General Fund
comprises $56.9 million of this amount. The Adopted Budget for FY 2011-12 consisted
of a total countywide budget of $219.1 million and a General Fund budget of $63.6
million. The recommended figures therefore represent an increase of $28.7 million, or
13.1% for the total budget but a decrease of $6.7 million, or 10.5%, for the General Fund.
The increase in the overall countywide budget is due to the State’s creation of the Public
Safety Realignment program in 2011.
Revenues essentially remain stagnant. Although the County Administrative Office is
estimating a 9% increase in sales tax revenue for FY 2012-13, property tax values are
projected to decrease by 2%, essentially erasing the gains in sales tax revenue. As a
result, a drawdown of $1.36 million from reserves is required in order to balance the
General Fund budget. Since 51.4% of the General Fund consists of salary and benefits
costs, it is not possible to achieve a $6.7 million decrease in the budget, especially after
three successive years of cuts, without affecting staffing. For the second year in a row,
the Recommended Budget for Sutter County includes recommendations for layoffs.

Emerging Issues
This section outlines five issues that have the potential for significant impacts on the
County budget in the future: regionalization of the Farm Advisor program, dissolution of
the cities’ redevelopment agencies, changes in CalPERS’ actuarial assumptions, Live
Oak fire services, and public safety realignment.
Tri-County Farm
Advisor
The Farm Advisor program in each county has traditionally
been a joint effort of the University of California Cooperative
Extension (UCCE) and the counties. Typically, the
University of California provides professional staff, and the
counties provide clerical staff, office space, and vehicles. The
University of California is in the process of regionalizing the
UCCE Farm Advisor programs across the state with the goal
of maintaining or improving customer service while
simultaneously reducing administrative costs. Sutter County
and Yuba County have had a bi-county UCCE Farm Advisor
program, with Sutter County as the lead agency, since 1982.
The University of California is in discussions with Colusa
County to merge its UCCE Farm Advisor program with the
Yuba-Sutter program. A draft restructuring plan is expected
to be available for review and discussion in the near future. It
is anticipated that the tri-county Yuba-Sutter-Colusa Farm
Advisor program would be housed in Sutter County.
The University of California also plans to modernize the
awkward funding structure for the UCCE Farm Advisor
program. Under the new plan, the University of California

Tri-County Farm
Advisor (continued)
would be the lead agency and the counties would contract
with the University of California to provide services and make
a financial contribution towards the total cost. Any county
employees employed in the current UCCE Farm Advisor
budget unit would become University of California
employees.
Dissolution of City
Redevelopment
Agencies
Until 2011, the Community Redevelopment Law allowed
local officials to set-up redevelopment agencies, prepare and
adopt redevelopment plans, and finance redevelopment
activities.
A redevelopment agency kept the property tax increment
revenues generated from increases in property values within a
redevelopment project area. When it adopted a
redevelopment plan for a project area and selected a base
year, the agency "froze" the amount of property tax revenues
that other local governments received from the property in
that area. In future years, as the project area's assessed
valuation grew above the frozen base, the resulting property
tax revenues --- the property tax increment --- went to the
redevelopment agency instead of going to the underlying local
governments. The diversion of property tax increment
financing never harmed schools because the State General
Fund automatically backfilled the difference between what a
school district received in property tax revenues and what the
district needed to meet its revenue allocation limit. When a
redevelopment agency diverted property tax revenues from a
school district, the State General Fund paid the difference.
Last year, citing a significant State General Fund deficit,
Governor Brown’s 2011-12 budget proposed eliminating
redevelopment agencies and returning billions of dollars of
property tax revenues to schools, cities, and counties to fund
core services in future years. Among the statutory changes
that the Legislature adopted to implement the 2011-12 budget,
AB 1X 26 (Blumenfield, 2011) dissolved all redevelopment
agencies. The California Supreme Court later upheld nearly
all of AB 1X 26, effectively requiring the dissolution of all
redevelopment agencies.
Both Yuba City and Live Oak had redevelopment agencies,
and both cities have named themselves as the successor
agencies to their redevelopment agencies. Redevelopment
Oversight Boards have been formed to oversee the dissolution
of the agencies’ assets.
The primary issue for the County budget is the continuation of
a “pass-through” agreement with the Yuba City
Redevelopment Agency which partially reimburses the
County for a portion of its lost property tax revenue as a result
of the formation of the redevelopment agency. The passthrough
agreement, which provides approximately $650,000
annually to the General Fund, is listed as an “enforceable
obligation” under the preliminary list of financial obligations
of the former redevelopment agency. In other words, the
payments should continue in FY 2012-13 and beyond.
Eventually, in future years, there may be an increase in the
percentage of property tax monies allocated to the Sutter
County General Fund.
PERS’ Revision of
Assumptions
Regarding Investment
Earnings
CalPERS, the state retirement system, sets its pension
contribution rates based upon a variety of actuarial
assumptions. These include factors such as expected salary
increases in the employee workforce, longevity, average age
of retirement, and inflation rates. Since investment earnings
dwarf revenue from employer and employee contributions,
one of the most critical pieces of the actuarial assumptions
involves the assumed percentage of earnings on investments.
For many years, PERS has assumed 7.75% earnings on
investments. Following the dramatic stock market downturn
in 2008, pressure has mounted for PERS to use a more
conservative earnings estimate. Although PERS investments
as of the end of FYs 2009-10 and 2010-11 saw returns of
13.3% and 21.7%, respectively, the PERS Board voted in
March 2012 to revise its estimated investment earnings
downwards to 7.5%.
As a result, PERS has notified Sutter County that they
anticipate 1-2% increases in our retirement contribution rates
for FY 2013-14 and beyond for our Miscellaneous plans and
2-3% for our Public Safety plans (exact figures will not be
known until the release of the Plan Valuation reports in
October). We estimate that this will require increased pension
expenditures of $1.24 million countywide, including
approximately $750,000 from the County General Fund.
Because of this, the County Administrative Officer
recommends placing $1.97 million of the $2.97 million in
anticipated loan repayments from the Sutter Butte Flood
Control Agency (see the “Sutter Butte Flood Control Agency
– Loan Repayment” section on page 16 for more detail) into a
Committed Account for Pension Stabilization. This will help
ease financial pressures on the General Fund over the next
few years.
Live Oak Fire Services The County and the City of Live Oak entered into a Master
Tax Sharing Agreement in September 2008. In that
agreement, the County agreed to continue the existing levels
of police and fire services and their related billing
methodologies for five years. It was acknowledged at that
time that the billing methodology for fire services
underestimated the actual costs of providing services. During
the next year, the County and the City of Live Oak need to
meet and negotiate a new billing methodology that more
accurately reflects the true costs of the services provided.
Public Safety
Realignment
In January 2011, new Governor Jerry Brown proposed a “vast
and historic” realignment of government services in
California, transferring authority and responsibility to cities,
counties, special districts, and school boards. The Governor
proposed to eliminate duplicative administration of services,
limit overhead costs, and allow for locally determined
priorities while maintaining statewide goals and objectives.
For public safety, AB 109 realigns correctional duties for
specified felony offenders to local governments and includes
intent language to provide revenues to cover the related costs.
Another key provision of AB 109 is that it shifts all newlyreleased
offenders from prison who do not have current
convictions for serious or violent felonies, who are not “third
strikers”, and who are not high-risk sex offenders (dubbed
“non-non-nons”) to post-release supervision by counties
rather than the state parole board. Post-release supervision is
to be implemented in a manner consistent with evidencebased
practices to reduce recidivism.
Beginning in the summer of 2011, Sutter County’s
Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) began to craft
their plan for dealing with the realignment of correctional
services from the State to the counties. The CCP adopted a
phased approach to Realignment in order to afford the time to
County of
properly address the multifaceted needs of the local
population and to assess the necessary resources to achieve
desired public safety outcomes. The Phase I plan outlined the
anticipated immediate impacts that needed to be addressed
prior to or immediately following October 1, 2011, the
effective date of the Realignment program. These included
new Probation Officers to address the new population under
their supervision, the increased need for thorough assessment
and implementation of the principles of effective intervention,
the adoption of reduced caseload ratios, research and data
analysis, and staff to address vocational, educational, and
mental health needs of offenders. Correctional Officers were
budgeted to address increased classification, programming
and transportation issues for the new population, and
Intervention Counselors were added to address substance
abuse issues. Because of space issues, including a need to
house expanded adult probation services, the CCP approved
the lease of a building for juvenile services, so that space
within the existing Probation office could be expanded to
address the needs of adult offenders.
As of May 17, 2012, the California Department of Corrections
(CDCR) had referred 159 post-release community supervision
cases (PRCS) to Sutter County. CDCR had estimated there
would be 69 cases. Roughly 8% of PRCS offenders have
committed new felony offenses. The jail population was
below pre-realignment figures of an average of 224 inmates
until April 2012, when the inmate population began to grow
to a current average daily population of 245. State parole
violators have been of concern as these bookings spiked prior
to Realignment and this is a population that local governments
have no control over.
One of the most significant issues faced by the local justice
partners is the breadth and complexity of changes to be
addressed in a very short period of time. The development of
expanded resources in the Jail and the community should
begin early in FY 2012-13, along with the development of the
Phase II plan.
The Governor has thus far been committed to finding
adequate and continuous ongoing funding for the program.
The fate of the Governor’s tax initiative in November 2012
may test that level of commitment, should voters not approve
the new taxes. In addition, a long-term allocation formula has
not yet been enacted. Counties will continue to use a shortterm
allocation formula for at least another year until data can
be developed regarding caseloads and outcomes. The
anticipated allocation for FY 2012-13 is $2.6 million, which
will help address the expansion of services.
Although the national economy and even the California statewide economy show signs of
recovery, inland counties such as Sutter continue to be mired in recession. This
Recommended Budget for FY 2012-13 is the third in what is likely to be several more
years of constrained budgets. Although we face challenges in the upcoming years, we
also have opportunities to find new and creative ways of providing services to our
citizens.