increase in appropriations compared with the FY 2012/13 Adopted Budget. The General Fund’s appropriations are $665.8 million,
which are approximately $28.7 million or 4 .5% higher than the FY 2012/13 Adopted Budget. The growth in appropriations is
predominately due to an increase of $19.7 million in Health and Human Services Agency appropriations due to increased caseload
growth generated by the downturn in the economy. The remaining difference is due to an increase in workers’ compensation charges
in the amount of $2 million countywide, a 3% cost of living adjustment for those bargaining units that are in negotiations this fiscal
year, and equity adjustments to a variety of job classifications. The General Fund’s estimated revenues are $646.2 million, which
are $28.1 million or 4.5% higher than the FY 2012/13 Adopted Budget. The increase in revenues is predominately due to
projected growth in: Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) funds; State and Federal revenues associated with CalWorks programs;
2011 Realignment revenues from the State; and projected growth in countywide Revenues. Estimated countywide revenues for
FY 2013/14 are expected to increase by 3.5% or $4.7 million. Importantly, the proposed budget does not utilize reserves in order
to balance the budget.
As noted above, the County’s General Fund ended FY 2012/13 with a strong carryover fund balance. The excess fund balance
allows the County to maintain its Contingency appropriations which are used to cushion the volatility in the local and State
economies. The Contingency appropriation is proposed to remain at $5 million for FY 2013/14. The strong carryover fund balance
also allows for a variety of one-time appropriations such as funding for a Porterville Sheriff’s substation- $1.5 million; expansion of
justice partners’ facility in Porterville as a result of the opening of the new Porterville Courthouse- $1 million; creation of a trust fund
using one-time redevelopment distributions to be used for future economic development grant opportunities- $2.3 million; and funding
to make the final payment on the County’s Invensys debt and set aside monies to defease a portion of the County’s Chevron debt.

Most importantly, the FY 2013/14 Recommended Budget proposes to increase the County’s General Fund reserve by $2 million to a
total of $22 million.
The County of Tulare continues to be inundated with marijuana groves on the valley floor. This is causing significant health and
public safety problems for County residents. The recommended budget for FY 2013/14 proposes to continue using one-time monies
to fund a Marijuana Strike Force Team comprised of Sheriff, District Attorney, Resource Management, and County Counsel
employees.
In conclusion, for FY 2013/14, the General Fund is seeing more improvement after the effects of the Great Recession of 2008.
Reserves are not required to balance the budget and are recommended to increase by $2 million. Workers’ compensation charges
increase structurally by $2 million to bring the total charges to $7.3 million. Some positions frozen for budget purposes during the
Great Recession are being unfrozen as countywide funding becomes available. Over the next few years, the County needs to
increase the structural level of workers’ compensation funding to approximately $10.3 million and continue to unfreeze positions on a
systematic basis. In addition to the improvement in the structural condition of the General Fund, the budget includes monies to pay
down debt early and enhance employee morale through negotiating cost of living increases for the first time in five years. Ultimately,
the County survived the Great Recession of 2008 without having to draw down any reserves and without permanent employee
compensation and benefit reductions.
OTHER FUNDS
Activities not included in the General Fund are budgeted in Special Revenue, Enterprise, Internal Service, Debt Service, and Special
District Funds.
 Special Revenue Funds
The County’s most prominent Special Revenue funds include the Fire, Roads, Child Support Services, Library, and Capital Project
budgets.
The Fire Fund’s appropriations increase by 2.5% predominately due to an increase in annual salary and benefits along with an
increase in workers’ compensation charges. The new budget includes the planned biennial purchase of one fire engine and a
patrol vehicle.
The Road Fund’s appropriations decrease by 11.6% due to the completion of large road construction projects during
FY 2012/13.
The Child Support Services Fund’s appropriations and estimated revenues decrease by 1.9% due to reductions by the State
affecting local child support operations.
The Library Fund’s appropriations increase by 7.1% predominately due to an increase in annual salary and benefits along with an
increase in budgeted reserves.
Appropriations for the Capital Projects Fund remain virtually the same as the FY 2012/13 Adopted Budget. The FY 2013/14
Recommended Budget includes $1 million in one-time monies for the move of public safety justice employees to Porterville in
support of the new Porterville Courthouse expected to open in mid-October 2013. The FY 2013/14 Recommended Budget also
includes the transfer of one-time monies in the amount of $1.5 million for the construction of a Sheriff’s substation in the Porterville
area.
 Enterprise Funds
Enterprise funds account for operations that are financed and operated in a manner similar to private businesses, where the intent of
the government is to provide goods or services to the general public on a continuing basis at a cost that is financed or recovered
primarily through user charges. The County's Enterprise funds include Public Transit and Solid Waste Management. Collectively,
the appropriations for these budgets increase $2.2 million or 11% compared with last year's Adopted Budget, largely due to the
closure of the Waste Management Unit One at the Visalia Landfill as required by the State, and the construction of infrastructure in
support the Transit Fleet Facility.
The County’s Solid Waste system has been going through a major reorganization, both internally and externally, since the
County Administrative Office took over supervision in May 2012. The FY 2013/14 budget reflects a number of operational
changes and fee reforms approved by your Board that have already had a positive effect on the financial condition of the system.
There are still a number of organizational changes to come based on an impending operations assessment in October 2013 along
with the implementation of a Franchise System by no later than the end of FY 2013/14.
 Internal Service Funds
Internal Service funds (ISFs) are utilized to provide services to d epartments within the County by taking advantage of operating
efficiencies. These funds provide better accountability and control over costs previously provided within the General Fund. ISFs
include services such as insurance, maintenance, custodial, fleet, printing, mail, communications, and information technology. As
part of the reorganization approved for the Resource Management Agency (RMA) effective February 2010, RMA’s ISFs were
transferred to the County Administrative Office’s newly established General Services Division. During FY 2012/13, the Board moved
responsibility for maintenance of County buildings to Capital Projects and created a new Department entitled Capital Projects and
Facilities.
 Debt Service Funds
A Debt Service fund is used to properly account for the County’s debt service activities. Overall, the Debt Service fund expenditures
i n crease about $4.8 million or 6 8 . 1 % compared with the Adopted Budget for last fiscal year. The reason for the increase is
due to the payoff or defeasement of the remaining years of Invensys Energy Management debt and a portion of the Chevron debt
with onetime monies.
 Special District Funds
Special District funds are independent units of local government generally organized and funded through assessments to the
beneficiaries of the Districts to perform a specific function(s) for a specific area. Examples include flood control, storm drainage and
landscape assessments, redevelopment, and sewer and water systems maintenance districts.
The County Flood Control Fund coordinates all countywide flood control activities. Flood Control’s appropriations increase by
$191,000 or 4.9% compared to the FY 2012/13 Adopted Budget. The FY 2013/14 Recommended Budget includes funds dedicated
for the construction of three flood control projects approved by your Board in FY 2012/13.
The Assessment Districts’ funds provide for long-term maintenance of storm drainage systems and landscape improvements.
Overall, Assessment funds’ expenses increase $96,000 or 18% compared to FY 2012/13 Adopted Budget. The overall increase is
due to an augmentation in professional services.
The County Redevelopment funds were responsible for improving, upgrading, and revitalizing areas within the unincorporated
territory of the County that have become blighted because of deterioration, disuse, and unproductive economic conditions. As of
February 1, 2012, all Redevelopment Agencies throughout the State were dissolved pursuant to Assembly Bill X1 26. Successor
Agencies were created to oversee the dissolution process and all future Redevelopment Funds have been converted into Fiduciary
Trust Funds.
The County Service Area funds account for sewer and water systems construction and ongoing maintenance within the
unincorporated areas of the County. Overall, County Service Area funds' expenses are virtually the same as the 2012/13 Adopted
Budget.