SUMMARY OF RESULTING RECOMMENDED BUDGET
The following chart illustrates the change between the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget and
the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget:
The chart shows that the General Fund will actually increase by $4.5 million under this
budget. This increase is driven by inclusion of $3.8 million for our Tree Mortality program
and $800,000 for first year operating costs for the Juvenile Detention Facility.
The most notable change is the $5.4 million decrease amongst all of the County's
Governmental Funds (e.g. General, Fire, Social Services, Behavioral Health, Health,
County Capital, Airport Capital, Road Capital, etc .. . ). The single biggest factor is the
County Capital Fund decreasing by $15.8 million which reflects the near completion of the
Juvenile Detention Facility. This decrease is partially offset by things such as:
• $1.7 million increase in the Airport Capital Fund related to taxiway projects and a
master plan update for the Columbia Airport
• The Road Capital Fund is $4.3 million higher due to the success of the CRA
engineering unit in advancing a variety of projects- most supported by grant
funding
• The $4.6 million of Tree Mortality program and Regional Juvenile Facility costs
mentioned above
• Incorporation of priority IT projects and services
• Higher salary and benefit costs due to a variety of factors such as:
o Full year funding of the 31 positions added to the FY 2015-16 Budget
o New employees going through their step increases
o Increased PER S costs
o Position changes approved mid-year in FY 2015-16 and others contained in
this Recommended Budget
• Inclusion of a bargaining set-aside
The decrease of $1.3 million amongst the County's Internal Service Funds is primarily
due to a combination of decreased costs in Liability, Unemployment and
Telecommunications.
The overall budget will be $9.8 million lower. Summary charts (a.k.a. Schedule ls) for
each group of funds can be found under Tab 3. There is a meager 0.5 overall position
decrease compared to the original FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. This decrease is the
result of 5 new positions approved during the current fiscal year and a net decrease of 5.5
FTEs recommended in this budget.
PERSONNEL ACTIONS
A list of personnel actions contained in the Recommended Budget can be found on the
"Recommended Budget Personnel Changes" spreadsheet (Tab 2, Attachment A). The
net 5.5 FTE decrease in recommended positions is summarized below:
The most significant changes are the 7 FTEs being eliminated from the Road Fund due to
decreases in Federal (e.g. Secure Rural Schools) and State (e.g. Gas Tax) road maintenance
funding. This decline in road funding is a nationwide problem. Staff will note that your
Board has been relentless in advocating for corrective action to be taken by our Federal and
State representatives.
The resulting change in total "Allocated Positions by Department" can be viewed in Tab
2, Attachment B.
Also provided for reference and use in conjunction with the FY 2016-17 Final Budget
Hearing is the updated "High Priority Position Restoration List" contained in Tab 2,
Attachment C. The first two positions listed are the Code Compliance Investigator and IT
Manager mentioned previously.
5
There is one additional worksheet provided entitled "Other Department Personnel
Requests" (Tab 2, Attachment D). This is a listing of a variety of personnel changes
departments would like to discuss with the Board in conjunction with the Final Budget
Hearing. For example, there are significant changes occurring at the State level with
respect to Social Service and Behavioral Health funding, programs and performance
expectations. Staff will have a better understanding of these changes as we get closer to
the Budget Hearing and will need to seek commensurate budgetary and staffing changes.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PROJECT LIST
The Information Technology Steering Board (IT SB) has completed work on the FY 2016-
17 Project List. The Project List reflects most of the priority projects discussed with the
Board. The recommended list can be found in Tab 2, Attachment E.
CAPITAL PROJECTS
The recommended capital project lists for the Road, Airport and County Capital Funds can
be found in Tab 2, Attachments F, G and H, respectively.
GENERAL FUND CONTINGENCIES
General Fund Contingencies have been established at $ 1,280,109. A stated priority of
your Board is to increase Contingencies by $419,891 during the Final Budget Hearing.
Staff would point out that your Board had authorized staff to fund up to 1% of the General
Fund Budget or $660,000 using beginning fund balance. The Recommended Budget is in
fact utilizing $769,410 of fund balance for operations which is $109,410 or 0.2% higher
than desired by the Board.
The $670,495 of cancelled General Reserve dollars are being used exclusively to fund the
County's 25% match under the California Disaster Assistance Act (CDAA) for the Tree
Mortality program. This action will reduce the County's General Reserves from $2.3
million to $1,629,505 with additional match needs anticipated in subsequent fiscal years.
The Board is actively pursuing a Presidential Disaster Declaration and funding related to
Tree Mortality in order to prevent the potential draining of our entire General Reserve over
the next few years.
LOOKING FORWARD TO THE FINAL BUDGET HEARING
Staff was originally thinking of setting the Final Budget Hearing for August 16. Given the
extremely short time my office would have to react to final fund balances, State funding
allocations and to properly notice the Hearing, staff would now suggest that the Board
consider a two-step process after approving this Recommended Budget:
• Directing staff to schedule an update on the budget in general and personnel
changes in particular on August 16, 2016. This review could lead to modifications
of the Recommended Budget (e.g. directing the addition of key positions,
incorporating any modifications related to TOT allocations, etc . . . ); and
• Directing staff to schedule and notice the FY 2016-17 Final Budget Hearing to
occur at 9:00 a.m. on September 6, 2016.