SUMMARY O F THE PRELIMINARY BUDGET
The following chart summarizes Preliminary Budget total appropriations
(expenditure authorization) by the General Fund and Non-General Fund
categories. The total County Preliminary Budget appropriations exceed $2.03
billion. Total appropriations are increasing from the previous year Adopted Budget
by 7.8%. The General Fund reflects a 5.6% increase in appropriations and total
Non-General Funds' appropriations are up by 10%.
Every year, numerous items impact the budget both positively and negatively.
Some of the primary impacts for FY 2015-16 are:
 Full year funding for approved midyear FY 2014-15 budget adjustments.
 Maintains services expanded last year in Public Safety Realignment,
Affordable Care Act, and Mental Health services for Foster Children.
 Expanded services in Adult Protective Services, In-Home Support Services,
and Children's and Family Services in order to achieve best practice caseload
levels and protect our most vulnerable.
 The budget also includes negotiated salary increases and, for a number of
positions, modest market based salary adjustments.
 Full year funding for operational and debt amortization costs for the new
Financial Management System.
 Funding to incorporate known Federal Health Care Reform program changes.
 Additional appropriations corresponding with increased program revenues.
Cost containment from self-managed insurance plans including the Ventura
County Health Care Plan, Workers Compensation, and General Liability.
 Departments have mitigated substantial portions of pay raises and other cost
increases.
 Departments are required to manage inflationary cost increases to services and
supplies.
 Value realized through Lean Six Sigma projects and service excellence efforts
offsetting specific agency costs.
 Continued effective management of Ventura County Health Care Plan
contributing to low health plan rates.
 Public Employees' Pension Reform Act implementation began January 1,
2013.
 Continuing Pension reform efforts including 50/50 Normal Cost sharing with
employees.
Further explanations for appropriation, revenue, and staffing changes between the
Preliminary Budget for the next fiscal year and the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget
are included in budget unit narratives in the FY 2015-16 Preliminary Budget.
With this budget, County services are generally maintained at existing levels and
expanded in the areas of Health and Human Services due to Federal and State
mandates under the Affordable Care Act and increased workload in Children's and
Adult Services. New general purpose revenues have been allocated to most
departments. Certain General Fund departments were provided additional
contributions toward net cost. Specifically, Area Agency on Aging, Mental Health,
Resource Management Agency, Human Services Agency, District Attorney, Public
Defender, and Required Maintenance were provided additional funds to offset
additional workload demands.
FY 2015-16 is the first year of a five-year plan to ramp down Tobacco Settlement
Revenues by $1.35 million without impacting non-governmental community based
organizations receiving Tobacco Settlement funds. In addition, the budget
includes ongoing funding for homeless services in the Homeless Prevention and
Rehousing Program and an ongoing contribution to the Boys and Girls Clubs
serving the three Federally Identified Disadvantaged Communities.
Additional Prop 172 revenues have been allocated to public safety services in the
Sheriff, District Attorney, Public Defender, Probation, and the Fire District. Both
the District Attorney and Public Defender Offices anticipate significant workload
increases due to the continuing implementation of Proposition 47. Therefore,
additional staffing has been added to those offices. After approximately 40 years
of operations, the Probation Agency will be closing down the Work Furlough
custody program. The plan is to have the facility-based program closed by the end
of September 2015, to be replaced by a community-based program utilizing
Electronic Monitoring/Global Positioning System home detention, and a day
reporting model for the direct delivery of rehabilitative services to the inmates.
Probation believes this new model will continue to allow appropriate inmates to
serve their sentences while remaining employed and will expand the type and
intensity of programming available to the clientele who need it.
GRANT APPLICATION AND ACCEPTANCE
Recommendation 4 approves grant applications and delegates, in accordance
with the Ventura County Administrative Policy, Chapter 11-5, to the County
Executive Officer or designee, the authority to accept grants and amendments and
to sign grant award and amendment documents, subject to review and approval
by County Counsel.
CA PITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN
The County continues to invest in Infrastructure and Technology including
significant upgrades in to the Countywide Financial Management System, the
Sheriff's Computer Aided Dispatch System, and Health Care Agency's Electronic
Health Records System to name just a few. Recommendation 5 requests your
Board receive and file the recommendations of the Capital Planning Committee
(Attachment C) to be incorporated into the FY 2015-16 to FY 2019-20 Five-Year
Capital Improvement Plan (CIP). The projects listed on Attachment B have been
identified as high priorities by the Capital Planning Committee and CEO including
a Public Safety Electronic Content Management System, a Medical/Mental Health
Housing Unit at Todd Road Jail, and a Children's Crisis Stabilization Unit. These
and other projects were generally outlined and discussed with your Board in a
presentation by our office on May 19, 2015. Each project will be presented to your
Board for specific consideration and approval before proceeding.
We have incorporated the review and comment of the recommended CIP projects
into the preliminary budget process. The recommended CIP will be combined with
projects by the Watershed Protection District, Waterworks District, and Public
Works Agency (PWA) - Transportation and placed into a consolidated CIP that will
be brought to your Board by PWA for receipt and filing independently. All
consolidated projects will be distributed to affected city/County planning agencies
for review to ensure General Plan consistency per Government Code Section
65402 (a).
PUBLIC SA F ETY REALIGNMENT
2011 Public Safety Realignment is a historic shift in responsibilities of certain lower
level offenders from the state to local jurisdictions. The State provides funds to
counties through transferring a portion of the State sales tax. The Community
Corrections Partnership (CCP), made up of County, city, and non-governmental
organizations, is responsible to develop and approve the public safety
implementation plan to carry out the local responsibilities.
The FY 2015-16 Preliminary Budget includes a total of approximately $19,329,841
in appropriations and $16,712,648 in corresponding State sales tax allocation
revenue to fund the CCP recommended priorities for next year. In the face of a
second year of declining state base funding, the CCP recommended reductions
from County agencies totaling $920,187 which are incorporated into the budget.
Funding for the three local law enforcement agencies and the Community Based
Organization Coalition were not reduced. There are no new FTE positions
recommended for next year. The operating deficit of $2,617,195 will be covered
by restricted program reserves.
Ultimately, the goal is to have ongoing expenditures match ongoing revenues while
maintaining the success of the AB 109 implementation plan. The base allocation
for FY 2016-17 is estimated at $17. 3 million. Assuming some revenue growth
combined with holding spending at the FY 2015-16 level for future years, the $5
million in reserves will alleviate further reductions and allow revenues time to grow
to match expenditures.
STRAT EGIC PLAN/ PROGRAM BUDGETS/ PER FORMANCE MEASURES
In accordance with the Countywide Strategic Plan to establish priorities, ensure
transparency, enhance accountability and continuously improve and add value to
the budget process, we are implementing a program oriented budget with
performance measures for each program.
Program level budgeting is a common best practice that is intended to provide the
Board of Supervisors with additional information on individual programs within the
departments. Performance measures add the ability to evaluate programs to help
determine where improvements can be made to increase efficiency and
effectiveness.
Now that performance measures have been established, departments will
continuously evaluate the effectiveness of individual performance measures.
Departments will fine-tune and/or change these measures to make them more
relevant to their overall goals and objectives or to more closely reflect the
Countywide Strategic Plan.
Ultimately, the program budgets and performance measures will complement the
Countywide Strategic Plan and serve as a primary source in evaluating department
progress in implementing Board goals and objectives.
G EN ERAL FUND DISCUSSION
In April, our office forecast the cost of providing current service levels for FY 2015-
16. We determined that, based upon improving local revenue combined with
relatively stable State and Federal funding, departments would be able to maintain
currently funded service levels. Departments were assigned specific net cost
budget targets and requested to determine impacts to service levels caused by
those budget targets.
The CEO and departments have gone through a rigorous target budget refinement
process over the past several months to account for changes in revenue estimates,
midyear approved additions/deletions, and forecast adjustments. The General
Fund Preliminary Budget presents the resulting departmental financial plan for next
fiscal year. Specific budget information is included in departments' budget
nairativ'es.
Overall, the General Fund appropriations are budgeted to increase from $947.2
million in FY 2014-15 to $999.6 million in FY 2015-16. Revenues are budgeted to
increase correspondingly from $947.2 million in FY 2014-15 to $999.6 million in
FY 2015-16. General Purpose Revenue is estimated to increase by about $19.9
million to $365.9 million. The increase in appropriations is due to several factors.
Salaries and Employee Benefits have increased due to negotiated and market
based adjustments. In addition, as the number of MediCal enrollees has increased
from 110,000 to 200,000 over the past three years there has been a corresponding
need to increase eligibility staffing in the Human Services Agency and
commensurate service demand increases in the Health Care Agency. We are also
seeing significant workforce expansions in Adult Services, Children and Family
Services, and Foster Care Mental Health Services. These increases are primarily
offset by increases in direct department revenues supporting the program
expansion and additional General Purpose Revenues.
Our office will work with departments throughout the year monitoring budgets and
maintaining a balanced multiyear financial plan. These financial management
efforts, following adoption of a balanced budget for FY 2015-16, will be essential
for the County to continue on the course of financial stability.

Although the Preliminary Budget is balanced, it must be noted that challenges still
exist that could negatively impact the County's current and future financial position.
A key area of concern is State or Federal actions requiring expanding service
levels in health and human services and public safety. Attachment A summarizes
a number of the FY 2015-16 Major Budget Issues, Highlights, and Potential Future
Impacts.
GENERAL FUND - FUND BALANC E RECOMMENDATIONS
In accordance with the new Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB)
Statement 54, we have classified our fund balances to classifications of Nonspendable,
Restricted, Committed, Assigned, and Unassigned. The Unassigned
classification has taken the place of our former Designation for Subsequent Year
Financing and as such is the basis for our fund balance that we monitor as a
percent of General Fund revenue. The recommended minimum level for the
Unassigned Fund Balance is 10% of total appropriations/revenue, with a long term
goal of 15%. This year we are recommending the Unassigned Fund Balance be
increased to 13%. Exhibit 5 in the Preliminary Budget provides a Fund Balance
History for the General Fund.
Strong Fund Balance plays an important role in preserving the County's overall
financial health and reinforces the County's overall financial position. A strong
Fund Balance prepares the County for future capital needs, establishes the ability
to fund expenses such as litigation costs and audit disallowances without affecting
operations, protects the County from shortfalls in response to State actions, and
shields the County against extraordinary events and significant fluctuations in
revenue. Fund Balance is also an important evaluation criteria for rating agencies
and was a factor when Standard and Poor's Rating Agency upgraded our Issuer
Rating to their highest level AAA. Our continuous improvement toward our long
term Fund Balance goal will reinforce Standard and Poor's rating and provide
additional support to the other rating agencies to upgrade the County one notch to
their respective highest levels and consequently lowering our comparative
borrowing costs even further.
Our office is currently projecting a General Fund year end fund balance from
ongoing operations of $15,000,000. We are recommending the following
allocations for potential future one-time purposes; $500,000 to Fund Balance
Assigned - Fixed Asset Commitment to bring that assignment up to the amount
committed as a contribution to Casa Pacific; $750,000 to Fund Balance Restricted
- Fixed Asset Acquisitions Public Safety to set aside funds for training costs related
to the Sheriff's new Computer Aided Dispatch system; $8,750,000 to Fund Balance
Assigned - Fixed Asset Acquisitions to set aside funds for future capital
improvements and the remaining $5,000,000 to Fund Balance- Unassigned. In
addition we are recommending transferring the $9,500,000 in Fund Balance

Restricted - General Reserve to Fund Balance - Unassigned to eliminate the
inflexible and unnecessary General Reserve.
In addition to ongoing operations, we are also projecting $18,000,000 in one-time
funding from the State for repayment of pre-2004 SB90 claims. We are
recommending the following allocations for potential future one-time purposes;
$83,700 to Fund Balance Assigned - Attrition Mitigation to bring that balance up
to $3,000,000; $3,500,000 to Fund Balance Assigned- Program Mitigation to set
aside funds that may be necessary for additional costs related to the upcoming
Presidential primary election and potential additional costs in implementing the
new Financial Management System; $5,100,000 to the current Fund Balance
Assigned - Fixed Asset Acquisition - Public Safety and rename to Fund Balance
Assigned - Fixed Asset Acquisitions Todd Road Jail Health Facility to bring that
balance up to $6, 100,000 as a set aside for the match necessary in the event the
County is successful in obtaining a grant to build a Health Care facility at the Todd
Road Jail; $8,000,000 to Fund Balance Assigned - Fixed Assets Acquisitions; and
the remaining $1,316,300 to Unassigned Fund Balance.
These recommended changes, combined with the other accounting transactions
that occur during the year result in an estimated increase of $22 million in Total
Fund Balance compared to last year's budget. The estimated Unassigned Fund
Balance is expected to increase by about $15.8 million to $129.7 million in FY
2015-16. The percentage of Unassigned Fund balance to appropriations/revenues
is expected to increase from last year's 12% to approximately 13% for FY 2015-
16. This Unassigned Fund Balance is above our desired minimum level of 1 0%
and steadily working its way toward our ultimate goal of 15%.
CONCLUSION
The Fiscal Year 2015-16 Preliminary Budget is a comprehensive working
document developed based upon your Board's stated priorities and guiding
principles. It is compiled and presented to your Board in a format designed to
assist you in determining the final FY 2015-16 budgetary management of the
personnel and financial resources of the County.

FISCAL YEAR 2015-16 MAJOR BUDGET ISSUES, HIGHLIGHTS AND
POTENTIAL FUTURE IMPACTS
 Labor Contracts: The overall goal of our labor contracts is to establish and sustain
a durable labor relation model that balances fiscal responsibility with fair and
competitive wages in order to recruit and retain a quality workforce while achieving
pension reform and cost savings. A data driven strategy is employed to achieve this
goal. This strategy employs extensive benchmarking of peer jurisdictions in
combination with a detailed cost analysis of existing contracts, as well as all potential
changes, to arrive at contract proposals that are competitive, fair and sustainable. The
benchmark and costing data is shared with our labor partners over the course of
negotiations so that both parties have the benefit of current and accurate information.
Utilizing this strategy, the County Labor Relations Resources Division of the CEO has
completed negotiating contracts with twelve of the thirteen labor organizations,
including the largest, Service Employees International Union Local 761 and is
currently negotiating with the remaining CNA Per Diem Nurses union. The
agreements include a 50-50 split of employer/employee normal retirement cost for
both current and future employees, reduction in annual leave redemption amounts for
future employees and modest salary increases. The Preliminary Budget includes
appropriations for any negotiated salary increases. Projected employee merit
increases are included in department budgets.
 Retirement Contributions: The actuarial determined composite employer
contribution rate remained the same as the prior fiscal year at 26.81 percent of
covered payroll. The rates are applied to a higher payroll, resulting in an increase in
retirement contributions of $10 million over last year’s budgeted amounts.
Retirement contributions included in the preliminary budget are based upon the
actuarial valuation information dated June 30, 2014 and as such are based upon
financial information as of that date. Any changes in the values of assets subsequent
to that date are not reflected in the data nor in the budgeted numbers but may have
an effect in subsequent fiscal year contribution rates. Subsequent to June 30, 2014,
the investment return on the retirement plan assets has not kept pace with the
actuarial assumed return. The retirement plan fiscal year does not end until June 30,
2015 and final investment returns will not be known until that time. However, it is
important to note that market returns, specifically significant losses from previous
years, have long term effects on the actuarial values used to determine employer
contributions. In addition, the Retirement Board adopted new demographic and
economic assumptions in May 2015 that will have a negative effect on employer
contribution rates beginning in Fiscal Year 2016-17.

Unfunded Liabilities: The County has two unfunded and unrecorded liabilities. The
Management Retiree Health Payment is a cash payment to eligible management
retirees’ equivalent to the premium for the Ventura County Health Care Plan
(Management Program). The Subsidized Medical Program accounts for the inclusion
of retirees in our overall health insurance pool resulting in an implicit subsidy of the
retirees enrolled in County insurance plans.
The County has obtained an actuarial valuation as of June 30, 2014 for both the
Management Program and the Subsidized Medical Program in accordance with GASB
45 (the “County GASB 45 Valuation”).
Pursuant to the County GASB 45 Valuation, the Management Program has Actuarial
Accrued Liability (“AAL”) of $13.4 million, down $0.8 million compared to the prior
year’s valuation. The present value of benefits (“PVB”) for the Management Program,
which represents the actuarial present value of all benefits ever to be paid to current
employees and retirees, is $16.2 million, down from prior year’s $17.5 million. The
annual required contributions for the County for the Management Program would be
$1.3 million, down slightly from prior year’s $1.4 million.
Pursuant to the County GASB 45 Valuation, the AAL for the Subsidized Medical
Program is $16.2 million, up from $15.5 million in the prior year’s valuation. In addition,
the County for the Management Program has a PVB of $26.3 million, up from the prior
year’s $25.4 million. If the County were to actually make contribution to the Subsidized
Medical Program, the annual required contributions would be $1.6 million, up slightly
from prior year’s $1.5 million.
In addition to these two liabilities, the County has infrastructure assets that
continuously need to be maintained including roads rehabilitation and overlay.
Further, we have increased annual General Fund contribution toward Required
Maintenance projects from $7.5 million to $8 million.
 State and Federal Funding: The County’s budget and operations are significantly
dependent upon State and Federal funding. Any disruption to these revenue sources
could have an impact on programs and staffing to maintain current levels of public
service. In conjunction with your Board’s policy, any elimination of State or Federally
funded program revenues will generally result in reduction of corresponding program
appropriations or reduction in alternative program appropriations.
 Affordable Care Act (ACA): Signed into law in March, 2010, the ACA continues to
impact the County as a service provider, as well as an employer, resulting in increased
County costs due to the eligibility service demands. The expanded MediCal and
Covered California programs under the ACA, have necessitated the need for
increased staff and contract resources for both the County Human Services Agency
(HSA) and Health Care Agency (HCA). Since implementation in January of 2013
Ventura County has seen a 75% increase in MediCal participants from 112,000 in
2013 to a projected 200,000 participants by June of 2015.

Additional positions in HSA budget will provide much needed relief to workloads
associated with expanded MediCal Eligibility through ACA. There is no General Fund
net cost associated with the HSA positions because costs will be covered by
Federal/State Medical allocations.
 Behavioral Health Department (BHD) – Mental Health, Alcohol and Drug, and
Driving Under the Influence Services: The BHD has continued its strategy of
maintaining, designing and implementing programs that are efficient, effective, and
evidenced-based. BHD programs allow for consumer and family member involvement
and promote the wellness and recovery of Ventura County’s mental health consumers.
Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) funding has been a vital component of this
endeavor.
Total FY 2015-16 program expenses are projected at $154 million for all services, with
$131 million (85%) directed towards mental health services, $18 million (12%) towards
alcohol and drug programs and just under $5 million (3%) towards driving under the
influence programs. The bulk of BHD’s net county cost of $11.9 million are funds
dedicated by the County as offset to the operating costs of the inpatient psychiatric
unit. There is no funding identified or appropriated for the implementation of Laura’s
Law.
Department revenues are derived from five major summary sources and budgeted as
follows for FY 2015-16: Short Doyle MediCal at $35.5 million, Realignment (both 1991
and 2011) at $34.9 million, MHSA (Prop 63) at $34.2 million, Grants at $29.6M, and
County contribution at $12.5 million. The department has fully embraced the spirit of
the Affordable Care Act, working one-on-one with its uninsured to educate them to
their new benefits and to assist them in obtaining MediCal coverage. Included in the
projections for MediCal revenue are just over $2 million in increases due to these
efforts. The MHSA forecast for FY 2015-16 reflects a decrease of $1.0 million in
appropriations with corresponding expense projection decreases reflecting the
leveling off of expense growth aimed at bringing expenditures in line with revenues
over the next five years. MHSA funding fluctuates with the economy and BHD
employs a 5-year strategic plan that utilizes draw down from reserves for planning to
sustain program levels.
 Public Health: After several years of reduced grant funding, Public Health is
expecting increases to some of their existing grants resulting in an overall increase in
revenue of approximately $500,000. This increase in funding will allow for current
service levels to remain relatively unchanged from the prior Fiscal Year, despite the
increase in payroll and other operating costs.
 Ventura County Medical Center (VCMC) System: The FY 2015-16 operational plan
for VCMC system projects an operating gain of about $8.8 million after adjusting for
non-operational budget items such as debt principal and fixed assets. Ventura County
Medical Center is projecting a gain of $4.7 million, Santa Paula Hospital a gain of $3.1
million and the Inpatient Psychiatric Unit a gain of $1.0 million.

The projected gain for FY 2015-16 includes $29.0 million additional revenue due to
increased census and outpatient volume from the Affordable Care Act (ACA) coupled
with Intergovernmental Revenue increase of $3.1 million for the MediCal
expansion. Approximately 45,000 lives will have extended coverage in Ventura
County as a result of the ACA. VCMC believes it is well positioned for the impacts of
the ACA and further believes the ACA will have a net positive impact financially due
to increases in patient volume and revenues.
The Centers for MediCare and Medicaid Services and State-delayed decisions related
to the change in the Waiver process has caused us to be conservative on revenue
projections. Disproportionate Share Hospital (DSH) for FY 2015-16 is projected at the
same level as FY 2014-15 which is $10 million below the 2014-15 Adopted Budget. It
is expected that ultimately the DSH will go down due to the shift of the reimbursements
as a result of the ACA. Although the overall net effect is unknown at this time,
The FY 2015-16 operational plan includes $16.3 million of debt payments for the new
Hospital Replacement Wing. It is also anticipated that the utilization of the Cerner
billing system will continue to grow, resulting in a timelier revenue cycle.
Major challenges confronting VCMC include the continued implementation of the $51
million electronic health record project, the $305 million hospital replacement wing
project, and the need to offer a sufficient number of providers due to the increased
demand for services.
 In Home Support Services - Public Authority (IHSS-PA): The IHSS-PA budget
contains costs to administer the State mandated program and provide services to
IHSS recipients. Payments for providers make up the primary cost in which the
County participates through a Maintenance of Effort (MOU) along with the
Federal/State governments. The preliminary budget request includes projected
increases in service hours, however, the General Fund Contribution for IHSS funding
is budgeted to increase by $335,000 based upon the MOE. Future changes in the
state legislation relating to the MOU could subject the County to much more volatility
in IHSS funding.
 Application of Ordinance 4088 Inflation Factor: Public Safety Ordinance 4088
provides for a net cost inflation increase for the County’s public safety agencies:
District Attorney, Public Defender, Sheriff, and Probation. On April 19, 2005, the Board
reached a Settlement Agreement with the District Attorney and Sheriff that created a
new inflation formula based on the County’s ability to pay and the CPI. The result of
this formula is called Formula Based Entitlement (FBE). In years when the County’s
ability to pay (ATP), defined as General Purpose Revenue growth, is less than the
FBE, the agreement calls for using the ATP. For FY 2015-16, the contribution
increase is 4.3% which is above the required minimum FBE of 3.3%.

Public Safety Realignment: 2011 Public Safety Realignment will enter its fourth year
of an historic shift in responsibilities of certain lower level adult offenders from the state
to local jurisdictions. Proposition 30 guaranteed funding of this shift through
transferring a portion of the state sales tax to counties. AB 109 created local
Community Corrections Partnerships (CCP) comprised of representatives from
County, cities, courts, and community-based organizations (CBO). Each CCP is
responsible to develop and carry out a public safety implementation plan approved by
the Board.
The FY 2015-16 Preliminary Budget includes a total of approximately $19,329,841 in
appropriations and $16,712,648 in corresponding State sales tax allocation revenue
to fund the CCP recommended priorities for next year. In the face of a second year
of declining state base funding, the CCP recommended reductions from County
agencies totaling $920,187 which are incorporated into the budget. Funding for the
three local law enforcement agencies and the Community Based Organization
Coalition were not reduced. There are no new FTE positions recommended for next
year. The operating deficit of $2,617,195 will be covered by restricted program
reserves. Following is a summary of County appropriations from the AB109 program.
Ultimately, the goal is to have ongoing expenditures match ongoing revenues while
maintaining the success of the AB 109 implementation plan. The base allocation for
FY 2016-17 is estimated at $17.3 million. Assuming some revenue growth combined
with holding spending at the FY 2015-16 level for future years, the $5 million in
reserves will alleviate further reductions and allow revenues time to grow to match
expenditures.
The final state public safety allocation for FY 2015-16 is still subject to change by the
state. If adjustments are needed, we will return to your Board to request approval of
any revisions in appropriations and revenue for FY 2015-16.
The Preliminary Budget also includes $200,000 for Information Technology Services
Department to develop a dashboard that captures recidivism, performance, and
workload metrics related to the County’s public safety realignment implementation
plan. Another $120,000 is allocated to contract with Evalcorp for the completion of a
comprehensive evaluation of all programs being funded through the implementation
plan. Both projects are important to determine the efficacy of each program and any
future adjustments needed to maximize state realignment funding. One-time
revenues received from the state for AB 109 planning and start-ups purposes will pay
for these two services.
The continuing implementation of Proposition 47 has caused workload increases in
both the District Attorney and Public Defender Offices. Therefore, additional staffing
has been added to those offices. We have also experienced some reduction in jail
population due to Proposition 47. The long term effects of Proposition 47 are unknown
at this time and we will continue to monitor public safety departments to determine
any longer term impacts.
 Fire Protection District: The District’s FY 2015-16 budget includes funding for
construction of three replacement fire stations which will be in process: stations #20
in Ojai, #27 in Fillmore, and #35 in Newbury Park. Also, the District plans to complete
a land purchase for a new training facility in Camarillo. The District is allocating $1.2
million for numerous small remodeling projects that are in need of repair or updating.
The CEO is recommending full funding of the Prop 172 allocation to the District at
$2,423,002, per the funding formula approved by the Board of Supervisors.