With this letter, I submit for your consideration the 2013-14 Yolo County Recommended Budget.
It is presented as the County Administrator’s recommended budget and adjusts departmental
expenditures and revenues for the coming fiscal year, meeting State requirements and
addressing Board of Supervisors adopted policies. On June 11, the Board of Supervisors has
scheduled a public hearing to consider this recommended spending plan at which time the
Board may add, delete or modify this recommended budget. This letter is intended to highlight
some of the expectations and assumptions used in creating the budget. The Board agenda
item presented on June 11 will include a detailed staff report describing the significant changes,
pending issues and areas of risk that comprise the recommended budget in greater detail.
Total expenditures for the county are recommended in the amount of $315,781,168 with general
purpose revenues of $57,670,702 which represents a reduction of $691,853 from the 2012-13
estimated general purpose revenue. Capital expenditures are recommended at $2,402,660.
This budget reflects known revenue and expenditure projections for the 2013-14 budget year;
however, it does not include any other State Budget related adjustments. This baseline budget
is designed as a temporary bridge until a more permanent strategy is developed after the
passage of the State Budget and the close of the 12-13 fiscal year. We anticipate these
changes will be addressed at the County’s Adopted Budget hearing, which could occur as early
as August; however, the actual date will be dependent upon final State Budget adoption.
The 2013-14 budget represents the sixth annual budget since the onset of the recession, is
balanced, and the only positions scheduled for layoff can be retained if AB 109 funds are
allocated to the subject departments. However, it is based on assumptions that agreements will
be reached with our two remaining labor groups to continue labor cost savings. If labor cost
savings are not maintained it is likely additional cuts and layoffs will be necessary at midyear.
Additionally, due to the interconnected nature of the County and the State, once final action on
the State Budget is taken it is possible additional layoffs may be necessary.
It is recommended the Board of Supervisors defer further program reductions, restorations or
augmentations until the Adopted Budget hearing, at which time additional information including
updated revenue trends, final State Budget actions, labor agreements and 2012-13 closing fund
balance information will be known.
The recommended budget also relies upon the assumptions noted below.
Maintain the current General Fund reserve levels. The 2008-09 and 2009-10 budgets relied
heavily on the use of one-time funds, including most notably the General Fund reserve, to fund
ongoing program needs. For 2010-11, the Board of Supervisors directed that the remaining
General Fund reserve be maintained for unexpected emergencies, and in 2011-12 and 2012-
13, the General Fund reserve was augmented to be compliant with the Board policy on Fund
Balances and Reserves. The 2013-14 recommended budget includes the recommended
augmentation of $713,561 in accordance with the Board’s Reserve Policy.
Creation of an adequate contingency. The 2013-14 fiscal year includes many known budget
risks. The State Budget, Affordable Care Act implementation on January 2, 2014, and unstable
revenue projections represent key concerns as staff constructs the 2013-14 budget. As an
example, several public safety budgets include the need for continued and in the Sheriff’s
budget additional 2011 Public Safety Realignment revenue. While we know the funding is
available, it requires the Community Correction Partnership to determine its use. In addition to
the aforementioned risks, specific uncertainties identified for 2013-14 include:
State budget
Affordable Care Act implementation
Continued public safety sales tax receipts
Continued labor concessions with two bargaining units
Delta related analysis and advocacy
Assessment appeal outcomes
Continued effects of the economy
To prepare for unexpected fiscal actions, the preliminary estimate includes a $2 million General
Fund contingency which is 3.0% of the 2013-14 general fund allocations.
More information will be available on a number of variables at the time of the Adopted Budget
hearings, including the State Budget, actual closing fund balances and revenue trends. These
variables will be considered in the recommended contingency level included in the Adopted
Budget. Budgeted contingency is available for Board appropriation throughout the 2013-14 year
should unexpected needs arise. Any unused contingency may also provide additional funding
flexibility in crafting the 2014-15 budget.
Creating a solid base for long term financial planning. Although economists and other
experts conclude the recession has ended, the economy is fragile and unemployment remains
high. California’s recovery will be slow with governmental revenue recovery lagging behind the
remainder of the economy. By funding Tactical Plan implementation strategies, increasing the
General Fund reserve in accordance with Board policy, seeking to increase the General Fund
contingency at Adopted Budget hearings and including a balanced array of cost reductions
comprised of program restructuring, elimination of vacant positions and employee concessions
throughout the organization, the proposed budget scenario supports long term financial
planning.

Current economic and budget projections describe an uncertain future. Even as the economy
proceeds through a gradual recovery, Yolo County continues to experience higher
unemployment levels than surrounding areas, the State and the Nation. Job growth, while
improving, continues at a slow pace. Similar to the 2012-13 budget, the 2013-14 budget
continues to generally reflect flat local general purpose revenues.

The Yolo County budget is composed of seven major funds and a large number of smaller
special funds, internal service funds, enterprise funds, debt service and capital project accounts.
The recommended budget includes:

The total budget of all funds pays for a wide variety of services, programs and projects that are
financed by many revenue sources including grant funds, State and Federal revenues, and
numerous fees that are acquired in exchange for providing requested services to members of
the public. When all of these funds and sources are combined, the fiscal year 2013-14
recommended budget totals $315,781,168.
Pomona Funds
The total of Pomona funds are a combination of de-allocated monies from the Board created
investment vehicle titled the “Ceres Endowment” and General Fund savings from the Energy
Conservation Project. For the last few years, these combined Pomona Funds have been
included as part of general fund revenue and allocated in support of indigent healthcare. On
April 9, 2013, the Auditor-Controller presented options for the board to consider in the use of the
endowment de-allocation. In order to preserve those options, the 2013-14 budget does not
include the de-allocation, only the energy conservation transfer in the amount of $596,422.
Capital Improvements and Debt Service
The capital improvement budget is financed by State grants, development impact mitigation
fees, Accumulative Capital Outlay funds and certain special revenue funds. The recommended
budget for capital improvements is $2,402,660.
Road Fund Projects are proposed in the amount of $26,825,719 million.
Debt service remains low – only $3,903,016, representing less than 2% of the total budget.
Debts currently being paid include the West Sacramento County Service Center, the District
Attorney’s building, Davis Library and the four solar projects (library, Monroe,
Beamer/Cottonwood and Grasslands).
Reserves
During years when the County was experiencing growth, primarily in property taxes, the Board
of Supervisors put aside funds to be spent as necessary in recessionary times, which helped
moderate reductions in 2008-09 and 2009-10 and preserve core county services. Since 2010-
11, the recommended budget has maintained the remaining reserve as well as modestly
increasing it in accordance with this Board’s Fund Balances and Reserves policy. This reserve
is to be used in the event of a catastrophic event or major unexpected cost and serves as a
fiscally prudent backstop to more than $300 million in County expenditures.
The recommended budget includes the following reserves:

Unfunded Liabilities
There are three major unfunded liabilities that continue to be a concern to the overall health of
the county fiscal climate. Pensions, retiree health, and road maintenance have a combined
current estimated liability of $583,744,075. The pension liability of $139,647,805 is being
addressed through pension reform and lowering of the formula for new employees as well as a
change in CalPERS’ rate changes. The retiree health liability of $138,080,000 is being
addressed through additional funds being added to the trust, capping the county premium
contribution and one-time funds being reserved. The road maintenance liability of $305,487,270
has yet to be addressed and staff is developing options for consideration which may include a
regional road maintenance tax proposal, General Fund contribution, incurring debt and/or
reserving one-time funds.
The County of Yolo continues to benefit from an engaged, skilled and dedicated workforce who
should be recognized for their ongoing commitment to quality, service and integrity. I wish to
thank our department heads, budget staff, the Auditor-Controller and fiscal staff throughout the
County whose hard work contributed to the creation of this budget. I also wish to acknowledge
the Board of Supervisors for focusing attention on long term financial planning which already is
showing dividends as the County’s fiscal health continues to strengthen.