In accordance with local ordinance and State Law, presented to the Board of
Supervisors is the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Proposed Budget, as recommended by the
County Administrator.
With the current fiscal year nearing an end, our organization has numerous
accomplishments to be proud of over the last twelve months. One of those
accomplishments is stability. After enduring several years of declining revenues, we
have reached a point where our primary revenue sources are increasing slightly or
remaining static.
Overall, a conservative budget approach by the Board of Supervisors over the last
several years has enabled the organization to continue providing a reasonable level of
service to our residents. Unfortunately the limited rebound in general fund revenue
sources does not allow for the replacement of many key positions lost during the great
recession. A majority of the revenue increases allow us to provide for increased costs
of doing business.
Necessary funding for public safety departments is a concern. The Sheriffs
Department, District Attorney, Probation and Juvenile Hall are complex operations
that have workload peaks requiring immediate resources in order to protect lives and
property. In addition, the physical demands and twenty four hour a day operations
create myriad complications. These departments are appropriated approximately 68%
of all available general fund revenues. Recognizing the Board's priority of public
safety, without an additional funding source identified in the near future, basic
government functions such as technology, recording, administration, financial
management, public guardian services and property assessments will continue to
languish with limited resources.
As with Fiscal Year 2014-2015, it is recommended that we continue to move forward
by making investments in our future. Of note are two particular capital projects, the
new Sheriffs Facility and the new Tri-County Juvenile Hall. The new Sheriffs Facility
is slated to be complete by the end of the current calendar year. Juvenile Hall, while
in the initial planning and design stages, will be a tremendous project in which Yuba
County led the effort to secure over $15 million in grant funds to build it. Both of the
new facilities are sorely needed and will benefit current and future taxpayers by not
having to consistently repair and modify half a century old buildings and associated
infrastructure.
I am also happy to report that in the upcoming year, our new Health Officer will be on
board and leading an unprecedented Board directed effort to have our communities
become healthier. I believe all of us look forward to developing new community
partnerships that will provide a healthier direction for our residents.
In the last decade, we have seen tremendous residential growth in the County and
conversely, a near stoppage of all growth. The same has been seen with General Fund
revenues. Through all of the instability, your staff has continued to remain focused on
accomplishing your strategic priorities and initiatives, while at the same time keeping
a positive attitude about our organization and those we serve.
Our image as an organization and a county are very important to us. As ambassadors
for Yuba County, I would encourage everyone to begin and end our conversations
about the great things Yuba County has to offer such as our rich history, community
and regional partnerships, our defense community, work ethic and more importantly
the value we place on maintaining and developing great communities.
The following budget document represents the hard work and dedication of dozens of
department heads, managers, and fiscal and support staff. I would personally like to
thank Grace Mull for her tireless efforts of managing the budget process over the last
decade.
Unfortunately, a balanced budget is a misnomer of sort considering department
workloads and the inability to fund resources previously lost to the great recession.
As an example, departments submitted requested budgets that would have required
nearly 5 million dollars of additional general fund revenue. A majority of the requests
are to meet the base level business cost increases, replace allocated positions lost
during the last several years of cuts or replace aging infrastructure.
The FY 2015-16 Proposed Budget is approximately $22,500,000 less than the FY
2014-15 Final Budget. This is attributed primarily to the anticipated completion of
the Feather River Boulevard and Hwy 70 Interchange project previously budgeted in
the Public Works budget and the close out of the NSP program which should occur in
FY 2015-16.
Departments were again asked to absorb cost increases where possible, particularly
those that receive a general fund revenue appropriation. While some larger
departments were able to absorb those increases, most were not without an
augmentation of revenue. Projected cost increases for general fund and non-general
departments were estimated in January as follows:

We anticipate receiving one-time revenue in the amount of $1,244,905 next fiscal year.
The one-time revenue sources consist of repayment of pre-2004 state mandated costs
recently approved by the State of California, anticipated proceeds from the Treasurer's
Tax Auction to occur in February 2016 and a one-time true up from the wrap up of
the state's Triple Flip.
While a difficult recommendation to make, use of one-time revenue in the amount of
$364,078 is recommended to help balance the budget. The remainder was used to
increase General Fund Reserves, maintain General Fund Contingencies at the current
fiscal year's level and setting aside approximately $587,000 in the County Capital
Fund.
General Fund contingencies and General Fund Reserve levels remain slightly above
budgeted policy levels. A more detailed summary is provided later in the budget
message.
The recommended budget assumes a carryover General Fund balance of
approximately $1.2 million. The amount may increase based on closing of the
financials in July I August. Should additional funding become available between
adoption of the Proposed and Final budgets, it is recommended that the funds be
evaluated as one-time or ongoing and also recommend they be budgeted according to
policy at Final Budget.

Gas Tax- Earlier this year, the State Board of Equalization reduced the gas tax by six
cents. This impacted funding provided to local governments for road repairs and
construction. For Yuba County, the negative impact is approximately one-third of
revenue, or $1 million. This impact was unexpected and caused a severe reduction in
planned road work repair and maintenance for Fiscal Year 2015-2016. There has
been legislative efforts to propose an alternative tax or make counties whole
eventually; however nothing has yet to be completed in final form. Staff will continue
to monitor any developments.
Affordable Care Act & Legislative Actions Regarding Sick Leave -
Implementation of the Affordable Care Act has been a challenge for many
departments. Health and Human Services has done a tremendous job in their
creation of a call center and performing quality outreach to our residents. However,
implementation of the Act is impacting our organization, requiring the County to
implement certain requirements as an employer and also to closely monitor its
membership in CMSP.
Effective July 1, 2015, California employers are required to provide sick leave to all
employees. While the County already provides sick leave to permanent and part-time
employees, the approval of AB 1522 now requires that sick leave be provided to extra
help and reserve employee classifications. The County cannot measure the fiscal
impact until data is reviewed post July 1, 2015.
Stagnant Public Safety Revenues -Public Safety revenues like the Public Safety
Sales Tax are no longer keeping pace with required services. Similar to the Gas Tax
that funds critical road work throughout the County, if positive changes don't occur
soon, we will be in a position where all County services will be affected negatively.
Pensions -Mentioned in previous budget messages, a new assumption related to
mortality rates of members in the pension system poses a severe challenge for local
governments and affordability of pension costs. The County is already seeing an
increase in the FY 2015-2016 rates and as indicated previously, the CalPERS
projected increases are significant for the next few years.
Proposition 30- Governor Brown's ballot measure passed in 2012, increasing the
sales tax rate by a quarter cent is due to expire in December 2016. Revenues from the
tax have gone to schools and community colleges and funded public safety services
that were transferred from the state to local government in 2011. There is uncertainty
as to whether or not there will be an effort to continue the additional quarter cent
sales tax or if it will simply expire. Staff will be following discussions related to
legislative proposals or initiatives, as this funding is critical to all counties.

Credit Rating- In 2008, Yuba County had its credit rating increased from an A- to an
A by Standard & Poors rating agency. Since that time, the County endured one of the
most difficult financial periods in decades but were able to maintain the same credit
rating. In 2014, the County began an effort to finance a portion of the new Sheriffs
facility. Through another rating evaluation done by the same agency for issuance of
bonds for the Sheriffs facility, the County's credit rating was upgraded from an A to
an A+, allowing us to obtain an insured bond issuance and saving taxpayers several
million dollars over the course of the borrowing. Staff will continue to focus on
financial stability by recommending additional financial management policies with
respect to increasing reserves and setting aside funds for economic uncertainties.
Capital Projects- Several capital investments totaling approximately $40 million are
underway in Yuba County. The projects are being led by the Public Works
Department and Administrative Services.
Feather River Boulevard and Highway 70 Interchange- This project is scheduled to be
completed in the upcoming year, making it the second County interchange project
completed in the last ten years. At a cost of approximately $14 million, this project
removes the last signal light between the Marysville city limits the Yuba County I
Sutter County line.
Sheriffs Facility Project- Scheduled for completion near the end of the current
calendar year, this approximate $10.5 million project will be the new home for Sheriffs
operations, including dispatch, patrol, investigations, administration and training.
Tri-County Juvenile Hall- This project replaces the forty plus year old juvenile hall
facility with a new 48 bed facility located on property adjacent to the Juvenile Camp
Program and Secured Housing Unit. The County was awarded $15.2 million in grant
funds from the State of Califomia. This project is a three county effort between Yuba,
Sutter and Colusa counties. The new juvenile hall is in the initial planning and design
stages.
Development Code Update- Completion of the County's Zoning/ Development Code is
scheduled to be completed in July of 2015. As stated in the previous budget
document, it is a necessary project as a result of our General Plan Update. It will
assist in clarifying land use / development policies for our communities as well as
advance future development goals.
Financial Policies -Key financial staff continue to refine and recommend policies to
the Board of Supervisors. In the upcoming year, it is anticipated that a policy will be
recommended to create a reserve for economic uncertainties and we will continue to
refine existing policies to make sure we are able to respond to economic downturns,
emerging community needs and organizational requirements.

Health Initiatives- Beginning with the current fiscal year and under the direction of
our Interim Health Officer, Dr. Kinnison, we began our first ever employee wellness
initiative. Through participation in numerous organizational and community events,
production of newsletters and attending workshops, our employees have embraced the
program and are setting a tremendous example. The Health Department also
produced its first ever annual report, summarizing the state of health within our
County with a roadmap that identifies key issues to tackle in the upcoming months
and years.
STATE BUDGET
The State budget appears to be more stable than at any time in recent years. The
increased set aside for a "rainy day" fund and the payment of some monies owed to
counties, cities and special districts indicates the budget is heading in the right
direction.
Pre- 2004 State Mandate Repayment - In this year's State Budget (May Revise) the
Governor has included full payback of the pre-2004 mandate amounts owed to
counties, cities and special districts. Yuba County received a portion of the amount
owed in the current fiscal year and full payback is expected in June andjor July of
2015. The additional amount owed to Yuba County is $702,000. It is recommended
that a portion of the reimbursement be used to support the current year budget.
However, since these are one-time funds, it is recommended that a majority of the
funds be budgeted for our two primary public safety facility projects, (Sheriff and
Juvenile Hall).
Drought- The Governor has appropriated 2.2 billion in funding for drought-related
programs, on top of the $1.9 billion already appropriated. The County is looking at
ways to access funding for potential community areas. Also included is $60 million to
support local groundwater planning efforts.
Payment in Lieu of Taxes (PILT)- The Governor has appropriated approximately $6
million to reimburse counties for State acquired County property. This amount is only
a fraction of what is owed statewide and as a result, Yuba County will receive a very
small portion of the approximately $700,000 owed, dating back to FY 2002/2003.
Legislation that would allow for full reimbursement has been met with little support
from the legislature.