Computer issues
In January 2008, the Calaveras County Library System upgraded to the Unicorn
software platform for our Automated Circulation System. That platform continues to
perform well for our library needs. However, our automated circulation system vendor
Sirsi Dynix has indicated they will stop supporting Unicorn in the next few years and we
will need an upgrade.
Our current servers will not support an upgrade. Our servers reached “end of life”
two years ago and must be replaced before we can upgrade.
To meet the County target of $367,324 the Library System will experience a shortfall of
$31,154. The Calaveras County Library System has been experiencing shortfalls since
2008. Limping from year to year with a shortfall continues to erode our base and level
of service. In FY 2014-15, the Library projected a shortfall of $53,000 but the County
increased its level of funding by $36,000 to bring the shortfall to $17,000. Due to the
support of Friends of the Library, shortfalls in previous years were supplemented by
Friends revenue.
We cannot and do NOT operate the library system on a budget of $367,324
(County General Fund contribution amount). To keep the library system fully
operational we are working under two budgets: the costs reflected in the County budget
document and then another $257,686 provided from fines, Angels City contribution, and
Friends of the Library and volunteer support. The total cost to operate the library
system is $625,010. 41% of the cost to operate our Calaveras County Library
System is not funded by the County General Fund contribution.
Several years ago when the Library System faced budget problems we turned to the
Friends of the Library for support. The cost of snowplowing did not go away - it was
absorbed into a Friends of the Library budget. The cost to clean a branch library is
absorbed into a Friends of the Library budget. Although there are no funds in the
County budget to purchase new books and materials, this cost is provided for by the
Friends of the Library. The Friends pay for landscaping and maintenance and children’s
programs and fingerprinting and copier supplies and so on and on.
System-wide we have over 100 volunteers who take the place of employees providing
an F.T.E. of over 4.0. In addition, 5 volunteers provide critically needed delivery
services not reflected in the County budget, services that would cost thousands of
dollars from a private company.Even with the combined resources of the County and the Friends of the Library, we are
only able to offer “okay” service to our users and compare poorly with all library
locations in California. What are we lacking that has either been dropped from the
budget over the past years or we have never had sufficient funding?
• Participation in the 49-99 Cooperative Library System
• Delivery to branch locations more than once a week
• Other libraries offer interlibrary loan without a charge to customer
• Funds for e-books
• Funds for newspaper and magazine subscriptions at each location
• Sufficient funds for new library materials, additional copies and replacements,
especially reference materials for job search skills, resume building, health and
wellness, genealogy, auto repair, self-help legal, surviving economic crisis,
• Funds to train staff (currently no training budget and no $$ for training)
• Mileage reimbursement for the director to visit branch libraries (visits are done at
the director’s expense)
• Funds for online subscription databases for library users such as legal and
medical
• Sufficient staffing to offer more hours of service at all library locations
• Sufficient staffing at the Central Library to keep up with cataloging and
processing new materials
• Staff have to haul away garbage at most locations
• Library service in underserved areas of the County – either adding facilities or
bookmobile coverage
• Several library locations are in inadequate facilities. These facilities lack space
to expand book collections, hold programs, allow groups such as books clubs to
meet.
The demand for adult literacy tutoring services continues to increase. This is due
to effect of high unemployment rates in Calaveras County combined with the
shortfall of funding in the local education sector. These factors, coupled with the
demands of inmate rehabilitation under the Public Safety Realignment measures
of AB109, have created more demand in our County for Adult Literacy services.
The Calaveras Unified School District and other Alternative Education Schools
have eliminated all GED Preparatory Instruction from their adult education
curriculums. With nowhere else to direct people who are seeking jobs, benefits,
or an increased chance for a better quality of life - Adult Probation, the County
Jail, Cal Works Social Services, Welfare-to-Work, Behavioral Health, the Crisis
Center, and Mother Load Job Connection, and the School System are all referring
clients to our Adult Tutoring Services in order to obtain their GED’s. Our County’s
Adult Literacy Program has been transformed into the last and only source of help
for people trying to prepare to pass this exam, find employment and to become
financially self- sustaining.
The California GED Exam became entirely computerized in Jan. 2014. Updated
material and the need for deductive reasoning skill sets make the test be far more
difficult to pass. The current exam requires keyboarding and other digital literacy
skills that many people currently do not have. With approximately 22% of
Calaveras County adults lacking a diploma, there simply are not enough
opportunities for adults to get the education they need. Those of us left in adult
education are not going to be able to do it without further funding, more
volunteers, training, computer equipment and software.
CAT has provided tutoring services to 112 adults with the assistance of 51
volunteer tutors in the past 12 months. With only one paid employee as
Coordinator, these volunteers are providing a tremendous amount of invaluable
service to this County. We continue to grow and provide more assistance in spite
of limited resources. Beginning near the end of January, CAT began accepting
applications from inmates for the first computer lab/ GED learning clinic in the
County Jail. Within the next six to eight weeks, I hope to have an additional 6 new
replacement GED/Adult Literacy computers installed at Probation’s Day Reporting
Center and 3 new units at the main San Andreas Library.
Revenue
The revenue for the Adult Literacy Program has always been derived from a
combination of blended sources including the County General Fund; California
State Library Literacy Service; donations from the Calaveras Friends of the Library,
other civic organizations and members of the public.
The total amount of the State Library Literacy Service (CLLS) Grant is never fully
determined until finalization of the state budget. Therefore, CLLS tries to provide
some stability by giving two different installments of funds. This year
approximately, $15,000 will be distributed in September and the remainder in
December. That remaining amount is never definite until near the end of the
calendar year. I have budgeted an approximate $7,500 under “other State
Grants”. Depending on the final amount, an adjustment may be necessary to
CAT’s budget revenue at Mid-year should the amount be different than
“guesstimated”.
In the past few years, swings in State Budget funds and County cutbacks have
seriously hampered our ability to help more people in need. To compensate for
the uncertainty of those amounts, CAT has been extremely fortunate in receiving
commitments for Reimbursed Expenses from the Probation Department’s AB109
Program and Cal Works Social Services, Welfare-to-Work funding. It has been a
sustaining and dependable source of revenue.
That is, until the current year, when substantial revenue was dedicated in the
approved budget by the Sheriff for a new education program in the jail. The
Sheriff’s Dept. has defaulted on its Reimbursed Expense commitment of $13,838
for FY 2014-15. This leaves a 19.2% shortage in what was a balanced budget.
From this point onward, Calaveras Adult Tutoring will only be accepting revenue
funding arrangements from reliable and trustworthy sources.
Dependable reimbursement arrangements have been made for the next FY
Budget. In cooperation with the Probation Department ($29,130) and Cal Works
($10,000), total of $39,130 has been procured in the form of transferred expense
reimbursements.
That amount, along with the estimated $22,500 from the State, will provide
$61,630 of collaborative funding and represents 72.7% of CAT’s total income for
next year. And as directed, the County’s General Fund contribution has remained
at $22,413, (26.6%).
The total amount budgeted for the FY 15-16 salary reflects a .97% increase. This
amount is less than the expected 4% due to a reduction in employee health care
expense. Services and supplies are budgeted at a total of $12,937, .87% less than
FY 14-15 year actuals of $14,406.

The Law Library's case flow is derived from court filing fees of the Calaveras
Superior Court. As of January 1, 2006, court filing fees (all California Superior Courts)
are transferred to the Administrative Office of the Courts, who disburses the funds back
to the various County funds, including the Law Library designated fund.
Over the past several years, the Law Library has experienced increases to its
expenditures each year while there has been a decrease in revenues from the AOC as a
result of reduced court case filings. Publishers have over the years replaced hard copy
publications with electronic versions such that the costs of the printed publications ~ave
actually increased by 61% within the past four years, while revenues continue to decline
(40% loss of revenue over the last four years). The Law Library has canceled
subscriptions in an attempt to stay within a sustainable budget and will likely need to
cancel additional subscriptions.
The Trustees' current long-range solution involves converting most hard cover
publications to the less expensive electronic on-line versions, but that in itself will take
extensive funding to purchase the computers and database connections and to pay for
monthly charges for the on-line version of publications. This long-range solution can
only be implemented upon the Library's move to ADA compliant space having proper
electrical connections.
Administration directed departments to prepare a status quo budget, where the General Fund
contribution remains at the same level as in the FY 2014/15 Adopted Budget. The County Counsel’s
office 2015/16 proposed budget meets that directive.
STAFFING
The majority of County Counsel’s General Fund contribution is for Budgeted Employee Costs (BEC). A
Deputy County Counsel I position remains budgeted, but unfilled. Previously, the position was
budgeted at an “E” step, which would allow me to return to my previously held position, if need be,
after serving as interim County Counsel. Since I have been appointed as County Counsel, I request
that this position remain budgeted at an “A” step. This cost savings, along with the additional revenue
received through A-87, allows our office to meet the budgetary restraints while not severely impacting
staffing in the office. The intention for this position is to either fill it with an entry-level deputy, or
alternatively, to hire a more experienced part-time contract attorney for the specific purpose of drafting
and updating the County Code. This would allow one attorney and one writing style to review and
work with each department to provide consistency through a comprehensive code update.
Throughout FY 2015/16, I will continue reviewing potential staffing options and/or restructuring
(FY2016/17) in positions and salary grades for the attorneys in the office, to ensure for adequate
supervision and opportunities for advancement in the office.
REVENUE
As indicated above, the total revenue our office received through A-87 increased from $14,417 in FY
2014/15 to $37,094 in FY 2015/16. This is a 157% increase.
OTHER EXPENSES
Budget line item #5221 was increased to account for the rise in membership dues for the CSAC
Litigation Program; and line item #5186 also increased because the Judicial Counsel Forms and the cost
of software increased through Lexis-Nexis. With the proposed cost savings and increased revenue,
described above, I am also proposing an increase to line item #5272, our office’s contingency fund, to
meet expected and unexpected needs for litigation, general plan review, and other potential legal issues
of the County. This line item was radically reduced in previous years to meet the budgetary limitations
and constraints. The minimal increase would only begin to build the line item back, which will be
needed since the general plan will need more attention from our office in FY 15/16.
Administration directed departments to prepare a status quo budget, where the General Fund
contribution remains at the same level as in the FY 2014/15 Budget. In order to meet this directive,
specific reductions must be made within the Public Defenders 2015/16 budget, as outlined below.
The budget and contracts for the Public Defender/Conflict Public Defender has historically been
overseen by the office of County Counsel. County Counsel has long recommended that it be moved
to an alternative department due to a perceived conflict as the office of County Counsel is opposing
counsel to the Public Defender/Conflict Public Defender in dependency, conservatorship and other
various civil cases. County Counsel has worked with County Administration and both departments
agree to transition the administration of the Public Defender/Conflict Public Defender contract and
budget to the Administration Department at the beginning of FY15/16. County Counsel and
Administration will work collaboratively to ensure the transition is as smooth as possible.
PUBLIC DEFENDER
Public Defender services are currently provided by the Richard A. Ciummo & Associates law firm
(“Ciummo”). The current three (3) year agreement is set to expire June 30, 2015. It is my
understanding there are ongoing contract negotiations between County Administration and Ciummo.
The proposed budget for Ciummo includes a 7% increase ($24,442) from $349,175 to $373,617.
According to the County’s contract with Ciummo, a minimum of $20,000 must be earmarked each
year within the Public Defender’s investigative services line item (within #5314) for Ciummo’s use.
The additional funds left in this account at the end of each fiscal year are rolled over to the next year
and will account toward that year’s $20,000 total.
CONFLICT PUBLIC DEFENDER
When Ciummo has a conflict and cannot represent a party, the Court will appoint a Conflict Public
Defender. The current contract with the Conflict Public Defender, Cyril Ash, is set to expire June 30,
2015. A Request for Proposals for Legal Counsel is being prepared and will be submitted to
Administration for further handling. The current contract allows for a month-to-month extension,
with no fee increase, and can be cancelled by either party once a new contract is confirmed. There is
no allowance under this proposed budget for an increase in contract fees. The current contract is for
$64,200.00 (#5272).

GENERAL FUND CONTRIBUTION INCREASE
At mid-year, this office requested and received an additional draw on contingency funds in the sum of
$50,000.00 for the 2014/15 Budget to cover on going costs of a Capital Murder case. The case is being
prosecuted and the County is responsible for payment of the defendant’s court ordered expert and
investigative expenses. To date, the costs incurred by the Public Defender’s office total $61,450.66; of
which $30,819.41 has been paid during this current fiscal year. The Public Defender has been allotted
$119,369.00 to date, with $57,917.34 remaining to cover the current and unknown future expenses of
this case.
At this time this department is uncertain if an additional draw will be required on the General Fund as
this case has yet to be tried. Should this matter proceed to trial, the anticipated Expert Witness costs
could range from $50,000-$100,000 or more. There simply is no way to place an exact amount on this
expense.
The 2014/15 - Mid-Year increase brought the Public Defenders general fund contribution to $560,434.
The proposed budget for 2015/16 will include the same amount allowing for the proposed Public
Defender Contract increase and the additional costs of the Murder Case that the County is obligated to
pay by Court Order.
REDUCTIONS
In order to meet the recommended 2015/16 General Fund contribution of $560,434, a reduction of
$23,605 is needed, which was spilt between two line items.
I propose a reduction in the sum of $19,997 for line item 5314. This item is reserved for such services
as Investigation, Psychological Services, Laboratory Testing, and Expert Testimony. The department
is concerned that the proposed budgeted amount may not be sufficient to cover these Court Ordered
expenses. If the funds from 5314 are exhausted, the department will use funds from line item 5289, if
available and appropriate. Should both accounts be exhausted, the department will request an
additional draw from the General Fund.
A reduction in the alternate-court appointed attorney(s) line item #5273 in the amount of $3,608 will
also be required to reach the $23,605 needed to meet the proposed General Fund contribution.
Either further reductions to the proposed budget, which is not recommended by this department, or
an increase of monies from the General Fund, may be required to cover any increase(s) to the Public
Defender and/or the Conflict Public Defender contract(s).
CONCLUSION
County Counsel advises that with the exception of the two (2) above-mentioned contracts, all public
defender expenses are based on Court order and must be paid. Therefore, it is impossible to
accurately predict total annual expenses for this budget as recent history indicates it is heavily
dependent on the number and type of criminal cases filed by the District Attorney and in particular
the number of alleged murders that occur during the fiscal year as those types of cases routinely
generate significant court-ordered defense costs.

After several years of budget cuts and staff reductions, this year's budget submission does not meet the status
quo target. Last year, two employees offered to reduce their work hours to help meet the targeted reduction.
My Chief Appraiser reduced his work hours by 40% and took a Partial Service Retirement. One of my
Assessment Techs offered to take one day off every week as Voluntary Time Off. When I had salaty savings
due to medical leaves, I was able to eliminate the VTO option. That helped ameliorate ptoductivity losses.
This past yeat, two long-term employees have retired or will be retired by the end of the yeat. Another
tesigned for a higher paying job in another location.
This year's budget includes an increase in time for the Chief Apptaiser position and no VTO by staff.
Because the vacant positions can be filled at a lowet level, our projected employee costs are only $4,000 more
than they would have been at last year's staffing level. The downside is that new employees have less
expetience and require more training. From a budgetary perspective, annual step increases will accelerate the
budget gtowth mote than a stable workforce.
The past few years have seen an inctease in our backlogged work that impacts othet depattments with toll
cortections and othet public agencies with unstable revenue ptojections. The public has been
inconvenienced as well. My staff continues to opetate with a high degtee of professionalism and dedication
to public service. It is a ptivilege to work with each and every one. I would appreciate your understanding
that we cannot complete the assessment roll with additional cuts.
There is no change requested to our Services and Supplies line items. Costs continue to inctease but we have
found innovative ways to abate expenditures. Revenues have been ptojected to inctease slightly due to
imptoving assessment roll totals.
This budget submission is a small step toward ensuring the stability of the assessment toll and the assessment
ptocess. Problems with the assessment roll will, naturally, adversely affect the county's tevenue. I
tespectfully ask that you help us help you and approve this budget as submitted.

This budget includes recommending the promotions of two employees into the 2 positions that
are currently in the “parking lot” and putting the vacated position into the “parking lot”.
1- Promotion of an Account Tech III to an Account Tech IV – General Ledger
Entry/Analysis – Additional cost of $4,524
2- Promotion of the Accountant Auditor II to the Assistant Auditor-Controller –
Additional cost of $5,709
Calaveras County removed the Assistant Auditor-Controller from their system in 2010 due to
budget constraint. However, this left the office with no succession and open for risk should the
incumbent be out of the office. Calaveras is one of the few counties to not have an Assistant. As
times have changed, roles have too. Historically, the elected Auditor-Controller could be
administrative in nature. With shrinking resources, the Auditor-Controller now has a dual role as
administrator as well as a daily workload. This has created a need to have a higher level
manager in place more than ever before to ensure that policies and procedures are kept abreast of
state and federal requirements. Additionally, so long as the county does not have minimum
requirements set for the position of Auditor-Controller is behooves the county to ensure that
there is a key position should succession planning need to occur. While I have no intention of
leaving my post as Auditor-Controller, it is imperative that I look to the future for the health and
safety of the County for longevity of this office. As such, I am recommending promotion of the
current Accountant Auditor II who has extensive education and experience in accounting and
auditing. This individual has stepped up in duties as an assistant without the title and it is
important to recognize the accomplishments and dedication to the county and this office that
have been demonstrated every day.

The position of Account Technician III has been filled for 9 years by an individual who has
taken an active role in their self-education by attending classes on their own time and cost,
researching and questioning the status quo, and coming up with some pretty inventive processes
to help save time and money for the county. It is with that, that I recommend promotion to the
Account Technician IV. This would allow for a tiered workflow between the other Account
Technician positions to her and help streamline the payable process for the county.
With the evolution of the Indirect Cost Plan (formerly known as A-87), I have tightened the plan
up to ensure that costs are allocated properly and clearly. As such, the Indirect Costs Revenue
will, for the first time in several years, be an increase to my budget. It is with that increase in
revenue that I bring forth the promotions and projects that have been deferred for several years.
• Storage cleanup - $7,040 is spent annually for storage for my office. I will be using extra
hire to help assist staff to go through the storage units and get our retention down to what
is required. I am hopeful, that with this, I might be able to downsize the storage needs
and costs for future years.
• OneSolution financial software upgrade. I will be using extra hire and overtime for
existing staff to dedicate resources for a much needed upgrade of our financial software.
I am hopeful that we will be able to tackle timecards, automated purchasing system, and
contract management system.

The term of the loan is 5 years with the final payment to occur on 6/30/2018. If there are
reductions in staffing OR “classic” CalPERS members are replaced with “new” employees who
fall under the pension reform formulas, the rates needed to pay this balance off will increase and
at that point, there will be added costs to the General Fund in order to make up that rate change.
However, even with this potential of added cost in the future, the move to refinance this loan
saves the county money overall.

REVENUE
Revenue for FY 2015-16 will decrease from the FY 2014-15 final budget significantly. Revenue
received from the June 2016 Primary Election will be minimal as the ballot will contain primarily
State and Federal Offices.
It is mandatory that all counties within the State shift over to VoteCal, a statewide voter
registration system, before the end of the FY 2015-16. Calaveras County is scheduled to migrate
in March of 2016. The State will reimburse up to $18,000 for implementation of VoteCal.
VoteCal funds are designated to assist with the integration of the County’s voter registration
management system with the VoteCal Statewide Voter Registration System.
EXPENDITURES
Election expenditures decreased slightly from final budget FY 2014-15. At this point, we are
anticipating a single election in fiscal year 2015-2016; however it is still entirely possible a
Special Presidential Primary Election could be called in addition to the June Primary Election. If
an additional election is called we will be requesting additional funds from the Board.
The department has applied for federal grant money, Help America Vote Act (HAVA) Section
261, specifically designed for improving polling place accessibility. The grant was not included
in the preliminary budget as the award has not yet been guaranteed. If the funds are awarded to
the County, the Election Department plans to purchase new equipment and supplies to assist with
voter accessibility for the June Primary Election. The grant will expire by the 2016 fiscal year
end. There will be no general fund impact upon receipt or expenditure of grant funds.
There are no special elections anticipated for the fiscal year. Office expenses are budgeted at a
minimum.
GENERAL FUND IMPACT
As presented, this budget represents a 6% overall increase from the 2014/15 Final Budget.
NOTE: In an effort to unify the three departments, a Request for Reclassification of the Elections
Coordinator position was submitted with preliminary budget. The core functions of the position
would be the same; however the job description would incorporate duties from the both Clerk and
Recorder Departments. It is being requested the position be changed to a I/II series. Adding a
series makes this position comparable to similar position in neighboring counties. The
reclassification does not impact the General Fund contribution for FY 2015-16.Fiscal Year 2019-
20 is when the current employee would be scheduled for promotion to series II if required
training courses are completed.

Revenue is expected to increase by 7% compared to FY 2013114 actual revenue received. The projected
increase is due to increases in marriage licenses applicants, marriage ceremonies, Fictitious Business
Name filings and Passport applications.
Revenue currently reflected in the County Financial system is incorrect due to a clerical error. The
revenue represented for FY2013-14 is shown as $26, 958 when the actual amount of revenue collected in
the Clerks office was $19,939. The additional $7,019 should have been reflected in the Elections
Revenue.
EXPENDITURES
Services and Supplies expenditures have decreased by 2% compared to the FY 2014-15 final
budget. Salaries and Benefits increased by 5% compared to FY 2014-15 final budget.
GENERAL FUND IMPACT
As presented, this budget represents a 4% overall increase from FY 2014-15 final budget (the
above mentioned clerical error of$7,019 has been accounted for in this equation).
Total General Fund Contribution: ($82,192)
REVENUE
It is projected that Fiscal year 2015-16 revenue will remain status quo with final budget FY 2014-
15. Projected revenue is comprised of fees collected for the recording of documents, copies of
vital records, and documentary transfer tax. In FY 2015-16 revenues for Documentary Transfer
Tax (4073) are projected to remain consistent with yearend FY 2013-14 and we are on track to
exceed budget for 14-15 as well. Revenue for recording fees (4646) is projected to decrease by
16% from year end FY 2013-14. This is due to a decrease in the actual number of documents
recorded; however it is anticipated that an increase in document transfer tax will offset this
decrease.
EXPENSES
Changes in staffing have reduced expenses by 10%.
GENERAL FUND IMPACT
As presented, this budget represents a 3% increase from the 2014/15 Final Budget.
NOTE: The Recorder’s Department is in the process of gathering bids for a new Recording
system. The Clerk-Recorder will be asking the board to award a contract to the selected vendor
May/June 2015. Total cost is not expected to be over $475,000 and all fees/costs will be paid out
of the Recorder’s designated funds (5466) for Modernization, (5454)Vital Records Modernizaiton,
and (5588) Social Security Number Truncation which will have no impact to the general fund.

W2Honorable Board of Supervisors Shirley Ryan Rebecca Callen
have prepared the Treasurer-Tax Collectors budget as instructed; status quo based on prior year General Fund contribution. This year just like the previous years, I am unable to meet that request. Fiscal year 2015-2016 will have the largest budget deficit my department has ever had to face.
As you know my department is a service department and does not generate revenue. Cutting costs is the only way to offset the lack of revenue. This past year I have worked with our bank and investment advisor to reduce costs while still providing us excellent service. US Bank was able to accommodate my request by reducing our bank charges by $3000 annually. This cost savings is passed on to all departments through my Treasury Administration fee. After explaining to our financial advisors that the County could not afford to pay a higher rate for their services, they dropped their percentage cost by one-third. Now I am able to invest more money and receive a better return on our pooled investments - and paying less for it.
A-87 costs are the lowest they have been since 2010. The loss of revenue this year equates to $30,000 - an amount so large that there is no way to recoup it. Salaries and Benefits are up $21,000 from last year; however, salaries are lower than they were in 2008. This is because of staff retiring and maintaining a part time employee instead of fulltime. This has been a challenge at times but we are able to make it work. While salaries make up 61 % of my budget there is no way to reduce staff or eliminate any positions without losing the integrity of the department as a whole.
Business licenses and Transient Occupancy Tax continue to be handled by my department. One employee provides 22% of their time to process, collect, and report TOT; however, we are not compensated for this.
My staff is a truly committee group and provides the public with the upmost care and service while continuing to perform the collection and investment requirements as outlined in the Revenue and Taxation and Government codes. I ask that you approve the General Fund contribution needed to make my budget whole so that the checks and balances are maintained within the department and allow us to complete tasks in a timely manner.
Respectfully Yours, 
The County Administrative Office provides support for the implementation of the Board of Supervisors’ adopted policies, goals and objectives for the county. Staff has the overall responsibility for developing, administering and managing the county budget; implements countywide administrative policies; plans and implements capital improvement projects; administers special grants and projects; and acts as the purchasing agent on behalf of the county. The County Administrative Office is responsible for Human Resources/Risk Management, Technology Services, Airport, Museum/County Archives, the Public, Educational and Governmental Access Commission/Public Access Television (PEG TV), County Fire, Community Organizations, Grand Jury, Non-departmental and Capital Improvement Program budgets.
During FY 2013/14 and FY 2014/15, in an effort to align like duties and responsibilities, significant structural changes were made to the Administrative Office.
In February 2014, upon the retirement of the Chief Information Officer/Director of Technology, the Board approved the consolidation of Technology Services into the Administrative Office.
Approved at FY 2014/15 Recommended Budget, responsibility for Buildings and Grounds (Facilities) and the Lighting Districts, and associated budget units, were transferred to Public Works.
Approved at FY 2014/15 Recommended Budget, responsibility for Human Resources and Risk Management was transferred to the County Administrative Office, eliminating it as a separate department and reclassifying the department head, Director of Human Resources and Risk Management to Assistant County Administrative Officer-Human Resources and Risk Management.
In April 2015, the Board approved a restructuring of the Human Resources/Risk Management Division, reclassifying the Assistant CAO-HR/Risk Management to Deputy CAO-HR/Risk Management and the Business Administrator to a newly created position of Human Resources Analyst. This generated an estimated first full year savings of nearly $12,000.
891 Mountain Ranch Rd, Ste 31 o San Andreas, CA 95249 Tel: (209) 754-6025 o Fax: (209) 754-6316
Departmental Budget Request:
The Department’s Requested Budget of $702,737 represents an increase of $21,159, or 3.1%, in expenditures and an overall increase of $267,797 or 133.5% in revenues when compared to the FY 2015/16 Final Budget. As a result, the Net County Cost / General Fund Contribution is decreased by ($246,638) or (51.3%).
Revenues: Factors Contributing to Significant Revenue Changes
The County’s A-87 Cost Allocation Plan is approved by the State Controller and reflects costs incurred by central service departments, which support overall countywide departmental service delivery. Costs for providing specific administrative services are reimbursed two years in arrears through A-87 charge backs. The Administration budget for FY 2014/15 reflects an increase of $270,297 in A-87 Indirect Cost Plan revenues.
Expenditures: Factors Contributing to Significant Expenditure Changes:
Salaries and Benefit costs increased $20,181 as a result of a negotiated 4% cost of living increase for the entire fiscal year, normal merit and longevity increases for eligible staff, and an increase to the PERS employer contribution rate.
Reflects a slight increase in services and supplies of $978.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations:
Continuous budget analysis, monitoring and economic forecasting for short and long range budget management and accountability has become the norm and requires intensive amounts of staff time.
Recruitment and hiring of an Assistant CAO and a permanent Deputy CAO-HR/Risk Management is crucial to maintain the level of service necessary for the Administrative Office.
Restructuring of the Technology Service Division (TSD) of the Administrative Office is necessary in order to attract and retain qualified staff. TSD is critical to every county department. They provide essential services and maintain the hardware and software that is necessary for all county departments to function in an efficient manner. Reclassifying positions to create career ladders and provide flexibility for the division will assist in the recruitment and retention of staff while providing essential services. This will be discussed in detail in the TSD budget and the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget memos.
ADA modifications to the Legal Building and the remodeling of County Counsel office space have been re-budgeted in the Capital Improvement Projects budget for FY 201516. These modifications will allow for the relocation of Human Resources to the Legal Building facilitating the merger of Human Resources and Risk Management with the 
NON-DEPARTMENTAL (10100040) Departmental Budget Request
The Department’s Requested Budget of $1,263,582 represents an overall increase of $1,263,582, or 411%, in expenditures and an overall increase of $1,779,837, or 8%, in revenues when compared to FY 2014/15 Final Budget. As a result, the Net County Cost / General Fund Contribution has decreased by ($516,255), or (2.4%).
Factors contributing to significant expenditure changes include:
A decrease of ($125,000) in Transfers to Designated Fund, due to the elimination of a $125,000 transfer for future costs of the 27th paycheck. This may be included at Final Budget.
A decrease of ($79,918) for prior year expense that was included in the FY 2014/15 to correct prior year’s transfers to/from designated funds.
An increase of $1,500,000 for Information Technology infrastructure projects.
Factors contributing to significant revenue changes include:
An increase of $380,548 in Current Secured Property Tax Revenues based on the projected 4% decrease in the assessment roll.
An increase of $155,843 in the Vehicle License Fees (VLF) tied to the estimated 4% increase in property tax revenues.
An increase of $349,077 in State SB90 Mandated Costs. The State is repaying the counties for all pre-2004 Mandated Costs. The State is expected to issue the warrant on June 26, however the county does not expect to receive the funds prior to fiscal year- end.
An increase of $22,291 in Federal Forest Reserve for Title III funds. The federal government reauthorized the Secure Rural Schools Act for 2014 and 2015.
An increase of $68,000 in State Aid for Public Safety (Prop. 172) based on current statewide sales tax revenues.
An increase of $622,137 in Transfers from Designated Fund as a result reducing by $836,135 the amount of Teeter Funds used to balance the FY 2015/16 Recommended Budget and a transfer of $1,500,000 to fund Information Technology infrastructure projects.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
Although the FY 2015/16 Recommended Budget projects a 4% increase in the property tax assessment rolls, the actual change will not be known until the assessment roll is closed at the end of June 2015. Anticipated revenues may require further adjustment at Final Budget. Additionally, based on the close of the FY 2014/15 budget, actual fund equity balance may change. 
COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS - 10100140
Departmental Budget Request
The Department’s Requested Budget of $293,308 represents an overall increase of $22,227, or 8%, in expenditures and no change in revenues when compared to FY 2014/15 Final Budget. As a result, the Net County Cost/General Fund Contribution increased $22,227 or 8%.
Factors contributing to significant expenditure changes include:
Funding of $22,291 has been included Federal Forest Reserve Title III projects. The Secure Rural Schools Act was reauthorized for 2014 and 2015. The offsetting revenue is budgeted in the Non-Departmental Budget (10100040).
The required Administrative Match for the Area 12 Agency on Aging increased $9,012. Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
An appropriation of $15,000 for Common Grounds Senior Service for the Meals on Wheels program and $3,500 for the Calaveras Senior Center is included in the budget. 
CAPITAL PROJECTS (10401060) DEPARTMENTAL BUDGET REQUEST
The Department’s Requested Budget of $1,361,733 represents an decrease of ($1,406,825), or (50.8%), in expenditures and a decrease of ($2,843,322) or (67.6%) in revenue when compared to FY2014/15 Final Budget. This budget unit has no Net County Cost/General Fund Contribution.
Status of Pending Projects:
Jail/Sheriff’s Office - Construction of the new Jail and Sheriff’s Offices have been completed. Appropriations and revenues will be updated at Final Budget to reflect any changes in expenditures and revenues should additional needs be identified.
Cosgrove Creek Feasibility Study - Certificate of Participation (COP) funds were set aside for the completion of the feasibility study. It is unknown when completion of the Feasibility Study will occur, so no appropriation or offsetting revenue from COP was included for this project.
Government Center Roofing - $130,000 has been included to reroof the three brick buildings at Government Center.
Land Use Building - $100,000 has been included in the FY 2014/15 budget for changes to the Land Use building to correct electrical feeder Issues identified this past winter. These changes will be funded with COP funds.
ADA Improvements - $350,000 is included for the Legal Building to address ADA issues and bring the County into compliance. This includes remodeling the current bathrooms (2 men’s/2 women’s) and the stairs, including the addition of a chair lift. These changes will be funded with COP funds.
Legal Building - $80,000 is included to remodel a portion of the recently vacated court space to create new office space for County Counsel. The remodel will be funded with COP funds. This is the first phase of a multi-year plan to move departments located off campus back to government center. The Administrative Office will move into the current County Counsel space and Human Resources will be re-located as part of the Administrative Office in the Legal Building.
Government Center HVAC - $371,000 for needed updates to HVAC system. This includes the "Legal” (Old Court) Building, the County Museum, and the Delta Controls for the old HVAC system.
Parking Lot and Area Lighting - $25,000 to improve the lighting in the area of the main steps to Government Center. This area is dark which creates an issue when night meetings are held. New lighting will alleviate the problem and make the area safer.
Structural Improvements - Public Works - $305,733
PENDING ISSUES AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
The cost for the Phase I Remodel of the Old Courthouse was re-budgeted in FY 2015/16. This was necessary due to the delay in issuing the original Request for Proposal (RFP), the need to reject all bids and to reissue the RFP as a base bid with bid-adds. As a result, construction and associated costs for the project has been significantly delayed. 
Parks and Recreation - 10870010
Departmental Budget Request
The Department’s Requested Budget of $12,309 represents an overall decrease of ($349), or (2.8%) in expenditures and an increase of ($10) or (16.7%), in revenues when compared to FY 2014/15 Final Budget. There is no General Fund Contribution to the Parks and Recreation Budget. Estimated Fund Equity at June 30, 2015 is $12,309.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
Funds in the Parks and Recreation budget are to cover the cost of any necessary repairs to Proposition 40 projects and the lease for White Pines Park related to a Proposition 40 project. 
FISH AND GAME - 11101560
Departmental Budget Request
The Department’s Requested Budget of $23,100 represents an overall decrease of ($806), or (3.5%), in expenditures and no change to revenues when compared to FY2014/15 Final Budget. There is no General Fund contribution to the Fish and Game Budget. The estimated Fund Equity balance at June 30, 2015 is $21,000.
AIRPORT (11201660) Departmental Budget Request
The Department’s Requested Budget of 1,220,255 represents an overall decrease of ($239,272), or (19.6%), in expenditures and an overall decrease of ($217,931), or (19.5%), in revenues when compared to FY 2014/15 Final Budget. There is no Net County Cost / General Fund Contribution to the Airport budget. The County Airport is a self-sustaining Enterprise Fund.
Factors contributing to significant expenditure changes include:
An increase of $7,666 in salaries and benefits.
An increase of $24,680 in A-87 Costs.
A decrease of ($184,913) in Maintenance of Runways/Aprons Factors contributing to significant revenue changes include:
A decrease of ($299,000) in Federal Aid Grant monies.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
The Airport manager has been working with the Federal Aviation Administration, and Mead and Hunt who has designed, Airport Runway Improvements and Taxiway Rehabilitation. These improvements include: runway edge lighting, counterpoise lighting protection system, upgrade electrical homerun, a new PAPI on each end of the runway, replacement of REILs, and replacement of supplemental wind cones. The Airport received an Airport Improvement Program Grant from the FAA in fiscal year 2014/15 and will continue additional monies in FY 15/16 to complete the project.
The Airport received additional money from the State Department of Transportation to update the Airport AWOS and replace its beacon. The projects will be completed in FY 15/16. 
COUNTY FIRE - 11301760
Departmental Budget Request
The Department’s Requested Budget of $390,949 represents an overall increase of $41,552, or
9%, in expenditures and an increase of $42,085, or 12.1% in revenues when compared to FY 2014/15 Final Budget. As a result, the Net County Cost/General Fund Contribution increased $28,455 or 11.6%. The estimated FY 2014/15 fund balance is $0.
Factors contributing to significant revenue changes include:
An increase of $2,083 to property taxes based on an estimated 4% increase to the property tax roll for FY 2015-16. This is a pass through to Central Calaveras Fire for coverage provided to an area not in their fire district.
An increase of $14,000 to Permits based on current trends for construction permits. Factors contributing to significant expenditure changes include:
An increase of $26,096 to Professional & Specialized Services for the CalFire Dispatch contract.
An increase of $14,000 to Transfer to Designated Fund. Permit Fee Revenue increased $14,000. These funds are transferred to the Water Enhancement Designated Fund to be used for the debt service payments on the water tenders purchased for the Fire Districts and to repay a loan from the Emergency Loan fund that covered the cost of repairs to Fire District water tenders.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
None. 
.4 FTE of TSD positions are charged to Mail, Communications, and Duplication.
TSD staff has experienced higher turnover in the past two years than has been experienced historically. Of the 10 individuals on staff at this time, 3 have been with County of Calaveras for 2 years or longer.
Current staffing and budget levels enable TSD staff to support critical ongoing operational needs of the County with minimal resources available to support continuing evolution of needs from all Departments.
Long term investments in technology within the County have not kept pace with needs, resulting in a current need to make substantial re-investments in multiple areas.
TSD is working with HR and Admin to review and modify as necessary multiple job descriptions that are currently outdated.
The Department’s Budget Request for 2015-16 includes a Net Budget of 1,105k vs. 925k from prior year for an increase of 90k
o Revenues increases of 275k, driven primarily by increased A-87 charges o Salaries and Benefits increases of 125k, driven primarily by plans for all allocated positions being staffed for full year.
o Services and Supplies increases of 241 are viewed as foundational needs. Key increases include:
o 5186 - Maintenance of Computer Software - increase of 107k driven primarily by extending the Microsoft Enterprise Agreement o 5187 - Maintenance of Computer Hardware - increase of 42k driven primarily by getting current with maintenance on CISCO Network equipment. This increase is partially offset by a 22k reduction in 5186 - Maintenance of Computer Software within 10100170 Communications as a consolidation of all CISCO maintenance was done as part of the budget process.
o 5271- Professional and Specialized Services - increase of 69k driven primarily by additional external resources to assist County with highly specialized skills, primarily in Network and Database areas. External resources work with internal staff to support critical needs of the County, o 5422 - Training - increase of 5k to provide for additional skill development for staff
o 5498 - Minor Equipment - Computer - increase of 14k, driven by need for 2 new computers for staff and replacement of one of the Core UPS units in County Data Center.
Adoption of the proposed budget and hiring into the two open positions will position TSD for status quo services being delivered to the County. TSD will continue to support ongoing high priority current operational needs with the ability to supply limited resources to new needs as time permits.
County is faced with high priority needs within technology infrastructures and within departments.
TSD has identified multiple high priority infrastructure needs for the County, including:
o Migrate critical areas away from Microsoft Windows Server 2003. This server software will be dropped from support by Microsoft in July of 2015. County has many core infrastructure components and business systems utilizing WS2003. o Network components - replacing components that are at End of Life and are not under support contract. Adding Network components where required to support current needs, o Upgrade of telephone system (Cisco Call Manager). Current system is at End of Life, not supported, and unable to keep up with needs of County, o Upgrades to Data Center Storage for limited number of areas. TSD is reviewing Storage architectures in place and age of equipment to assess highest risk areas to County in event of equipment failure.
o Replacement of antiquated TSD Support Ticketing System, enabling improved abilities for County staff to report problems, request support, and for TSD to manage to highest needs on ongoing basis.
Following a survey with Departments, expectations of Departments include needs for: o Completion of upgrade of IFAS to ONESolution, including introduction of Purchase
Order Management and Contract Management o Completion of upgrade of Megabyte o New Case Management System for DA o New Case Management System for Probation o New Clerk-Recorder System - for Vital Record o Providing for additional core capability HR needs o Upgrade to Environmental Health system o Upgrade to Library System
o Sherriff s Office - CLETS availability at substations and Angels Camp PD o Sherriff s Office - Improved system failover capabilities for key law enforcement system o Numerous other stated system and infrastructure requests - (i.e. Internet needs to have
better up-time)
Current resource allocations for TSD do not enable support being provided to meet critically stated needs for Departments.
TSD will:
o Propose critical infrastructure investments for 2015-16 and beyond. TSD has engaged external resources to begin this process.
o Continue to work with HR to revise job descriptions. Recruit and hire into open positions
o Refine internal procedures to ensure that resources in place are assigned to tasks and projects that best address needs of County.
o Continue to support current operational needs of County and address project needs as able
o Provide quarterly update reports on key metrics TSD proposes:
o Adoption of central planning functions that define County-Wide technology needs, set priorities on County-Wide basis, balance stated needs with resources.
o Adoption of technology re-investment processes that map out known areas that
require investments being made over multiple year period of time. Incorporate as part of central planning.
o Balancing critical needs for 2015-16 with resources available to support those needs. Develop a reasonable inventory of projects that will be undertaken, with resources to support those projects as well as ongoing operational needs. Adjust approved staffing levels as appropriate to support agreed upon critical needs.
TSD remains committed to working with CAO, County Departments, and Board of Supervisors to provide best overall service levels that we can achieve on behalf of the County. 
The Technology Services Department has responsibility for the Duplication (10100090) budget unit which is used to allocate costs for copiers utilized by a number of County departments.
Departments participating in the centrally managed Duplication Fund are charged a flat rate per copy made, with a difference in rate for Black and White / Color copies. Departments are direct billed on a quarterly basis for copies that their department generated.
Revenues generated offset costs for operation, maintenance, supplies and staffing. Revenues generated in excess of these operational costs are transferred each year to Duplicating Fund 5474. This fund is designated as a Capital replacement fund to acquire new Copiers when needed. Based on budgeted revenues and expenditures, it is estimated that 2015-16 will transfer an additional 10.5k to the Capital replacement fund.
TSD has been working with a Copier Provider to conduct a complete analysis of the Copier placement, utilization, and “best-fit” to meet departmental needs. Maintenance availability, age of machine and past services requests has been evaluated. The Provider is in the process of providing a recommend placement of existing machines in departments. Provider will also be recommending a multi-year replacement plan. Many of the current copiers being utilized by Departments are at end or near end of maintenance support.
Additionally TSD is committed to conduct an annual financial analysis of the fund to not only ensure a comprehensive replacement evolution but to also adjust per-copy charges in order to ensure that the departments copy needs continue to be met. 
The Technology Services Department includes the Geographic Information Systems (GIS) division. The GIS division budget unit (10100130) is used to allocate costs for staff, software maintenance contracts, and other GIS related expenses. The GIS unit is not included in the County’s A-87 cost plan; therefore, all expenses related to this division are allocated through the general fund.
The GIS division maintains the County's spatial data sets, addressing responsibilities, and assists with other important systems such as Reverse 911. GIS maintained data is used to produce maps for various purposes ranging from Roadways, General Plan Updates, to electronic maps in Sheriffs Vehicles.
GIS staffing includes two GIS technicians.
The GIS Budget Request for 2015-16 includes a Net Budget of 245.5k in expenses vs 229k from prior year for an increase of 16k. Anticipated Revenues will be flat to last year. Increases expenses will come from:
Salaries and Employee benefits - increase of 6k
5247- Office Expense - Computer Paper - increase of 2k in supplies (ink and paper) for a plotter purchased during past year.
5271 - Professional and Specialized Services - 8.5k for an outside Consultant evaluation of current GIS capabilities and results. Engagement will provide information related to areas where GIS could be further leveraged. Engagement will provide technical assistance and planning necessary for County to improve its existing mapping functionality and Internet presence. It is anticipated that a probable outcome of the Engagement will be a suggestion to upgrade our ESRI software to be at current release level as well as the Server that the software resides on. 
The Technology Services Department has responsibility for the Communications (10100170) budget unit which is used to allocate costs related to general telecommunications operations and maintenance for the County.
The Telecommunications Budget Request for 2015-16 includes a net budget of 5k in expenses vs 46k for prior year for a net reduction of 41k.
Revenue increases of 8k, driven primarily by increased A-87 charges. County Reimbursements are anticipated to remain relatively flat.
Salaries and Benefits decrease of 3k
Services and supplies decrease of 30k
o 5186 - Maintenance of Computer Software - reduced by 22k with shift of CISCO equipment maintenance to 101000070 TSD 5187 - Maintenance of Computer Hardware.
o 5121 Communications - includes costs from Telecommunication companies for Telephone and Internet use. A reduction of 8.5k to last year budget is anticipated.
AT&T - County telephone service is expected to remain flat.
Comcast wireless internet service is expected to remain flat
Internet services for last year included funding for broadband as well as business internet in place through Utility Telephone. Budget for broadband was higher than needed for last year. 2015-16 services will be delivered with 8.5k reduction to last year budget.
Broadband internet services have been contracted for and are anticipated to be delivered to County prior to start of new fiscal year. The fiber optics delivered internet connection will provide significantly more bandwidth to the county.
Telephone service is received with AT&T Government pricing via a CALNET contract. This ensures the County gets the best pricing available as long as County departments direct their Phone requests to TSD.
Departments are charged back on a monthly basis for telephone charges incurred. 
Human Resources - 10100021
Departmental Budget Request
The Department’s Requested Budget of $577,815 represents an overall increase of $49,456, or 9.4%, in expenditures and an increase of $124,360, or 53.1% in revenues when compared to FY 2014/15 Final Budget. As a result, the Net County Cost/General Fund Contribution decreased ($74,904) or (25.5%).
Factors contributing to significant revenue changes include:
An increase of $124,610 in A-87 Indirect Cost Plan revenues.
Factors contributing to significant expenditure changes include:
 An increase of $53,981 to Salaries and Benefits. This increase is a combination of a reduction in costs due to the reclassification of two positions, the funding of a HR Assistant I/II, the full year costs of a negotiated 4% COLA, normal step increases and longevities, and an increase to the PERS contribution rate.
A decrease of ($4,525) in Services and Supplies.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
The recruitment for the Deputy CAO-HR/Risk Management is ongoing. The County will be negotiating new contracts with all bargaining unit during the 2015-16 fiscal year. An appropriation for Professional and Specialized Services to assist with negotiations is included in the FY 2015-16 budget. 
Insurance - 10100150
Departmental Budget Request
The Department’s Requested Budget of $2,518,446 represents an overall increase of $371,090, or 17.3%, in expenditures and an increase of $112,290, or 17.4% in revenues when compared to FY 2014/15 Final Budget. As a result, the Net County Cost/General Fund Contribution increased $258,800 or 17.3%.
Factors contributing to significant revenue changes include:
An increase of $112,294 in A-87 Indirect Cost Plan revenues.
Factors contributing to significant expenditure changes include:
An increase of $198,810 to the Worker’s Compensation Insurance Premium.
An increase of $24,120 to the Property Insurance Premium.
An increase of $112,464 to Liability Expense to fund at the targeted 80% confidence level per the FY 2014-15 General Liability Actuarial.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
The recruitment for the Deputy CAO-HR/Risk Management is ongoing. The County will be negotiating new contracts with all bargaining unit during the 2015-16 fiscal year. An appropriation for Professional and Specialized Services to assist with negotiations is included in the FY 2015-16 budget. 
April 1, 2015
To: Board of Supervisors From: Gary Kuntz, Sheriff
Subject: Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Department Request for Sheriff - General Fund (10100320)
The attached budget has been compiled using the instructions received from the County Administrative Office for a Budget requesting a “Status Quo Budget.” In reality due to the direction given by the Board and CAO, this budget request represented a $270,505 reduction to services. This is due to Budgeted Employee Cost (BEC) increases negotiated by the County. Although the County Administrative Office requested a $270,505 reduction, as your Sheriff I believe it is imperative that we submit a budget that protects the safety of our community and employees.
As your Sheriff, I have travelled the county for the last four years talking with and listening to the citizens of our county. Our constituents have made it very clear that they expect us to hire more deputy sheriffs and investigators to respond to calls for service and investigate crimes committed against them.
This is why the Board of Supervisors and I together began to restore some of the positions lost during the recession, rather than restoring other much needed programs within the Sheriff’s Office. While we began to restore those positions in FY 2012-2013, the decisions made by the Board of Supervisors in FY 2014-2015 reversed that trend. In FY 2014-2015, nine (9) deputy sheriff positions were placed in the Board termed “Parking Lot.”
In addition a Sheriff’s Service Technician, whom had just begun critical and valuable work in crime statistics and analysis, was laid off. The net result, last year, was $1.36 million dollars in loss of funding for the Sheriff’s Office. This was in addition to years of cuts due to the recession. I believe we must now begin to restore some of those Deputy Sheriff positions that were lost and to begin to purchase and replace much needed equipment that has been deferred for several due to budgetary cuts.
The Sheriff’s Office had previously presented a plan to the Board of Supervisors to restore lost positions. Six (6) of those positions were to be assigned to Patrol to create a new centralized beat to reduce response times and fill other cover shifts to reduce overtime. The seventh position was a deputy sheriff position that would have allowed the Sheriff’s Office to restore a detective position that had been cut.
Unfortunately, the plan has suffered a setback due to losing positions and due to budget reductions in FY 2014-2015. In addition and within the last year, the Sheriff’s Office has lost four (4) sworn employees to other agencies. Restoring those positions and the new centralized beat will be significantly beneficial to your constituents and the citizens we serve.
In FY 2014-2015, the Sheriff’s Office was awarded a COPS Hiring Grant for three (3) school resource officer positions. While the Board of Supervisors had indicated verbal support for the SRO positions, you ultimately chose to not accept the grant and finance the school resource officers. The Board of Supervisors could choose to fund that program out of the General Fund. The cost to approve those positions is outlined in this document.
This year’s direction from the County Administrative Office to the Sheriff’s Office to absorb all the budgeted employee cost increases, combined with multiple years of cuts, is neither productive nor supportive of community and employee safety. The absorption of budgeted employee cost increases would necessitate further unreasonable and unsustainable reductions to overtime, gas and oil, and maintenance of auto equipment. In FY 2014-2015 the CAO ordered the Sheriff’s Office to reduce $75,000 to Overtime and $100,000 to Gas and Oil; this reduction was not sustainable.
Due to the cuts this year, we are being forced to make further unsustainable reductions to gas, overtime, and maintenance of auto equipment. Gas and oil is being further reduced $90,168. Overtime is being further reduced $90,169. Maintenance of auto equipment is being reduced $90,168. I recommend you choose your own path in whether the Sheriff’s Office should absorb increased budgeted employee costs, restore funding to overtime, gas and oil expense, and maintenance of auto equipment, and whether to begin to restore positions cut in previous fiscal years. Please understand these amounts are unsustainable and we will go over budget for these line items.
Highlighted Changes in Revenue Classes
Licenses, Permits, and Franchise Fees
o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $27,750 o FY 2015-2016 Budgeted Amount: $29,250
Intergovernmental Revenue - State
o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $154,273 o FY 2015-2016 Budgeted Amount: $108,867
o The Sheriff’s Office does not anticipate receiving grant funding from Alcohol Beverage Control in FY 2015-2016.
Intergovernmental Revenue - Federal
o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $18,084 o FY 2015-2016 Budgeted Amount: $18,084
Charges for Services
o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $547,364 o FY 2015-2016 Budgeted Amount: $475,569
o Revenue reduction due to one-time financing of vehicle by Bureau of Reclamation.
Other Financing Sources
o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $110,747 o FY 2015-2016 Budgeted Amount: $101,586
Highlighted Changes in Expense Classes
Salaries and Employee Benefits
o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $4,500,924 o FY 2015-2016 Budgeted Amount: $4,858,165
o Includes personnel reassignments and increase to budgeted employee costs.
o Includes new position request for one (1) school resource officer position.
Services and Supplies
o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $411,731 o FY 2015-2016 Budgeted Amount: $297,243
o Net reduction of Gas and Oil allotment by $90,168. o Net reduction of Overtime allotment and Medicare (OT) allotment by
$90,169
o Net reduction of Maintenance of Equipment Auto allotment by $90,168.
Other Financing Uses
o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $0 o FY 2015-2016 Budgeted Amount: $1,000
o Reimbursement to Human Resources for staff recruitment costs.
Critical Needs
The Sheriff’s Office needs to replace many vehicles. Our county’s deputies are driving vehicles with very high mileage, that are fully depreciated, and that are past their useful economic life.
The Sheriff’s Office is also in need of a lieutenant for the Jail. This lieutenant is going to be filled through a reclassification of a current vacant sergeants position. The lieutenant will tasked to develop jail bed rental contracts and other revenue generating programs. Correctional sergeants are currently handling lieutenant duties, such as payroll and contract development. They are not able to supervise staff or conduct inmate interactions in compliance with Title 15. The lieutenant will also improve supervision of correctional sergeants and corporals.
Other critical Sheriff needs will be outlined during the FY 2015-2016 Budget Hearings presentation. 
April 1, 2015
To: Board of Supervisors From: Gary Kuntz, Sheriff
Subject: Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Department Request for Dispatch - General Fund (10100330)
The Sheriff Office’s FY 2015-2016 budget request for Dispatch - General Fund (10100330) conforms to the County Administrative Officer’s Recommended Budget Development Instructions, except for the absorption of Budgeted Employee Cost (BEC) increases and the financing of mission critical maintenance contracts.
Highlighted Changes in Revenue Classes
Intergovernmental Revenue - State
o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $6,995 o FY 2015-2016 Budgeted Amount: $6,995
Charges for Services
o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $239,013 o FY 2015-2016 Budgeted Amount: $241,604
Highlighted Changes in Expense Classes
Salaries and Employee Benefits
o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $1,214,636 o FY 2015-2016 Budgeted Amount: $1,288,682
Services and Supplies
o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $15,995 o FY 2015-2016 Budgeted Amount: $33,520
Budgeted Employee Cost (BEC) Increases
Dispatch cannot absorb personnel cost increases due to past budget cuts. Absorption of BEC increases would result in the layoff of one full time equivalent (1.00 FTE) dispatcher. The lay-off would result in a critical staffing shortage. Absorption of BEC increases would mean a significant increase in the overtime budget for this unit.
Two new communication contracts need to be financed in Dispatch in order to maintain and protect County assets.
The first is the Avtec Dispatch Communication Center Service Contract. The contract is critical for maintaing and upgrading the new Dispatch radio communications equipment located in the Dispatch Center. The cost of the contract is $9,965 per year and the performance period of the contract is five (5) years.
The second is the Alcatel-Lucent Microwave Service Contract. The contract is mission critical and is for the maintenance of communications, particularly the microwave [communication] system. The microwave system provides data service to patrol units in the field; two way dispatch and enforcement information is provided to patrol units through the Mobile Data Termination (MDT) equipment installed in the patrol units. The contract was originally funded five years ago with a one-time PSIC technology grant. An increase to appropriations from the General Fund, in the amount of $7,560 per year, is needed to finance the contract. The contract’s performance period is three (3) years.
Sheriff’s Recommendation
Finance Dispatch at the base level, including the financing of budgeted employee cost increases.
Increase Services and Supplies base funding in the amount of $17,525 for the financing of Avtec and Alcatel-Lucent contracts.
Reduce overtime allotment to realign budgeted amount with FY 2014-2015 projected year end actuals.


The subvention grant from Department of Boating and Waterways has been allocated to
the Calaveras County Sheriff’s Office for over eighteen (18) consecutive years. The
purpose of the subvention is to finance Marine Safety operations. Allocation amount,
$174,926, has remained unchanged for the past seven (7) years.
The Department of Boating and Waterways mandates that subvention grant funds be the
last source of revenue used for financing operations. The State mandates funding
sources are to be used in the following order: Unsecured Boat Taxes; General Fund;
Subvention Grant.
Marine Safety Program Revenue: Unsecured Boat Taxes
Revenues derived from Unsecured Boat Taxes have been received by the Calaveras
County Sheriff’s Office Marine Safety program for over twelve (12) consecutive years.
The revenue is allocated only if the Sheriff’s Department maintains the unit in connection
with the Department of Boating and Waterways Subvention Grant.
Unsecured Boat Tax revenue has declined by 30.78% from FY 2009-2010 to FY 2014-
2015. The Marine Safety Unit has been relatively unable to maintain equipment, vessels,
and trailers and staff lake patrol functions due to the reduction in Unsecured Boat Tax
revenue and cuts made to the Sheriff’s Office General Fund appropriation. Patrols
include Lake Tulloch, New Hogan Lake, New Melones Lake, Camanche Reservoir, and
Pardee Lake. Without extra overtime only two lakes can be patrolled per day, with one
deputy at each of the two lakes that are patrolled for the day.
To meet County budget appropriation targets, Marine Safety eliminated three (3) extra
hire deputy sheriff positions and restricted the use of over time. The loss of extra hire
sheriff deputies and the imposition of restrictions to overtime significantly decreased the
amount of patrols on Lake Tulloch, New Hogan Lake, New Melones Lake, Camanche
Reservoir, and Pardee Lake. Reduction in lake patrols has caused considerable risks and
impacts to officer and public safety.
Minimal equipment maintenance has and continues to reduce the availability of marine
vessel and trailers for use by sworn staff and the availability of dive equipment for use by
the Rescue Dive Team. Due to limited staffing resources in Marine Safety, the Sheriff
Office’s Rescue Dive Team has been unable to maintain a consistent training regimen.
Marine Safety Program Expenditures: Budgeted Employee Cost (BEC) Increases
If the Sheriff’s Office absorbed BEC increases, Marine Safety would be forced to
discontinue regular law enforcement coverage on Lake Tulloch, New Hogan Lake, New
Melones Lake, Camanche Reservoir, and Pardee Lake. The department’s dive team will
receive only partial funding, thus limiting their capabilities and availability for
deployment.
Marine Safety Program Expenditures: Overtime
Marine Safety was allotted $8,763 for overtime in FY 2014-2015. Marine Safety
requests an increase of appropriations, for overtime, in the amount of $6,237, for a total
overtime allotment of $15,000. An increase in overtime will create a more consistent
training regimen for the Sheriff Office’s Rescue Dive Team and will increase the amount
of patrols on the County’s lakes.

Policy Considerations for Fiscal Year 2015-2016
In Fiscal Year 2014-2015, the Sheriff’s Office informed the Board of Supervisors that its appropriation
request was based on staffing and operational analysis prior to construction, in which the Jail would
maintain a capacity of eighty (80) inmates. The Board of Supervisors was further informed that the
Sheriff’s Office did not know with certainty if the proposed intermittent supervision model would be
adequate to supervise inmates in the new facility.
The new Jail was required to begin its operation on June 13, 2014 in order to maintain compliance with
AB 900 grant requirements.
The Sheriff’s Office established minimum staffing levels and Fixed Post coverage to be compliant with
Title 15 operational standards and other applicable law. The Sheriff’s Office initially decided that only the
East Housing Unit, including A, B, C and D pods, would be occupied and that the West Housing Unit, E
and F pods, would remain unoccupied. Under this operational mode, the population of inmates would be
confined to a smaller area of the Jail, making it easier for correctional staff to manage and supervise
inmates.
The first few weeks of operations were relatively smooth. As the Jail increased its population from 60 to
80 inmates, it was determined that an additional housing pod would need to be occupied to meet
classification needs, regardless of the number of inmates being housed. Upon this determination, F-Pod
was opened to house sentenced inmates; with the population of the unit to not exceed twenty four (24)
inmates. As the transition continued, the Sheriff’s Office realized that, due to the unpredictability of
human behavior, housing classifications had to again be reevaluated. The Jail now uses all housing units
and pods.
The Jail currently has twenty (20) correctional officers and two correctional sergeants to manage the
inmates and provide for their confinement. Minimum standards daily data has been compiled for the
period of operation from July 13, 2015 through April 1, 2015. Minimum standards daily data was
compiled for the purposes of determining impacts on staff. The data was also used to evaluate potential
efficiency improvements and means to more effectively operate the Jail. During this time period, and
specific to Title 15 §1027, §1055, §1056, and §1240, the Jail has booked 1,471 offenders, conducted
7,080 hourly checks, placed 325 offenders in detox cells, conducted 3,900 detox cell safety checks,
housed 112 offenders in safety cells, conducted 5,376 safety cell checks, and served 75,225 meals to the
inmates. The referenced sections and caseloads account for a substantial amount of staff time expended
on all shifts. All remaining staff time is allotted to meet the remaining Title 15 standards and
requirements.
Since the opening of the new Jail, many operational factors have been revealed which warrant additional
evaluation and analysis. Early in operation, Post positions were initially determined to be fixed, requiring
twenty four (24) hour coverage. Position stations were adjusted to allow correctional officers to perform
other duties within the Jail when necessary, either for exigent circumstances or staff shortages, which
would normally generate overtime expenses. Although Jail staff made every effort to operate in
compliance with operational standards and budget constraints, some areas of the Jail absolutely required
fixed post twenty (24) hour coverage to ensure compliance with Title 15 standards.
The Sheriff’s Office quickly determined that reliance on partial flexible positioning made compliance
with the minimum standards of Title 15, to conduct hourly safety checks, difficult. It was determined that
in order to operate the Jail to meet minimum standards, limited staffing - mandatory overtime practices
had to be put in place. Limited staffing – mandatory overtime practices were absolutely necessary to
maintain compliance with Title 15 and to reduce the County’s legal risk and protect the safety of staff and
inmates.
The BSCC (Board of State and Community Corrections) completed their biennial inspection on the new
Jail operation. Their overall assessment: the Jail is in compliance with minimum operating standards,
except with §1027, sufficient staffing.
6,517 hours of overtime, in 295 days of operation, were used to cover post positions and meet minimal
staffing levels. Overtime was also needed to provide for relief of Jail staff: staff coverages due to normal
days off, training, sick leave, vacations, and extended medical absences.
In addition the Jail experienced a substantial staff turnover rate in FY 2014-2015. The Jail did not have
all of its allocated positions filled until February, 2015. Currently, there are four correctional officers
seeking and pursuing employment with other agencies. The Jail continues to conduct backgrounds on
applicants seeking employment with the County and has a pool of personnel available for placement into
extra-hire positions.
The Sheriff’s Office recommends and requests to increase its quantity of extra-hire positions for the
following reasons: provide a relief factor; fill vacated positions; fill shift shortages; reduce the County’s
legal risk; improve correctional officer safety; and improve inmate safety. The increase use of extra-hire
positions will save the County a significant amount of funds. Extra-hires are 33% less expense than a
permanent full time person working overtime. .
The Sheriff’s Office will determine what available bed space can be rented out to other agencies in order
to increase Jail revenue.
Sheriff’s Recommendations
? Significantly increase extra hire allotment to mitigate staff fatigue, reduce overtime, and improve
efficient use of public monies.
? Hold the overtime line to $99,828

Budgeted Employee Cost (BEC) Increases
Office of Emergency Services cannot absorb BEC increases due to past budget cuts and
grant award reductions. Absorption of BEC increases would result in: the elimination of
support for HazMat and Bomb Squad teams; elimination of essential OES staff; and the
transferring of responsibility for the financing and management of radio communication
site leases to the County Administrative Office.
Absorption of personnel cost increase would further reduce the County’s capability to
prepare for, protect against, respond to, recover from, and mitigate hazards and disasters.
The reduction will worsen a disaster’s impact on the community and public. The
reduction will also increase the cost, to the County, of responding to and recovering from
a disaster incident.
Sheriff’s Recommendation
? Finance Office of Emergency Services at the base level, including the financing of
budgeted employee cost increases.

Department 21 is composed entirely of grant funds received from CalOES Office ofVictim
Services and has no impact on the GF. This program provides funding for Victim/Witness
services in the DA's Office and has been in existence for more than 20 years.
• $106,452- GRANT FUNDING FROM CaiOES, OFFICE OF VICTIM SERVICES
This budget funds I FTE Victim/Witness Coordinator, a 45% Clerical position, 5% of
the Criminal Division's Administrative Assistant position, and services and supplies.
PROGRAM SUMMARY
A violent crime can impact many aspects of a person's life. Not only does crime affect the
victim but also their loved ones and sometimes, an entire community. A crime can have long
lasting physical, emotional and financial effects.
Often the needs of crime victims can appear to be overshadowed by the focus on the
investigation and prosecution of the accused. The Calaveras County District Attorney's Office
Victim-Witness Program seeks to make the criminal justice system more understandable,
accessible and responsive to the concerns of victims and witnesses.
Our Victim Advocate is available to ensure that crime victims and their family members are
kept informed and supported throughout the criminal justice process. Our advocate has
extensive training in elder/dependent adult abuse and domestic violence.

BUDGET OVERVIEW
----
The District Attorney is responsible for the litigation of all matters that come under the
jurisdiction of the DA including all criminal cases, juvenile delinquency cases, and certain
related civil and appellate matters. TheDA's Office includes attorneys, victim advocates, an
investigations unit, and support staff. With the goal of prosecuting and preventing crime, the
DA's Office works closely with all local law enforcement agencies and with many other partner
agencies including Probation, Health & Human Services, Calaveras Crisis Center, and the Office
of Education to name a few.
TheDA's Office is a OF department, with approximately 25% of its total operational costs now
funded by outside sources. Pursuant to BOS direction, Dept. 30's budget has been prepared as a
FY14115 OF contribution status quo budget of$1,272,200. This represents an 8.9% ($113,298)
reduction from a FY14/15 operational status quo budget and is reached by the following
reductions:
• $26,599 - GF SAVINGS -Reduction of Senrices & Supplies
TheDA's Office services & supplies budget includes many predictable expenses such as
blood draws in DUI cases, paper for filing criminal complaints in Court, discovery costs,
case file management, training, and legal research materials, along with many other
important office functions. In contrast, special litigation costs such as expert witness fees,
evidence storage, travel, and extraditions are highly unpredictable and may or may not
actually be expended despite best projections. The DA only approves special litigation
expenses upon sufficient justification by the DDA handling the case.

This reduction in services & supplies will require the DA to seek BOS approval for each
special litigation expense as it becomes a necessary for trial preparation, with the knowledge
that it may not actually be expended due to the unpredictable nature of litigation.
• $69,453 - GF SAVINGS -Terming Out of Limited Term Position
The Limited Term Investigative/Trial Support Assistant was added at FY13/14 final budget
as part of the DA's restructuring plan to reduce the personnel costs of Dept. 30 while
maintaining a minimum level of staffing in the investigations unit. The BOS approved
continuing this position through FY14115 because ofthe DA's workload. During its term,
this position provided many valuable services to the DA's Office at a lower cost than a sworn
investigator. This position has successfully completed training in crime scene processing,
rural crimes, and child abduction. With the terming out of this position, the DA
investigation's unit will be reduced to one investigator. The service impacts of the loss of
this position are set forth in the attached "Summary of Service Impacts".
• $50,735- GF SAVINGS- Reduction ofFTE Deputy DA II to .6 FTE
This voluntary reduction maintains status quo Attorney staffing.
BUDGET REQUESTS FOR FY15/16:
1) $25,000 for special litigation costs:
The overwhelming majority of the People's cases are resolved by plea or trial without expending
resources for experts or other special litigation costs. However, certain cases do require retained
experts and other litigation resources in order to pursue justice. The DA has the Constitutional
authority to decide which cases to pursue and must maintain a litigation budget in order to
protect this Constitutional authority. An underfunded litigation budget would require the DA to
seek BOS approval for litigation funds on a case by case basis. This is in stark contrast to
defense attorney requests for litigation funds which are confidentially submitted to the Court and,
if approved by the Court, are then charged to the County without BOS approval.
In years where budgeted special litigation costs are not spent, they become cash carry. For
FY14/15, the DA estimates that Dept. 30 will have $57,320 in cash carry, $30,000 ofwhich is
specifically from unspent budgeted special litigation costs. TheDA is requesting $25,000 of this
be re-budgeted for FY15/16.
2) $57,608 for District Attorney Investigator I filled at mid-year:
TheDA currently has one DA Investigator (DAI). Prior to the recession, the DA's Office was
staffed with three DAis. DAis are sworn peace officers and as such are a critical part of the
DA's Office for matters including follow up investigations, search warrants, witness and trial
preparation, confidential investigations, officer involved shootings, and security. Our sole DAI
has reached retirement age and had planned to retire during this fiscal year. However, our

current case load and the particular investigations to which he is assigned have required the delay
of his retirement at least until a new DAI can be brought on and trained to take over. A mid-year
start date will permit effective succession planning so our current DAI can retire at the end of
FY15/16, resulting in a cost savings going forward.
3) $26,529 for shared Administrative Assistant position:
TheDA, the Environmental Management Agency Administrator, and the Building Official are
requesting to share 1 FTE position in order to maximize resources and enhance those areas
where these Departments work together. The requested position is shared by the DA (40%),
Animal Services (40%), and Code Compliance (20%). See "New Position Request Form".
This shared position will provide the DA with the ability to receive and process bad check
reports from local merchants for consideration of charges or referral to a restitution program. A
third party vendor used to receive and process these reports, however this no longer a viable
option for the DA. With this position, the DA will also be able to identify those checks reported
as bad checks that are actually stolen and forged checks. While failure to fund this position may
reduce the workload of the DA by a few cases per year, the DA believes the ability to address
these cases is important for the protection of local merchants and the public.
TheDA will realize additional efficiencies as a result of this position being shared with Animal
Services and Code Compliance as these Departments both forward criminal and civil cases to the
DA's Office. This shared position will serve as an effective conduit of information between
Departments, thereby enhancing services overall.
4) $69,453 for extension ofFTE Investigative/Trial Support Assistant:
With the terming out ofthis position at the end ofFY14/15, the DA investigation's unit will
again be comprised of one investigator. At this staffing level, the DA's Office will be severely
limited in the number of follow up investigations it can conduct on cases received from law
enforcement agencies resulting in delays and/or lower filings and, potentially, loss of evidence
due to the passage of time. Increasing numbers of incomplete investigations will be referred
back to the initiating law enforcement agency for completion, which in tum burdens that agency.
Many trial support services will go incomplete or flow to other employees resulting in the
inefficient use of personnel resources. Since the budget crisis began, the ability ofthe DA's
Office to initiate and complete investigations has become increasingly restricted. This staffing
level may, for all practical purposes, eliminate this ability altogether. Priority will be given to
homicide and officer involved shooting investigations, and immediate trial preparation services.
Over the last 6 months, this position participated in over 70 investigations, and assisted
prosecutors in over 80 cases by gathering documents, participating in trial preparation meetings
with witnesses, and coordinating forensic interviews in child sexual assault cases. This position
provides necessary investigative and trial support at a lower cost than a sworn investigator. The
DA is requesting this position be extended so the investigations unit will be maintained at its
current level. For an overview of functions that will not be performed should this position not be
extended, please see the attached "Summary ofService Impacts".

SUMMARY OF SERVICE IMPACTS
FTE Investigative/Trial Support Assistant- Terming Out
The following tasks will go incomplete where remaining staff is unable to absorb the task:
c::> Investigate the possession of firearms by persons prohibited from owning or possessing
firearms due to psychiatric history, restraining order, or conviction
c::> Provide specialized investigative and victim support in adult and child sexual assault
cases including coordinating with members of the Multi-Disciplinary Interview Center
c::> Perform follow up investigation for law enforcement agencies as directed
c::> Perform follow up investigations on Grand Jury referrals as directed
c::> Obtain witness statements in filed cases as witnesses come forward
c::> Assist Investigator at crime scenes taking photographs, measurements, and collecting
physical evidence
c::> Arrange for forensic testing of evidence and preserve chain of custody of evidence
c::> Prepare photographs, sketches, diagrams and transcripts for courtroom presentation
c::> Provide technical support for prosecutors in court
c::> Provide transportation and/or travel arrangements for victims and witnesses to and from
court or interviews as needed
c::> Serve subpoenas for time sensitive witnesses
c::> Locate and obtain necessary documents from other agencies, businesses and jurisdictions
c::> Process and serve legal documents
c::> Track the location of persons including witnesses and suspects

BUDGET OVERVIEW
Department 800, Reduce Impaired Driving (RID), is composed entirely of grant funds received
from the Office of Traffic Safety and has no impact on the GF.
• $39.142 - GRANT FUNDING FROM THE OFFICE OF TRAFFIC SAFETY
This grant provides funding on the federal fiscal year cycle from October 1st through
September 30th annually. Each year at preliminary budget, Dept. 800 can only be budgeted
for the first quarter of the County fiscal year pending receipt of a grant renewal funding letter
for the remainder of the fiscal year. Should this grant be renewed at the same level as last
year, an additional $117,584 will be budgeted in Dept. 800 at final budget.
This budget funds 1 FTE Deputy District Attorney II, .2 FTE Paralegal, and services and
supplies, including mandatory training.
PROGRAM SUMMARY
In 2010, Calaveras County ranked No. 2 in the State for alcohol-involved collisions with injuries
or fatalities. 1 In 2012, the DA's Office received grant funding to form the Reduce Impaired
Driving (RID) team. In addition to prosecuting DUI cases, the RID team works closely with
1 As reported by the California Office of Traffic Safety.
891 Mountain Ranch Road • San Andreas, CA 95249 • 209-754-6330 • Fax 209-754-6645
local law enforcement agencies and many other community partners to address the problem of
impaired driving on our roads. The RID team has three essential goals:
• Vertical Prosecution of all DUI Cases
Vertical prosecution means that a single Deputy DA is assigned to prosecute the case
from the initial charging through adjudication. With a dedicated team assigned to all
DUI cases, case preparation and readiness, prosecutorial expertise, agency coordination,
and consistency in Court proceedings are all improved. The criminal justice system can
be complicated and confusing to victims of DUis. The RID team helps victims and their
families navigate the justice system by providing information and referrals and keeping
them informed about the progress of the case. Communication and trust between the
prosecution and victims are part of the foundation for a successful prosecution.
• Prevention and Reducing Recidivism
Prevention and reducing recidivism are an integral part of RID's mission. With that in
mind, the RID team worked closely with Probation, local law enforcement, Behavioral
Health/Substance Abuse, the Coroner, and many other community partners, and created
the Reduce Impaired Driving & Education program (RID&E). RID&E began as an
innovative voluntary early intervention program for juveniles at risk of alcohol and/or
drug abuse. Participating juveniles attended a series of interactive multi-disciplinary
presentations designed to raise their awareness, challenge their perceptions, and help
them develop tools to make better choices for their future. RID&E sessions have
included powerful presentations by DUI victims, recovering addicts, and DUI defendants
heading to prison. Parents/guardians of the juveniles are required to attend the final
RID&E session in an effort to encourage on-going communication on the issues facing
their children. RID&E was so well received, it has expanded to include a separate Court
ordered track. Without funding from this grant, RID&E would not be possible.
• Education and Outreach
Through RID, the DA has developed a coordinated multi-disciplinary impaired driving
education and outreach program targeted both to youth and adults. RID has created
interactive school presentations that range from the classroom or Courtroom setting to
larger school assemblies and special events, depending on the school's request. RID
school presentations focus on raising student awareness to the dangers of not only alcohol
impairment, but the dangers of legal and illegal drug use as well. RID uses real life
scenarios and methods designed to engage the students in conversation regarding the
risks and responsibilities they may face. At community events, RID offers information,
referrals, and the opportunity for individuals to try the "Drunk Goggles" which simulate
the impairment to physical coordination caused by alcohol at different levels. The RID
team has received very positive feedback on its education and outreach efforts.

The Probation Department has been directed to prepare its budget assuming a status quo General Fund
contribution of $1,083,854.00. The proposed budget reaches that target while absorbing the 4% COLA
actualized by the employees in January 2015.
The proposal includes funding for all existing positions and one additional Deputy Probation Officer due
to the following efforts:
• Through staff attrition and internal promotion, higher cost employees’ positions have been
backfilled by lower cost, entry-level employees.
• Juvenile revenue from Title IV-E has resumed, and the Probation Department anticipates
bringing in at least $60,000 per year.
• Other state juvenile revenue sources (YOBG, JPF, and JJCPA) have all increased substantially (By
an estimated total of $58,000 per year or more.) As revenue was also higher than expected
during FY 2014/15, there is currently a fund balance of just over $36,000.
• SB 678 revenue that was previously being directed toward paying for BI, Inc. to run our Day
Reporting Center, is now being utilized more effectively. Prudence with the 678 revenue during
the 14-15 fiscal year will result in a small designated fund balance that can be carried over
(approximately $40,000).
• More effective efforts to improve fee collections have led to a slight increase in revenue offset
from Electronic Monitoring.
• Ongoing efforts to reduce unnecessary costs, such as excessive overtime and overpriced risk
assessment tools that can be replaced with more efficient and equally reliable systems.
• The department received $20,500 from the state in FY 2014-15, and anticipates receiving it
again in 2015-16. This money is related to the release of a 3-Judge Panel ruling that resulted in a
temporary increase in cases transferred from state prisons.
• The department’s expenses related to juvenile incarceration continue to trend downward: due
in part to continued efforts to implement Evidence Based Practices.

Chief Probation Officer
This is a very exciting time for the Probation Department. Approving the Proposed Budget will allow the
Probation Department to do the following:
• Invest in training its officers to a new standard of professionalism with regard to arming, use of
force, Motivational Interviewing, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, Trauma Informed Care,
assessments and case planning, just to name a few.
• Resume supervising a much more adequate percentage of high risk, and even some medium risk
adult offenders for the first time in the past few years.
• Increase juvenile probation from only two officers to three officers (a 50% increase!) While still
not quite sufficient, the additional staff will result in our department being able to make a bigger
effort to be more visible in the schools for preventive purposes, as well as to provide critical
rehabilitative programming such as Forward Thinking and the Parent Project.
• When fully staffed, have specialized caseloads for Drug Court, Veterans Court, mentally ill
offenders, and sex offenders.
• Maintain adequate administrative/supervisorial staffing to improve our department’s adherence
to proper policy, procedure, and risk management needs. Further, this level of administrative
staffing will allow us to continue to actively manage the budget to continue to develop services
without being entirely dependent on GF increases.

This Budget Unit is funded by the State “AB 109” allocation through the Community Corrections Subaccount,
and does not draw from the Calaveras County General Fund. The major change for revenue in this unit has been
stability. During the 14/15 FY, a permanent formula was developed; thereby making it easier for the Community
Corrections Partnership (CCP) to track and project annual revenues. As such, the 2015/16 FY Budget includes a
$1,212,999 contribution from the State, as well as an additional $20,000 in projected revenue from our
partnership with the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR).
On March 20, 2015, the CCP Executive Committee voted 4-0 to approve a FY 2015/16 spending plan that is very
similar to the CCP Implementation Plan approved by the BOS in January 2015. However, there are a few
changes or additions worth noting:
• Funding of a “Victim Program Coordinator” through the District Attorney’s Office at the estimated cost of
$75,909.00. This position will ensure that victims have better post-sentencing follow-up in looking out for
their rights. The position will also seek restitution on behalf of the victims and associated county
departments.
• $15,000 for flash incarcerations in the Calaveras County Jail.
• $14,400 for specialized training related to Evidence Based Practices and enhanced enforcement.
• $5,000 for sentencing training for the District Attorney’s Office due to the complexities of felony
sentencing after realignment.
• $13,000 for spending on graduation ceremonies, food, incentives, and other needs related to positive
reinforcement of successful DRC participants.
• An additional 20% of the Adult Literacy Program Coordinator’s position is now being picked up by the CCP
to continue the education and employment preparation work conducted by her and her team of
volunteers for services in the California County Jail.
The Day Reporting Center remains the highest expenditure from the AB 109 Unit, and the transition away from
BI, Inc. and toward a county-run DRC is ongoing. The DRC should be fully staffed before the start of the 2015/16
FY. Programming continues to improve, and some services have already been extended into the jail.

First 5 Calaveras is in the process of developing their two year strategic plan for FY 2015
through 2017. The commission and staff will be finalizing their recommendations after their
review and study of survey results from parents and professionals in Calaveras County.
Current focus is on mechanisms and strategies to expand existing services in dental
screenings, nutrition education, food distribution, and prevention education. Specific focus will
be on increasing services to pre-school children in addition to infant and toddlers, countywide.
Two new initiatives to be proposed for FY 2015/16 are:
• “First Five Impact” which is a continuous quality improvement program to improve the quality
of early childhood education and teacher knowledge while developing safer, more effective
childcare. (QRIS rating system)
• “Talking is Teaching” which is a message campaign to reduce language gap due to
economic status for birth to three year olds.

Public Health Services is requesting to complete its transition from last year when they hired a
Public Health Emergency Preparedness (PHEP) Manager, part-time to begin the process of
having a County Manager in lieu of having a contractual arrangement for disaster preparedness.
The person under contract, while excellent and knowledgeable, lives in Modesto, roughly an
hour and a half away. This past year, Diane Vickerman, the part-time PHEP Manager and
Doug Buchanan, contractor, spent time in training so Diane would be able to assume a full time
role. We are requesting permission to increase her hours from .5 FTE to 1.0 FTE. Conjointly,
we will be recommending reduction of the contract for Mr. Buchanan to less than $50,000 to
perform three required community exercises and some consultation which includes review of
the various required State disaster plans.
Donation
Public Health requests permission to continue its yearly contribution to The Resource
Connection for the Children’s Fair in the amount of $250.

Mental Health is respectfully proposing to add the following six new positions in fiscal
year 2015-16:
1. Case Manager III: This position will be responsible for supervision of the
conservatorship unit while carrying a caseload. Four (4) new conservatorship
cases and three (3) new representative payee cases have been opened since
January 2015. The current caseload for this unit consists of 12 conservatees and
7 representative payees. Since these 12 conservatees are court ordered, as a
result of a mental health disorder, the caseload has increased significantly. Staff
is required to do home visits, appear in court, and provide after-hours phone calls
from hospitals, locked Institutions for the Mentally Diseased (IMD), board and
care homes, family members, and clients. The increased caseload has resulted
in 84 hours of overtime and CTO in FY 2014-15, to date. The total cost for this
position in FY 2015-16 is $86,162.
2. Case Manager I/II: This position is being requested to replace one of three Case
Managers who have been assigned to other duties in the Adult System of Care
(ASOC). One Case Manager II has been assigned to the Mental Health Clinic to
for crisis response and 5150 evaluations. While this move has improved our
crisis services, it has left ASOC short staffed and unable to provide the level of
critical case management support needed for adults with severe mental illness.
The total cost for this position in FY 2015-16 is $79,638.
3. Case Manager I/II: This position will provide focused case management services
for youth, ages 16 to 25. These youth are also known as Transitional Aged Youth
(TAY) and they are serviced out of the Children’s System of Care (CSOC) unit. In
a recent report our CSOC unit has served as many as 40 clients in the 15-18 age
group and 30 in the 19-25 age group. This number of clients has caused existing
staff to limit the number and quality of services they are able to deliver to this
population. A new case manager will provide critical support for young persons
with severe emotional disturbances/mental illness that are currently a part of
Child Welfare Services and Katie A settlement. The Case Manager for the TAY
population will work closely with Mental Health and Child Welfare Services to
provide assistance with daily life management skills and will help many of these
youth thrive as they transition from childhood into adulthood. The total cost for
this position in FY 2015-16 is $79,638.
4. Community Services Liaison, 0.50 FTE: This position is being requested to add a
second staff person to assist with the day to day operations and staffing of the
Living Room Peer Wellness and Recovery Center, which is open from Monday
through Thursday, providing education, resources, outreach and socialization for
persons with mental illness. This project has been funded through the Mental
Health Services Act (MHSA) and it was previously contracted out. In September
2014, the Adult System of Care unit took over the management responsibilities
associated with the Living Room. This position will be responsible for assisting in
daily operations, as well as development and monitoring of peer run groups. The
total cost for this position in FY 2015-16 is $35,901.
5. Community Health Assistant III: This position will be responsible for presenting a
wide range of educational materials to public schools and the community dealing
with suicide prevention and stigma reduction towards persons with mental illness.
The addition of this position will allow us to provide the appropriate level of
training and support, ensuring that we are providing the most current and best
researched information, while providing the proper level of support for high risk
populations of students and community members. The total cost for this position
in FY 2015-16 is $68.223.
6. Office Technician I: This position will provide specialized technical office skills for
the office support unit specific to the increasingly complex electronic medical
records and billing system required as a result of expanding services in the
Mental Health Clinic. Over the last ten years there has been an increase in the
number of direct service staff hired through the Mental Health Services Act
(MHSA), without a corresponding increase in administrative support staff to
handle the increase in paperwork and reports involved in documenting and billing
for the services provided. The total cost for this position in FY 2015-16 is
$57,820.
The total funding for the six new positions is $407,385. Approval would have no impact
on the County General Fund. 1991 Mental Health Realignment, Mental Health Services
Act, Federal Medi-Cal funds will be utilized to fund these positions.
Fixed Assets
Mental health is requesting permission to purchase the following technology related
items:

purchase all-wheel drive vehicles with the intent to retire some of the older
vehicles in the fleet. If approved, we will identify aged vehicles to surplus.
Contributions
Mental Health is requesting to make a $500 contribution to the annual Children’s Fair.
SUBSTANCE ABUSE PROGRAM
There are no significant changes to the Substance Abuse Program Budget.
Contributions
Substance Abuse is requesting to make a $500 contribution to the annual Children’s
Fair and a $1,000 contribution to the Grad Night Foundation.

While there have been some delays in certain areas of the merger of Health and Human
Services due to circumstances beyond our control, we have made progress in a number of
areas that have been beneficial in service to the community and to the staff and agency as a
whole. Listed below are some of the progress areas:
1) Merger of Fiscal Staff into one Unit – Fiscal staff from Public Health, Behavioral Health and
Human Services are now housed at the St. Charles Street office. While remaining in their
specialized areas they have continued to meet and brainstorm cost savings ideas on bulk
purchasing, fleet management use by HHS staff, consolidation of contract fiscal audits, MAA
funds, grant application requests, cross coverage and rethinking on the use of certain grant
funds.
2) Contract Management Consolidation – All contracts, with the exception of First 5 Calaveras
and the Public Authority, are consolidated and handled by one Staff Analyst. He has begun
the process of combining multiple contracts for one service provider into one contract. This
will enable both the service provider and the Agency to have one contract review process.
3) Parenting – Just getting underway is a committee to review more holistically, the various
parenting class offerings in Health and Human Services. A parenting brochure has been
created on the class offerings.
4) OES/Disaster – As Health and Human Services has a variety of responsibilities during
various types of disasters, it is key for all staff to know the various roles in medical and
physical disasters and what they need to do. The committee covers issues from home
preparation to office safety to our work during emergencies depending on type. Reporting
responsibilities will also be included.
5) Shared Trainings – Training sessions are frequently offered agency wide, saving and
expanding the use of training dollars. It also creates a common base of understanding for
staff working together on behalf of the public.
6) Cross Over of Workers – While the various units and divisions in Health and Human
Services may range in size of staff, efforts in providing direct services are a lot easier when
you have a larger team to pull on. The Independent Living Program, for example, has been
fortunate to have staff from Behavioral Health, First 5 Calaveras and Public Health provide
sessions and education on their various programs, including health education, and drama
therapy and art.
7) Masters in Social Work/LCSW – We are working with two universities that are offering two
different types of part time programs for working staff to obtain their Masters in Social Work
while remaining employed. We also have the ability to enable our MSW certified employees
to work on obtaining their LCSW, if they so chose, by obtaining their supervision through
Behavioral Health.
8) Veterans Court – The efforts to gain a Veterans Court has been an ongoing combined effort
of the CSVO, Behavioral Health and TSD as part of the service we are seeking is the start of
a telemedicine pilot for Calaveras County. If obtained, we would be able to have a Veteran
assessed for mental health services in Calaveras County for possible referral and treatment
via the Palo Alto Network.
9) Employment and Training Workshops – Behavioral Health and Human Services clients are
now invited and attend workshops focused on gaining and retaining employment skillsand
job leads.
10) Shred It/Storage – We now have joint contracted services for all of Health and Human
Services that have reduced staff time for shredding and eliminated large scale shredder
purchases. Where appropriate, storage for records and files is now shared.
Credit in all of these areas goes to staff willingness to come together and use their creative
ideas to benefit the community, the County and the Agency.



The net effect is an increase of 1,770 Medi-Cal cases since FY 13/14. As reapplications for
CalFresh (Food Stamps) is now attached in the intake process for the Affordable Care Act, the
number of new applications and cases has also increased in the past year with a net effect of an
additional 286 cases bringing that caseload to 2,809 as of March 3, 2015.
A positive impact of the Affordable Care Act has been the significant reduction of the need for
the County Medical Service Program (CMSP) due to the majority of clients being eligible for and
receiving services under either Medi-Cal or Covered California. In 2013 the CMSP caseload
average was 937 cases. As of March 2015, the current active caseload is 3. On June 25, 2015
there will be a strategic planning of the CMSP county members to discuss its future plans and
possible direction. For FY 15/16 due to the significant reduction in caseload for all county
members, counties will not be asked to contribute to their yearly MOE costs due to a sufficient
risk pool.

Part of the work of the unit, includes job development (which includes attending Chamber
Mixers, Rotary Club’s meetings and meeting with employers), SOARS (helping clients with
expedited Social Security Administration claims), teaching Life Works seminars, and working
with the junior colleges as part of their advisory boards.
Due to recent legislation drug felons, who had previously been banned from some public
benefits are now able to apply effective April 1, 2015 (AB1468-2014). Additionally due to a
second legislative action (AB74-14) intensive efforts and funding have been designated to
increase efforts to get families self sufficient which includes getting the underemployed to a
higher level of self sufficiency where cash assistance is not required. Additionally the intensive
efforts are requiring a more in-depth appraisal of employable recipients and more intensive
efforts to enable those with medical and/or disability issue to obtain treatment or alternate
permanent funding.
Due to the increased federal and state requirements and with the commencing addition of the
need to meet the mandate for home visits to sanctioned clients when necessary the Agency is
requesting permission to hire one additional Employment & Training Worker FTE to meet the
mandates of the legislative requirements.
• Child Welfare Services
In the last year there has been progress in movement towards several key federal goals
particularly in the area of out of home placements;

*returning children home or keeping children at home to prevent out-of-home placement
Concentrated movement towards meeting federal goals, in addition to desirable outcomes, is
needed as federal funding for the program varies from 50% to 75% depending upon the activity.
Additionally AB12 enabled children in foster care to remain receiving services until age 21, as
non-minor dependents, if they meet certain criteria. Our caseload at present is 18 and we
presently have 20 children eligible in 2015 to apply for non-minor dependent status.
As a result f the increase in the number of young adults in need of service via the Independent
Learning Program (ILP) and ongoing case management, I am requesting permission to hire an
additional Social Worker IV. This worker will also work with the Calaveras Youth Connection.

Our current Transportation Officer for Human Services is an extra hire employee with limited
hours. The agency has a need for this position to work more hours than allowed due to time
constraints on extra hire employees. The current limit of 1000 hours does not fit the need of the
agency. Human Services prefers to use one transporter as children need consistency due to the
fact that many have already had significant trauma. Having a familiar face has proven beneficial
to our smaller residents.
Not having a dedicated full-time transportation officer would require social workers to provide
transportation services which would in turn affect their caseloads, client services and increase
overtime in the program. Due to these factors, we are requesting a new position of
transportation officer.
Human Services – Equipment
Human Services is aware that some of our technology infrastructure may be in need of
replacement. Previous estimates included:

Human Services – Staff Services Specialist
Since the merger of Health and Human Services in October 2013, I have had difficulty meeting
the various administrative tasks that are required. Part of this is due to the fact that the Staff
Services Analyst who used to assist me retired and her position was transformed to include
responsibility for 106 Health and Human Services contracts that we presently have and daily
administration of the Calaveras Mariposa Community Action Agency.
The Agency is requesting establishment of a Staff Services Specialist which is a Merit Systems
classification. The position fits into the Merit Systems Staff Services series and closely fits the
Agency’s needs and requirements. This will be a multifunctional position to assist in such
assignments as policy and procedure development, training development, agency projects and
programs, research, writing, processing administrative records and reports, program evaluations
and studies. Assignments can be in a wide variety of areas as the agency continues to develop.
As this position directly reports to the Director, I ask that if granted, the position be exempt.
The Agency is currently working with Human Resources to do a Class and Comp Study and will
bring the complete request before the Board in May.
Human Services – Chief Financial Officer
With the merger of Health and Human Services, the position of Staff Services Manager became
the financial advisor and budgetary expert for the Agency, doubling the duties of the position
and expanding to include all programs within the Agency. This position is also responsible for
the technical accounting functions related to the establishment and maintenance of accounting
and fiscal records, budgetary and statistical evaluations and analyses as well as direction of
staff from multiple programs. The position retains responsibility for other administrative duties
such as contracting and building oversight as well as equipment, purchasing, and inventory. The
Agency is requesting establishment of a Chief Financial Officer for Health and Human Services.
This position would be a County reclassification of the Merit Systems, Staff Services Manager
position. The Agency is currently working with Human Resources to do a Class and Comp
Study and will bring the complete request before the Board in May.

Within the Human Services budget is an expected revenue source of $35,000 which equals to
the funding received for the benefit and application work presently being performed by Chele
Beretz, the Board designated County Veterans Services Officer who is also an Eligibility Worker
III. During FY 2014-15 Ms. Beretz applied for and received grant funding for a County Veterans
Services Representative to assist in outreach, education, information & assistance and referral.
Funding for the grant ended in March 2015. The grant is not expected to be available for
application in FY 2015-16. You graciously provided funding to continue these services through
the end of this fiscal year.
Beginning in July 2015 Human Services will return to its dual model of having one CVSO who
provides eligibility and veterans benefits services exclusively to our eligible residents, unless the
Board wishes to consider a different model.
In the event the Board wishes to discuss providing Veterans Services in a different venue, a job
description and suggested salary range is enclosed for further consideration. The salary range
equals that of your current CVSO and matches a current salary study review. Possible models
may include:
1) A second FTE CVSO in Human Services to increase overall application and benefit services
availability to Veterans and their families.
2) A stand alone County General Funds CVSO position and supports, its host department to
be determined by the Board of Supervisors.
3) Retain the current structure.

The proposed Public Authority (PA) Budget for FY 2015/2016 remains the same as the FY 2014/2015 Budget, with no
increase in General Funds costs. The PA is funded primarily by Federal and State funds, with a capped share of County
funds.
The PA serves Calaveras County’s community of elderly and disabled individuals through the In-Home Supportive
Services Program (IHSS). The PA supports the Consumer’s ability to remain independent and live safely in their own
homes, which directly affects their quality of life.
As of March 1, 2015, 321 Consumers are enrolled in the IHSS program. 287 caregivers provide services to the
Consumers.
The Public Authority works closely with the Adult Services Social Workers to maintain a cohesive level of care for
Consumers; trains the IHSS care providers in compliance with state regulations; operates a Registry of background
checked and screened workers; acts as the Employer of Record for collective bargaining; and administers provider health
benefits per the MOU.
Please let me know if you have any questions or require further information.

Calaveras County applied for and was granted funds from the Community Development Block
Grant for FY 13-15 in the amount of $600,000. While our contract has been approved, and
more recently our contracts for our consultants have finally been approved since March 2015,
we are awaiting permission to bill for services rendered. The State Agency appears to have lost
previous audit correction reports which have since been resubmitted. A recent change in ruling
will only allow the county consultant to be paid from the current grant from March 2015 forward,
however permission was given and recommended to increase the contract to three years of
consultation.
What has not been determined yet, through discussions with the State or our consultants is
whether any of the costs of the consultant for our housing inventory maintenance can be
covered under the administrative costs for grant CFDA #14-288. The inventory, which
historically for some but not all properties, is tied to the HOME First Time Buyers Program. The
administrative fund was depleted in early 2015; therefore we are requesting a General Fund
contribution of $25,000 to cover the inventory costs for FY 2015/16.
While regular monthly billings average $1,250 per month, unexpected additional work requests
do occur. Any unexpended funds will be carried forward toward the continuity of service in FY
15/16.


In the past year, the Facilities Unit has seen many successes. Facilities held the first on-campus
surplus sale in the last decade. This sale not only generated a small amount of revenue but also
rid storage of a large amount of surplus furniture, equipment and miscellaneous items. We will
repeat this in the coming Fiscal Year 2015/16. Also, Facilities moved to using PublicSurplus.com
for the sale of surplused vehicles. Although this increased the amount of time that staff spends
on the sale of each vehicle, the savings of not sending the vehicle to an auction house more
than covers the cost of the extra staff time. The net outcome is increased revenue for the
County, removal of outdated vehicles and reduction of stored vehicles. The Department will
continue to remove vehicles from the fleet through surplus sales.
At Final Budget FY 2014/15 Facilities had requested $3,000 for a project to upgrade the
plumbing ventilation system that had been found to be insufficient at Government Center. This
project was completed this past fall, and included re-plumbing of the vents and adding carbon
filters to the vents. Since this project has been completed we have not had any more issues
with the venting of sewer gases inside the buildings at Government Center.
Buildings A, B and D have had drainage problems for more than 8 years. The storm drains
around these buildings are circa 1964 terra cotta pipe and have been infiltrated by tree roots.
Facilities has tried auguring and pressure jetting the pipes but has been unsuccessful in clearing
the tree roots and debris. This necessitated the replacement of the drain pipe. An outside
contractor ended up replacing over 80 feet of drain pipe on the west and south sides of Building
D. The replacement of this drain pipe has relieved the drainage problems on the south sides of
the Buildings A and B and the flooding problems around Building D.
The Facilities Unit prioritizes projects in many ways, but the foremost is safety. The carpets
around campus are old, packed down, do not clean easily, could use a deep clean quarterly and
in some cases need to be replaced. Old wall to wall carpet can create a safety issue as it did in
the Treasurer - Tax Collector’s office. The carpet in this office had become a trip hazard and
needed replacement. This project was done in less than two weeks with minimal disruption to
the staff and tax payers.

Despite the many successes that Facilities has had this past year, there are issues that
overshadowed these successes. A major concern is the increasing amount of deferred
maintenance at Government Center. This is evident to anyone driving into or walking around
Government Center. A quick glance at the buildings reveals that the brick facade is failing, the
buildings are in need of paint, the roof structures need replacing, the walkways and concrete
need fixing, grinding and replacing, the landscape maintenance has been differed and the
campus is unsightly. There are two full-time Facilities staff members to maintain the buildings
and the grounds. Safety concerns and workplace environment takes priority over preventative
maintenance and grounds work. Problems that arise and need immediate attention and
corrective actions are consuming the majority of the time that the staff has. Most of the
systems on campus are past their useful life and require a high level of maintenance. System
failures tend to be catastrophic in nature and require major fixes under emergency contracts.
In 2011 Facilities had an ADA self-evaluation performed on County Facilities. This evaluation
sited extensive ADA deficiencies at all facilities under County control. Facilities has not
developed an improvement plan to address ADA.
The Old Jail and Sheriff’s Office is currently unoccupied. Many issues have been identified that
need to be addressed before this building can be used. There are HAZMAT concerns that need
to be abated such as Asbestos, and lead paint. Two other major issues with the build are the
roof which leaks allowing water to enter the building and the HVAC systems that will need to be
replaced prior to occupation of the building.
The Facilities Unit would like to develop a Capital Equipment replacement program and an
internal service fund to help fund the major system replacements that are coming in the near
future. Not only would this help fund the replacement but also help to budget and account for
the equipment. This would also help reduce the catastrophic failures of systems and the higher
costs to do emergency repairs and replacements.
The Custodial Staff, which is also part of Facilities, consists of seven personnel; two of which are
assigned to the New Jail and Sheriff’s Office. The Custodial staff could not have assumed the
responsibility for the new buildings without the increase in staff that the Board of Supervisors
provided last year. The Custodial staff is minimally staffed for their responsibility and workload.
The staff has been hard at work, making small changes to routines, and doing what they can to
increase the service level provided to the County. With the help of the Lead Custodian, the staff
has figured ways to reduce the cost of supplies, cleaning tools and do what they can to stretch
the budget and provide the best possible service level. They do a wonderful job keeping the
buildings clean.
Both of these positions are necessary for the continued maintenance of Government Center
but the Facilities Maintenance Engineer is essential for the County. It is imperative that the
County hire a Facilities Maintenance Engineer in the beginning of Fiscal Year 2015/16. In the
near future, the County is looking to remodel the old Courts area of Building A, and it will be
necessary to address the old Jail and Sheriff’s Office building. The new Facilities Maintenance
Engineer will be an integral part of managing these projects for the Facilities Department,
working on the future Capital Equipment program and, providing back-up the primary Facilities
Maintenance Engineer. The primary Facilities Maintenance engineer will have the task of
developing and implementing preventative maintenance programs for all systems throughout
the County. Although the best solution is to fully fund this position and hire a full-time Facilities
Maintenance Engineer, this position is far too critical to not fill in some capacity. Currently the
Facilities budget has a vacant custodial position, and if Facilities did not fill this position, the
funding for this position could be used to hire a part-time Facilities Maintenance Engineer.
The Facilities Maintenance Worker I position would be directly responsible for the deferred
landscape maintenance, and the exterior maintenance of the buildings.
In July of 2014, the Facilities Unit was transferred to the Department of Public Works. When
this happened the Administrative Analyst was performing the clerical tasks such as payroll and
claims. Public Works Administrative staff has since taken on these responsibilities. Public Works
is a non-General Fund department and has requested that the Facilities Unit reimburse the
Public Works Admin budget for the services they render. This cost has been estimated at
$96,000 for Fiscal Year 2015/16, and has not been included in the budget.
The Facilities Unit budget being presented represents a status quo General Fund contribution.
The budget has been balanced by an increase in indirect cost plan revenue and unbudgeted
costs due to the new Jail and Sheriff’s Office. Some of these costs include the elevator service
agreement for the three elevators, Department of industrial Relations permit fees for these
elevators, generator permits, FM200 fire system inspections and also the increased cost of
custodial supplies.

• An Increase of $3,500 in line 5182 Maintenance –Auto, the Facilities vehicles are
aging and require more maintenance
The Facilities Unit is also responsible for Capital Improvement Projects on County facilities and
land. There are several projects that will occur during the 2015/16 fiscal year and they are
summarized with approximate completion dates below.

The position of Fleet Manager was filled in Fiscal Year 14-15 and for the first time in over
seven years the Equipment Service Center (ESC) is fully staffed. Management
determined the need for a Mechanics Helper so the ESC is requesting to reclassify the
under-filled Lead Mechanics position to a Mechanics Helper. The position is currently
filled with a Mechanics Helper which will be a savings to the division.
Currently the ESC is maintaining vehicles and equipment for the following Public Works
Divisions: Roads and Bridges, Integrated Waste Management, Transit, Public Works
Administration and Facilities.
This year the ESC is requesting a Capital Improvement to the building that houses the
Equipment Service Center. The exhaust system needs to be replaced and early estimates
of the work are approximately $64,500, the cost of which will be covered by the
reimbursements from the other Public Works Divisions.
The ESC is also requesting a New Position. We would like to hire a .5 FTE
Administrative Services Officer I to assist the Administrative Analyst and Fleet Managers
in many of duties required in the shop. Additionally, this staff member will be able to
learn ESC administration and operations and hopefully maintain the continuity in the
Equipment Service Center, if and when the Administrative Analyst takes vacation and
eventually retires. Public Works will begin actively seeking qualified trainee/candidate
to succeed the current ESC Administrative Analyst.
On July 1, 2011 the ESC took on the responsibility for maintaining the Calaveras County
Transit Fleet. The Fleet is comprised of seven buses, aged from 2009 to 2010. At that
time, Public Works Department asserted that County maintenance of the Transit buses
would result in an overall reduction in maintenance expenses. The ESC is actively
working to reduce the cost per service hour as related to vehicle maintenance.
Efficiencies and cost savings measures have been implemented by the Fleet Manager.
The Transit Division is currently in the process of purchasing new buses and vans which
will result in a reduction of costs related to Transit maintenance as the new vehicles are
brought on line.
With the pending purchase of additional vehicles for the Transit Division fleet, the ESC is
contemplating a tiered step structure for mechanics to better meet the needs of the
Department. This change, if implemented will occur later in the year.

Public Works Administration provides the staff necessary to support all administrative
functions. The administrative costs are captured in this budget and then allocated to the
other divisions of Public Works based on the proportionate services each unit receives.
During fiscal year 2014/15 Public Works Administration provided administrative
support to the Facilities Division. We request that the Facilities Division be included in
the cost allocation plan for Public Works Administration, as we provide payroll, accounts
payable, human resources and management support for Facilities.
In Fiscal Year 2015/16 Administration will be focused on creating and implementing the
department wide safety programs. Additionally, we will initiate and complete the hiring
process for vacant positions in Engineering, Roads and Bridges and Integrated Waste
Management Divisions. We will continue to provide excellent services to our customers
and contribute positively to the intergovernmental relationships in the County.
Administration staff has been working with the Calaveras Council of Governments and
California Department of Transportation to assess and acquire funding for our
department programs. We will continue working in FY 2015/16 to investigate grant
opportunities to determine if the proposed projects may be beneficial to the Public Works
Department, County and Public.
In fiscal year 14/15 Public Works Administration worked extensively for the Transit
Division providing fiscal and management support. We anticipate that these projects will
continue into fiscal year 15/16.
Public Works Administration is continuing to work on a process whereby the Board of
Supervisors, County Administrative Officer, and the Auditor/Controller can confirm and

track the status of all major work in the Department in terms of the funding sources and
the availability of local match funds.
In order to better manage Department operations we are requesting that three positions
be moved to the Public Works Administration Budget Unit. Two of these positions are
from Roads and Bridges, and the third is from Integrated Waste Management. We are
requesting that the Permit Technician III position from Roads and Bridges be reclassified
to a Public Works Analyst I, as we anticipate this position taking on additional duties
related to our County storm water program. We are also requesting that the Permit
Technician II position is upgraded to the Permit Technician III position in the series,
because she has met the requirements as outlined in the job description for the step
increase.

In the second year that the Capital Improvement Project (CIP) and Engineering have
been separated from the Roads and Bridges Budget, this separation has proven to be an
effective and transparent method to independently track capital project costs and road
maintenance expenditures.
Roads and Bridges staff provides road maintenance programs, snowplowing services,
and roadside vegetation mitigation. Road crews assist during emergencies throughout
the County by responding to trees blocking roads, roadway flooding, and providing
traffic control support and bagging stations during emergencies or extenuating
occurrences.
The State is projecting that the funding for the Highway User Tax Account for
Calaveras County will be reduced this year by approximately $900,000. Over the next
year we will be evaluating all of the programs in the Roads and Bridges Division to look
for additional cost saving measures. This year we have seen a slight increase from
County Administration in the Vehicle License Fees (VLF) funds coming to the Road
Fund.
Staff will continue to make California Air Resources Board (CARB) mandated
purchases of new equipment as required by regulations, and replace and upgrade our
aging fleet and equipment.
We are requesting to move the Deputy Director of Engineering position from the
Engineering Division to the Roads and Bridges Division. This position is currently
vacant and will be changed to Deputy Director of Operations and Maintenance. This
staff member will be responsible for overseeing maintenance and operations in Roads
and Bridges, Integrated Waste Management, County Surveyor and Facilities. The costs
for this position will split between the divisions.
Additionally, we are requesting a reclassification of the Engineer Technician II to a
Public Works Analyst II. This reclassification is necessary as this position assists with
the Surveyor duties. We are able to continue to keep the costs down in the Surveyor
Office by having many of the routine technical reviews done by the Public Works
Analyst II instead of employing a full time Surveyor. Currently the Surveyor office has
an Interim Surveyor who is also a Senior Engineer in the Roads and Bridges Division.
Finally, we are requesting that a Designated Fund be established for future equipment
and vehicle replacements in Roads and Bridges. The fleet, specifically snow removal is
very old and requires extensive maintenance on an annual basis. It is our goal to
establish the fund and to generate a comprehensive fleet replacement plan.

The transit program is staffed by one full time position, Public Works Analyst, in Public
Works. This position has responsibility for overall program management, capital purchases
and installations, equipment and vehicle maintenance through the Equipment Service Center
and the oversight of contract transit operations. The Calaveras County Council of
Governments (CCOG) has been instrumental in assisting and supporting the Public Works
Department with program funding and transit related assistance. The Auditor/Controller has
provided oversight and assistance with the establishment of program reporting.
The Transit Budget has been struggling to keep costs in control, but with an aging fleet, this
becomes more difficult. With a widespread County over which to provide Transit services,
the expected useful life of this fleet is generally of a shorter duration than smaller counties
with less elevation. Funding bus replacements (including reduction in the size of some of the
busses that will be replaced over the next five years) will be a challenge following the limited
fleet replacement that will occur in the 2015/16 fiscal year.
The 2015/16 Budget will continue to have funds earmarked for construction and installation
of bus shelters at locations in the County identified in the Bus Shelter Phase IV project. Two
new routes will begin operation. Additionally, the Short Range Transit Plan as well as a longterm
strategic visioning among the BOS, CCOG and City of Angles Camp will occur during
the early part of the fiscal year.

The Integrated Waste Division of Public Works does not rely on any General Fund
support. Consequently, it contributes very little financially to the County budget with the
exception of A-87 costs and reimbursement to other Public Works Divisions that perform
work or provide services to the Rock Creek landfill and at Red Hill (closed landfill site).
The County has been assessing a $150 per year parcel fee since 1992 (with no increases)
on all residential parcels that have homes constructed on the parcels. Business, industrial,
and commercial properties pay a parcel fee based on a residential/equivalency basis. Of
the $150 per year parcel fee, $10 was to be used on diversion programs. However, a
greater amount of the fee is being used on diversion programs as more programs have
been implemented and have become more robust. Meanwhile, landfill costs continue to
increase. As such, total available funds may not be adequate to complete projects like the
construction of the next waste cell projected to be needed at the
Rock Creek Solid Waste Facility in 2018. This funding issue was identified in 2008.
Public Works had intended to find a way to increase the fee on all users that is equitable
and legal under proposition 218 by funding a nexus study. This effort started and
stopped a number of times and no effort has been made the past couple of years to find a
mechanism to apportion integrated waste costs across the tax base.
This coming fiscal year, the County will be updating the solid waste permit at the landfill. A
Joint Technical Document which itemizes the facility’s specific regulatory functions
(operations manual) will be completed this year. An assessment of landfill capacity will be
included as part of this work. This is important because it will provide the data necessary to
determine the life of the current landfill cell. Additionally, the County will be developing a
strategic plan for the solid waste operations to determine the services that must be delivered
to meet current and future requirements such as upcoming waste diversion rates. Included
in this effort will be an analysis of the best ways to fund the programs. Once completed, the
County will be assessing the cost of all necessary programs to determine if a nexus study is
needed. The cost of these studies is included in the budget proposal.
The division is requesting a capital equipment purchase for the 15/16 fiscal year. An Air
Curtain Burner is being requested to augment the use of the grinding machine for wood
waste at the Red Hill Transfer Station. With the purchase of this equipment is anticipated
that the annual savings in trucking will be $100,000 per year.

In keeping with the direction of the County Administrative Office, the Department of Agriculture
and Weights & Measures FY 2015/16 recommended budget is being submitted meeting the FY
2014/15 General Fund contribution.
The Department is absorbing significant increases in A-87 costs and staff step increases in
addition to anticipating a decrease in unclaimed gas tax revenue. As a result of the increase in
costs and reduced revenue and unless additional General Funds are made available, funding
for the Animal & Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) Federal Wildlife Services Contract
must be reduced by $15,070.00 from last year's County contribution. Wildlife Services is
requesting $65,720.70 for the county share of a full time Wildlife Specialist which is an increase
of $650.70 from last year's contribution. Last year's contribution included a 33 hour furlough.
The Department has budgeted $50,000.00 toward the APHIS program under the present
guidelines. The Federal Wildlife Services Specialist controls predators such as mountain lions,
bears and coyotes as well as other nuisance pests such as raccoons and skunks.

In keeping with the direction of the County Administrative Office, the Animal Services
Department FY 2015/16 recommended budget is being submitted meeting the FY 2014/15
General Fund contribution. In order to achieve the FY 2014/15 targeted contribution, the
Department eliminated 1 Full Time Equivalent (FTE) Animal Control Officer I (ACO I) position.
The ACO I was the sole position with the Department and as a result of the elimination of this
position, only two AGO's remained on staff to meet Animal Services needs and concerns
throughout the County for this seven day a week operation.
During the course of the FY 2014/15 budget year, one of the two remaining ACO Ill positions
retired. The ACO Ill was backfilled with the ACO I (E) step position that had previously been
laid off leaving the department with one ACO I and one ACO Ill to meet all of the Animal
Services enforcement needs of the county.
While we are proposing 250 extra hire hours for shelter assistance and 80 extra hire hours for
front office assistance, we far exceeded this number during FY 2014/15 as a result of one
extended Administrative Leave that led to a retirement and two unanticipated resignations, one
of which left the region to take a position in the Southern United States.
Animal Services, not unlike any of the other County General Fund Departments, has taken
significant fiscal cuts since the 2008/09 Fiscal Year. As a Health and Safety based program
(statutorily established for the control of rabies), Animal Services is still lacking three key
positions that would bring the department up to minimal staffing. These positions, not included
in the recommended budgeted employee costs, include the need for an additional Shelter
Assistant (preferably an individual who could also serve as Registered Veterinary Technician),
an additional ACO (making three officers to cover the entire county) and an additional Office
Technician. The existing two ACO's must not only cover their field duties but also cover the
shelter and office two days a week significantly impacting the department's ability to respond to
Potentially Dangerous domestic animals including potentially rabid animals. This has also had
the effect on the department's ability to file civil and/or criminal charges as required by law.
As an example, during the months of October 1, 2014 through March 20, 2015, the two ACO's
collectively spent 55 days or approximately 25% of their time performing shelter duties. In

addition, the two AGO's collectively spent an additional 30 days or approximately 13% of their
time covering the front desk. Therefore, 85 days or approximately 38% of the AGO's available
time was spent on activities other than their job as ACOs!
Although not included in the proposed Department budgeted employee costs, we are proposing
to jointly share a new Paralegal position with the District Attorney's Office and the Building
Department. Both the District Attorney's Office and Animal Services would account for 40%
each of available hours and the Building Department would account for the remaining 20% of
available hours. The position would assist with analyses and preparation of potential criminal
and civil cases in addition to assisting with front office duties. The Request for New Position
justification for this proposal is included in the Department's proposed budget.
An additional request is being made along with the Request for New Position justification for an
additional Shelter Assistant position. As with the shared Paralegal position, the cost is not
included in the Department's proposed budgeted employee costs. The need for this position is
tied with the introduction of the two new modulars as donated to the County by the Friends of
Calaveras Animal Services (FOCAS). These modulars are to serve as the site for housing
felines while the existing shelter will serve to house canines. There is a significant need to have
a Shelter Assistant in each of the two separate facilities.
It should be noted that should the two above cited positions be filled, most if not all of the
requested extra hire hours and therefore cost, could be eliminated.
Accomplishments
Our Animal Services volunteers continue to number over 1 00 individuals! Our volunteers clean
cat cages and walk dogs on a daily basis while others help maintain the current shelter from
weed eating the grounds to hanging shelves to painting our buildings. The Calaveras Humane
Society (CHS) continues to be an invaluable partner in helping Animal Services meet all of its
obligations and the newly formed FOCAS has made great strides for an organization that was
just formed in June of 2014. FOCAS has expended $26,092.65 in the transportation and
ongoing conversion of the two modulars to house felines. The County also received a donation
of a modular from CHS this year that will serve as the CHS office and possible spay/neuter
clinic. CHS has provided funding in an amount of $11, 7 41 .80 for medications and vaccines thus
far this current fiscal year.
The County also dedicated 6.93 acres of property at its December 18, 2014 meeting for
development of a new Animal Services Center that is intended to include construction of a new
animal shelter. The property is located adjacent to the Courts property. Construction of the
new shelter is proposed to be funded through private donations and CHS. The Board resolution
dedicating the property has a five year window in which the project may be initiated.
If it were not for the tremendous amount of work hours donated by our volunteers and the
significant financial help as provided by CHS and FOCAS, Animal Services would not be able to
meet several of its state mandates.
As was accomplished in 2013, Animal Services once again stayed below the national average
for euthanasia rates of both felines and canines in 2014. The feline euthanasia rate was 37%
(national average was 41%) and the canine euthanasia rate was 16% (national average was
31%). This was brought about by the continued efforts of Animal Services staff in partnership
with CHS, FOCAS and our volunteers.

In keeping with the direction of the County Administrative Office, the Onsite Wastewater
Department FY 2015/16 recommended budget is being submitted meeting the FY 2014/15
General Fund contribution.
In order to achieve the FY 2014/15 targeted contribution, a vacant Registered Environmental
Health Specialist (REHS) II position was eliminated from the Department budget. This has
resulted in one REHS II to cover the entire County to perform onsite wastewater (septic system)
inspections. Environmental Health Department REHS staff continues to provide assistance in
helping the Onsite Wastewater Department inspections as necessary.
The elimination of the Registered Environmental Health Specialist II position remains a concern
as the Department continues to experience an increase in permit activity as a result of a
stronger housing market. The Department has not seen this type of activity since joining the
Environmental Management Agency (Agency) in 2007. Should permit activity continue to
increase, it may be necessary to add the position back into the Department at a future date. The
Department had three full time inspectors at the time it joined the Agency.

In keeping with the direction of the County Administrative Office, the Environmental Health
Department FY 2015/16 recommended budget is being submitted meeting the FY 2014/15
General Fund contribution, which in the case of the Department, is no net General Fund cost.
The Department is proposing to expend $266,005.00 in grant funding including $60,000.00 in
Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA) Rural Reimbursement Account (RRA) funds during
FY 2015/16. The RRA funding is a result of the passage of SB 1824 in 2000 of which staff
helped author and has brought $60,000 to the Department annually since 2001. Although
businesses storing hazardous materials must cover their permit and inspection costs, fees
incurred by these businesses are significantly reduced as the RRA funds help offset Department
costs in implementing the CUPA program.
There is one Capitol Asset being presented for consideration in the Department's FY 2015/16
budget. The request is to purchase a 4x4 Sport Utility Vehicle as funded through the Local
Primacy Agency (LPA) Small Water System Grant. The vehicle will be used by Department staff
in performing inspections and in attending required meetings and other required trainings. There
will be no net cost to County General Funds.

In keeping with the direction of the County Administrative Office, the Air Pollution Control District
FY 2015/16 recommended budget is being submitted meeting the FY 2014/15 General Fund
contribution which in the case of the District is zero dollars. The current cash carry within the
District is $216,598.00.
The District budget covers .22 Full Time Equivalents (FTE) of the Onsite Wastewater
Department Permit Technician Ill position. The Permit Technician Ill assists the District in
tracking APCD permits, performing file review, billing and issuance of burn permits. The District
budget also covers .05 FTE of the Environmental Health Department Permit Technician II
position. The Permit Technician II assists the District in the issuance of burn permits. The
District staffing is made up of 1. 7 4 FTE's.

The proposed budget for the Planning Department is within the net county cost of last year and
attempts to meet the levels of service needs of the upcoming year. Funding for the General
Plan update consultant contracts is carried over from previous encumbrances but contingencies
for additional costs have been reduced. Conservative estimates were made for fee revenue but
result in a slight increase. One additional position (Planner Ill) is proposed to meet the
demands of an increasing workload. This will be paid for by increased revenue and reductions
in consultant costs.
Net County Cost
The proposed budget provides a net county cost of $898,457, which is under last year's budget
of $899,182.
General Plan Update
The top priority for the department continues to be the development of the General Plan Update
and its associated Environmental Impact Report. In addition to the already encumbered amount
to cover the existing contracts with Remy, Moose, and Manly for legal services (approximately
$90,000) and the consultants for the plan and EIR, Raney Planning and Management
($214,000) and Augustine Planning Associates ($23,000), I have requested an additional
$150,000 to cover potential costs if significant changes are necessary due to public comments
during the adoption process or extensive additional work becomes necessary on the EIR in
responding to comments in the Final EIR process. $20,000 has been allocated toward general
plan implementation and other ordinances, including adoption of a medical marijuana ordinance.
This is a decrease from last year by $10,000.
Staffing
Currently filled positions are the Planning Director, two Planner Ill positions, one Planner II, a
Planner I, and an Administrative Assistant II position. This budget includes an additional
Planner Ill position. Please see attached Request for New Position Form for details. Generally,
the position is necessary as workload increases from development applications, and the need to
have staff for concluding the general plan adoption process as consultant contracts wind' down
and implementation begins.
One adjustment should be made in staffing: The present Planner I position is an underfill of a
Planner IV position. These two positions are in different bargaining units. The change from a
Planner IV to a Planner 1/11 should be made permanent and the position should be moved from
Bargaining Unit 4 to Bargaining Unit 7.
Revenue
Planning intentionally underestimated revenue in the 2014-15 budget due to uncertainties in the
economy, even though upward trends showed an increase in development activities. If trends
continue through this fiscal year, Planning will double its revenue projections. However, we
have cautiously increased revenue by only 50%.
Other Expenses
Minor adjustments have been made in other expense items. Increases are proposed for
Planning Commission stipends to cover hearings on the General Plan and to pay for the
videographer of those meetings. Overall expenses such as office expenses, postage, printing,
and rents have been adjusted to meet expected needs for the general plan, increased
development activity, the public workshops for the FEMA map revisions.


PLANNING DEPARTMENT (10100430)
. .
The proposed budget for the Planning Department is within the net county cost of last year and
attempts to meet the levels of service needs of the upcoming year. Funding for the General
Plan update consultant contracts is carried over from previous encumbrances but contingencies
for additional costs have been reduced. Conservative estimates were made for fee revenue but
result in a slight increase. One additional position (Planner Ill) is proposed to meet the
demands of an increasing workload. This will be paid for by increased revenue and reductions
in consultant costs.
Net County Cost
The proposed budget provides a net county cost of $898,457, which is under last year's budget
of $899,182.
General Plan Update
The top priority for the department continues to be the development of the General Plan Update
and its associated Environmental Impact Report. In addition to the already encumbered amount
to cover the existing contracts with Remy, Moose, and Manly for legal services (approximately
$90,000) and the consultants for the plan and EIR, Raney Planning and Management
($214,000) and Augustine Planning Associates ($23,000), I have requested an additional
$150,000 to cover potential costs if significant changes are necessary due to public comments
during the adoption process or extensive additional work becomes necessary on the EIR in
responding to comments in the Final EIR process. $20,000 has been allocated toward general
plan implementation and other ordinances, including adoption of a medical marijuana ordinance.
This is a decrease from last year by $10,000.
Staffing
Currently filled positions are the Planning Director, two Planner Ill positions, one Planner II, a
Planner I, and an Administrative Assistant II position. This budget includes an additional
Planner Ill position. Please see attached Request for New Position Form for details. Generally,
the position is necessary as workload increases from development applications, and the need to
have staff for concluding the general plan adoption process as consultant contracts wind' down
and implementation begins.
One adjustment should be made in staffing: The present Planner I position is an underfill of a
Planner IV position. These two positions are in different bargaining units. The change from a
Planner IV to a Planner 1/11 should be made permanent and the position should be moved from
Bargaining Unit 4 to Bargaining Unit 7.
Revenue
Planning intentionally underestimated revenue in the 2014-15 budget due to uncertainties in the
economy, even though upward trends showed an increase in development activities. If trends
continue through this fiscal year, Planning will double its revenue projections. However, we
have cautiously increased revenue by only 50%.
Other Expenses
Minor adjustments have been made in other expense items. Increases are proposed for
Planning Commission stipends to cover hearings on the General Plan and to pay for the
videographer of those meetings. Overall expenses such as office expenses, postage, printing,
and rents have been adjusted to meet expected needs for the general plan, increased
development activity, the public workshops for the FEMA map revisions.
In general the construction industry is showing positive signs of increased activity
throughout Calaveras County and the entire Western region of the United States.
To maintain competent service to the health and safety of the public and to
authorize to build and authorize to occupy buildings in the county and increase in
qualified staffing should be considered.

EPARTMENTAL BUDGET ADJUSTMENTS OR REQUESTS
The Department's requested budget of $631,706 represents an overall increase of
$72,298.00, or 12.9%, in expenditures and an increase of $72,298.00 or 12.9% in
revenues when compared to FY 2015/16 Adopted Recommended Budget. Code
Compliance does not receive a General Fund Contribution.
SIGNIFICANT BUDGET CHANGES
Factors contributing to significant expenditure changes include:
• An increase of $83,805.00, net result 49% in Salaries and Employee Benefits for a
new position, Permanent Permit Technician II and Extra Hire funding anticipating
continued workload increase.
• An decrease of $10,156.00, or 8% overall in Services and Supplies after analyzing
specific needs in each category.
Factors contributing to significant revenue changes include:
• An increase of $75,000.00 in revenue from 10100580 Building Department permit
revenues for operational costs which resulted in a net increase in revenue of
$72,298.00 or 12.9%
Delete any of the above mentioned Classes not found in your Departmental Budget and
add as necessary any which may not appear above.
Major contributing factors are a decrease in A-87 costs, $75,000.00 revenue
contribution from Building, increased Salary and employee Benenfits due to 4%
COLA, a new position request(Permit Tech II) and increased extra Hire funding due
to an increasing work load.
PENDING ISSUES AND/OR NEW POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
The number of Code Compliance cases continues to grow and at current staffing
levels the Code Compliance Department will continue get further behind making it
difficult to bring cases to a conclusion which seriously effects funding to the Unit.
Currently there is MMJ regulation that is being considered and at this time it
appears that Code Compliance will be responsible for administration and
enforcement of this regulation will require at least on full time employee if not two
in the not too distant future.