Allocates $54,280 to continue and enhance the County's ability to manage water issues. This is a General Fund obligation. 
Allocates $19,600 to the Agriculture Department to upgrade their Ag Daily software. This software upgrade is needed to support the Department's field personnel with reporting to the State. This is a General Fund obliga-tion. Allocates $53,317 to Migrant Housing to cover costs the State Office of Migrant Services (OMS) is currently not paying. The County is meeting with OMS to discuss and negotiate the issues to reinstate reimbursement for all costs of the Migrant Housing facility. 
Allocates $25,000 to purchase a vehicle to replace an aged vehicle to increase the efficiency of the office. 
Allows for the redistribution of expenses from the Board of Supervisors budget to the County Administrative Office  budget to more accurately reflect where costs should be allocated. There is no additional costs to the General Fund with these adjustments. Allocates $43,000 to fund the purchase of two servers to replace servers that have reached the end of life and are no longer supported by the manufacturer. This will ensure IT services are provided to the County's operating offices/ departments. Allocates $15,00 to fund the purchase of new firewall software for the County's IT infrastructure to replace old end of life software that is no longer supported. 
The FY 16-17 Recommended Budget absorbs the Revenue and Recovery function into the County Counsel Office budget-decreasing staff by 1 full-time employee.
Allocates $3,700 in additional funds to provide additional books, supplies, flyers and informational packets, etc. for children's story times, digital literacy courses, music, game and book clubs and a resource center for parents who are interested in accessing all the programs the county has to offer. By increasing the funding, the Library will be able to purchase new books, provide access to important online databases and eBooks to patrons who have tablets and smart phones. This is a General Fund obligation. Allocates $2,366 in additional funds to extend the library extra help staff hours at the outlying branches. This is a General Fund obligation. 
Allocates $85,000 to General Maintenance which includes, but is not limited to: a. Tree maintenance at the Historic Courthouse. b. Walkway repairs at the west entrance to historic courthouse. c. Re-lamping the Hall of Records. d. Replacing HVAC in IT room at Auditor's Office 
Allocates $225,193 for repairs and maintenance at the following Library Branches: a. Install new flooring at the Arbuckle branch. b. Paint interior and install new flooring at the Colusa branch. c. Repair termite damage and renovate the Princeton branch. These projects will be funded using special revenue funds with no impact to the General Fund. 
the 2016-17 Recommended Budget as follows: Includes $42,905 to fund an additional Correctional Officer. The annual ongoing costs for this position will be $64,357. This is a General Fund obligation. Includes $193,000 to fund the purchase of new patrol vehicles. These vehicles will be paid for from Rural Law Enforcement monies and will have no impact on the General Fund. Includes $7,890 for a limited term Jail Lieutenant to assist in providing training for an incumbent Jail Lieutenant who will replace the retiring Jail Lieutenant. This is a General Fund obligation. Includes $91,503 from the General Fund to cover the cost of anticipated overtime. 
