CAO’s Recommendation
The Department of Agriculture has a number of
Standard Agreements and other revenue
distributions from the California Department of
Food & Agriculture (CDFA) and the Department
of Pesticide Regulation (DPR) as well as pass –
through money from the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA). These
revenue streams continue to be unstable. In
order to prevent layoffs, the Department of
Agriculture has held 1.5 FTE positions vacant
and will continue to do so until the revenue
streams stabilize.
The County Administrator’s Office is
recommending no reduction to the Department
of Agriculture’s baseline budget. Any additional
cuts would place unclaimed gas tax revenue in
jeopardy. California Food and Agricultural Code
(FAC) Section 224 (g) states that counties must
maintain a certain level of County General Fund
support or risk the loss of unclaimed gas tax
revenue.

CAO’s Recommendation
The baseline net County cost reflects a
$438,181 increase from the fiscal year 2012-
13 budget. This increase is due in large part
to estimated salary and benefit costs.
The Assessor’s Office has experienced a high
level of turnover in the past few years resulting
from resignations and retirements. The
Department currently has 33 vacant positions
out of 122 authorized positions, which
represents a 27% reduction in workforce.
Reduced staffing levels make it extremely
difficult for the Department to close the regular
and supplemental assessment rolls in a timely
fashion, and make it difficult to meet the
statutory program obligations of the office.
In past years, we have agreed to permit an
unresolved funding gap in the Assessor’s
budget that we attribute to savings that result
from staff turnover – a budgetary vacancy
factor. To avoid personnel reductions and
permit an augmentation to current staffing
levels in the new fiscal year, we have agreed
to continue this practice and have increased
the vacancy factor to $581,914 based upon
recent turnover experience. We recognize,
however, the high level of pressure this places
on the department to manage the filling of
unplanned staff vacancies in a manner that
achieves the $581,914 savings. We have
advised the Assessor to continue to recruit
aggressively in order to maximize staffing
within authorized levels. Should the
Assessor’s Office not achieve the budgeted
vacancy factor, we will return to the Board
later in the fiscal year with a recommendation
for a budgetary augmentation.

CAO’s Recommendation
Baseline Budget
The baseline net County cost represents a
$44,690 increase over the FY 2012-13 Adjusted
Budget.
Salary and benefit costs increased by $241,634,
mainly due to increased costs for retirement
benefits. Other operating costs increased by
$141,680. This includes the new charge for
Building Lifecycle costs and an estimated
decrease for expenditure transfers.
Revenues are estimated to increase overall by
$338,624.
Recommended Budget
The County Administrator is recommending no
reduction to the Auditor-Controller’s baseline
budget. The recommended net County cost will
provide the funding necessary to maintain
mandated services in FY 2013-14.

CAO’s Recommendation
This Budget covers the administrative
requirements of the Board’s operations.
Services and Supplies include the costs of
memberships in the California State Association
of Counties (CSAC), Association of Bay Area
Governments (ABAG), Urban County Caucus
(UCC) and National Association of Counties
(NACO). Services and Supplies also include
electronic support of the County Code as well as
funding for the Countywide Single Audit.
The County Administrator is recommending no
reduction to the Board of Supervisor’s baseline
budget. The difference in net County cost
between prior year and current year is due to
appropriations of fund balance in Board
Mitigation Programs. These funds will be added
to fiscal year 2013-14 at the end of the current
year when final amounts are known.

CAO’s Recommendation
The recommended budget for Central Support
Services reflects a net County cost of
$5,322,502. This amount will fund the
aforementioned departments at a level that will
enable them to provide the current level of
services into fiscal year 2013-14.

CAO’s Recommendation
For the Clerk-Recorder/Elections Department
general fund budgets, baseline expenditures
reflect a $1,558,423 decrease over FY 2012-13.
This expenditure decrease is because costs will
be less than those for conducting the
Presidential Election in November 2012.
Salaries and benefits decreased due to moving
one position to be funded by the Electronic
Recording Delivery System (dedicated trust
fund) as well as establishing a vacancy factor in
baseline of $480,631 to recognize the savings
achieved from the time required to recruit new
personnel for vacancies in the Clerk-Recorder
Division.
The Clerk-Recorder/Elections Department
general fund revenue is projected to decrease
by $1,587,205, which is primarily attributed to
$750,000 in decreased revenues from
suspended SB90 or other State reimbursements
and the fact that elections during this election
cycle generates little revenue, compared to the
amount of required expenditures for conducting
the elections.
The Recorders negative net county cost offsets
a portion of the elections net county cost for the
upcoming year.

CAO’s Recommendation
Land Development Fund
DCD’s operations are funded primarily through
the Land Development Fund (programs funded
in the General Fund are discussed separately
below.)
Baseline Budget Adjustments
DCD’s baseline request for 2013-14 is
$27,069,720, a reduction of $1,154,915 from FY
2012-13. Despite modest increases in salaries/
benefits, services/supplies and fixed assets, the
baseline budget has been reduced in part due to
lower occupancy and other charges realized by
the consolidation of several DCD offices to a
central location at 30/40 Muir Road. DCD also
anticipates a higher level of expenditure
transfers.
It is noteworthy that in fiscal year 2013-14, the
Weatherization program will operate on a
smaller scale with the loss of ARRA and EECBG
funding. However, with the downsizing of
Weatherization, DCD was able to secure a
$50,000 BayRen grant to operate the Energy
Upgrade Program. This program will
complement the Weatherization program. The
plant acquisition program within the Land
Development Fund has been fully expended due
to project completion and no appropriation is
requested for FY 2013-14.

CAO’s Recommendation
The $10 million contingency reserve was
eliminated in FY 2006-07 after remaining
basically unchanged for 16 years. The County
Administrator’s Office recommended that the
practice of appropriating $10 million for
contingency be discontinued and that the funds
be designated for Contingency on the General
Ledger. The recommendation was implemented
to offset a portion of the County’s $45 million
budget reduction in that year. The anticipated
impact of that recommendation was that
appropriations would no longer be inflated and
annually generated scarce resources would not
be required to balance them.
The County Administrator reinstated the
contingency reserve for FY 2012-13. General
Fund contingencies include funding necessary
to provide continued County operations despite
economic uncertainties. As a general rule, a
contingency fund should be maintained at a
level sufficient to finance all issues/items which
occur during the fiscal year but which were
unforeseen during the budget process. Failure to
appropriate a reasonable level of funding for
contingencies would not be prudent and could
likely result in a “midyear budget crisis”. The
County Administrator recommends that the
Contingency for General Fund be budgeted at
$3,110,000. Although this amount is significantly
lower than the FY 2005-06 Final Budget, it does
allow some funding for: 1) any unforeseen
emergency that the Board may need to fund
during the fiscal year; 2) appropriations without a
dedicated earmark to help to rebuild and grow
the County’s fund balance; and 3) appropriations
for technology projects to increase efficiencies
and economies.

CAO’s Recommendation
The fiscal year 2013-14 baseline net County
cost decreased by $3,353,499 from fiscal year
2012-13. The reduction reflects the elimination
of $3,336,521 of restricted prior year fund
balance from CATV franchise fees and an
estimated decrease in operating costs of
$16,978.
The baseline budget also reflects an increase in
appropriations and revenues of $4,485,000 from
the AB 109 State Realignment allocation from
the State to provide for Community Programs
($4,035,000) focused on the reentry and
reintegration of the formerly incarcerated and
the administration of the AB 109 program,
including funding for administrative oversight
and data evaluation components ($450,000).

CAO’s Recommendation
The baseline net County cost reflects a
$740,822 increase from the FY 2012-13 budget.
The majority of this increase is a result of labor
negotiations. Contra Costa County has
historically tied unrepresented attorney classes
to the represented classes in the Contra Costa
Defenders' and Deputy District Attorney'
Associations for purposes of salary parity. On
November 6, 2012, the Board of Supervisors
adopted new memoranda of understanding with

the Contra Costa Defenders' and Deputy District
Attorneys' Associations that included wage
increases. On December 4, 2012 the Board of
Supervisors approved a 1.5% salary increase
effective July 1, 2013 and 2.0% salary increase
effective January 1, 2014 for the unrepresented
attorney classes.
The County Administrator is recommending a
net County cost for FY 2013-14 of $2,244,308.
This action will require a reduction of $20,514 to
the County Counsel’s Office which will be met in
the following ways:
• During staffing transitions and special
projects, County Counsel contracts for parttime/
temporary help. These contracts will
be reduced in FY 2013-14 ($9,000).
• County Counsel will carefully monitor
expenses in office supplies, mileage, and
computer software. County Counsel will
absorb costs through delaying computer
software upgrades and operational
efficiencies ($11,514).

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline budget reflects an increase of
$41,000 from FY 2012-13. The increase reflects
an estimated increase in assessed valuation for
the coming year based on prior year trends.
The actual return-to-source shares are
determined each year in the Fall.

CAO’s Recommendation
The budget includes the West Contra Costa
Healthcare District agreement impacts adopted
in April, 2011. The Baseline Budget reflects the
anticipated second transfer and the
Recommended Budget the third transfer. It is
anticipated that the obligation will continue into
FY 2014-15, dependent upon tax generation.
Each year’s transfer will appear as a negative
net County cost in our schedules.
In the Retirement UAAL Bond fund,
appropriations were increased to cover the FY
2013-14 debt service (pension obligation
bonds), which are budgeted in each department
as a compensation expense. Transfers for the
Retirement Litigation Settlement Debt Service
are also budgeted in each department as a
compensation expense. We do not anticipate
issuing Tax Revenue Anticipation Notes
(TRANs) in FY 2013-14.

CAO Recommendation
The Recommended Budget for the Department
of Information Technology for FY 2013-14 is
$1,371,193 higher than the current year, due
mainly to appropriations for the replacement of
aging equipment, computer licenses,
maintenance and other manufacturer annual
cost increases.
Department user fee rates charged to
departments increased by 2.18% due to aging
equipment replacement, and have been set to
match anticipated expenditure increases. The
department has a net county cost of $95,000,
which reflects a portion of the annual debt
service for the digital microwave system.
The County Administrator has accepted the
department’s baseline budget submission as the
recommendation for fiscal year 2013-14.

CAO Recommendation
The Recommended Budget for the Department
of Information Technology for FY 2013-14 is
$1,371,193 higher than the current year, due
mainly to appropriations for the replacement of
aging equipment, computer licenses,
maintenance and other manufacturer annual
cost increases.
Department user fee rates charged to
departments increased by 2.18% due to aging
equipment replacement, and have been set to
match anticipated expenditure increases. The
department has a net county cost of $95,000,
which reflects a portion of the annual debt
service for the digital microwave system.
The County Administrator has accepted the
department’s baseline budget submission as the
recommendation for fiscal year 2013-14.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline Budget reflects a net decrease of
$6,846,049. The net decrease reflects the
elimination of prior year fund balance totaling
$6,767,536 as well as decreased costs of
$95,255 for anticipated reductions in retiree
health costs. Additionally, the budget reflects
increased software costs of $16,742 for the
County PeopleSoft project.
The recommended budget reflects sufficient
funding in order to maintain the County payroll
and benefits system as well as funding for
retiree health benefits for Court employees and
other retirees that cannot be attributed, and
therefore charged, to current departments.

CAO’s Recommendation
The County Administrator’s Office is projecting a
growth in property tax revenues of 2% for FY
2013-14 compared to FY 2012-13 actuals. FY
2012-13 experienced 0.86% growth in assessed
value compared to 0.49% loss in FY 2011-12.
In the past, the Recommended Budget for
General Fund departments relied on significant
increases in General Purpose Revenue to offset
increases in the cost of doing business.
Normally, the most significant increases in
revenue from year-to-year are due to increased
assessed valuation on current secured property
tax. The economic downturn in the past few
years eliminated growth in assessed valuation,
significantly reduced interest rates, and greatly
impacted Supplemental Property Tax revenues.
Although small, in the past two fiscal years,
assessed values have begun to experience
growth. The County Administrator’s Office is
cautiously optimistic that growth will be at least
2% in FY 2013-14.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline budget for fiscal year 2013-14
reflects a net decrease of $596,238 from the
current year. The reduction is due mainly to the
removal of restricted, prior year fund balance
rebudgeted in fiscal year 2012-13 for Benefits
Administration. Salary and benefit costs are
estimated to increase by $33,497. Revenue
increased by $131,016 for personnel services
and benefits administration.
The Recommended budget was increased by a
net of $116,649 to reflect the addition of two
positions: one Human Resources Technician in
the Employee Benefits unit and one Labor
Relations Specialist II position in the Labor
Relations unit. An additional staff-person is
needed in the Employee Benefits unit to
continue to implement the Deferred
Compensation Loan program as there are
currently 350 loans in place, totaling $4.5 million.
This position will be offset by charges for
Benefits Administration. The additional staffperson
in the Labor Relations unit will support
the collective bargaining negotiations, meet and
confer obligations, and assist in managing
grievances and unfair labor practices. The
Department has experienced a significant
number of retirements in recent years and
additional staffing is needed in crucial areas so
that services may be delivered in a more
effective manner.

CAO’s Recommendation
Baseline costs for salaries and benefits are
decreased due to benefits cost savings resulting
from the combination of six part time positions
into three full time positions, and reduced
projection of retiree health costs due to overestimate
of the number of possible retirements
in 2012-13. Baseline services and supplies are
decreased to reflect one time purchases in
2012-13 of equipment, computers, and
materials. The Recommended Budget for
Services and Supplies is decreased by
$209,307 due to reduced spending on library
materials. Baseline costs for other charges are
reduced due to decreased facilities maintenance
costs. Baseline Fixed Assets are decreased
due to onetime appropriations for security gates,
self-check machines, and computer equipment
in 2012-13. The Library budget is balanced and
is structurally sound. The Library consistently
brings people and ideas together with its
exceptional service to the community.


CAO’s Recommendation
The Department reduced their General Fund
baseline budget by a net of $217,414. This
reduction reflects the removal of one-time
allocations of funding for specific projects in
fiscal year 2012-13.
The Recommended budget reflects the addition
of five positions: two positions in the Facilities
Maintenance Division; two positions in the
Custodial Services Division; and one position in
the Grounds Maintenance Division. These
positions are recommended to increase the level
of service provided to various County buildings.
Also included in the increase is funding to cover
the lifecycle costs for general fund buildings that
are currently not chargeable to any County
department.
The Road Fund Budget decreased by a
$5,365,500 which reflects the completion of
projects pertaining to Vasco Road and Bethel
Island in fiscal year 2012-13.
The Land Development Fund, which supports
engineering functions, was increased by
$344,382 to match anticipated revenues
generated from planning and engineer services
in fiscal year 2013-14.
The Airport Enterprise fund, which supports
airport operations and capital development at
the Buchanan and Byron Airports decreased by
$2,502,016. The adjustment reflects project
completed in fiscal year 2012-13 that was
funded by grants from the Federal Aviation
Administration. The budget includes the
addition of two positions that are being
recommended due to increased environmental
and regulatory requirements. All budgeted
expenditures are 100% offset by anticipated
revenues for fiscal year 2013-14.
The Department continues to respond to the
growing challenges by proactively identifying
areas in its operations that can be modified,
streamlined, and/or restructured for better
service and cost efficiency, as well as
maintaining operations within their base line
budget.

CAO’s Recommendation
Baseline Budget
The baseline net County cost represents a
$28,964 increase over the fiscal year 2012-13
Adjusted Budget. Salary and benefit costs are
anticipated to increase by $41,226, mainly due
to increased retirement costs. The Department
was able to reduce other operating costs by
$37,262. However, estimated revenues are
expected to decrease by $25,000 in fiscal year
2013-14.
As foreclosures have stabilized, the declining
number of new delinquencies has limited the
amount of service costs and redemption fees
that could potentially be collected. At the same
time, property values have remained low,
resulting in decreased property tax revenues.
Finally, investment income is at a record low, as
interest rates hover well south of 1%. The Office
has entirely mitigated this reduction in revenue,
however, with offsets to budgeted non-salary
expenditures.
Over the past year, the Treasurer-Tax
Collector’s Office has increased the efficiency of
department operations by swapping two higher
skilled positions (which had become vacant
through attrition) for three part-time Experienced
Level Clerks. This has allowed the Office to
maintain its high standard of service to the
County’s taxpayers, while enabling management
employees to focus on tasks more challenging
and appropriate to their job titles.
Recommended Budget
The County Administrator is recommending no
reduction to the Treasurer-Tax Collector’s
baseline budget. The recommended net County
cost will provide the funding necessary to
maintain mandated services in fiscal year 2013-
14.

CAO Recommendation
FY 2013-14 Baseline expenditures increased
slightly in comparison to the corrected FY 2012-
13 Baseline, primarily through increases in
salaries and benefits. Revenue remains
unchanged. The slight salary increases are
offset by a corresponding reduction in
expenditure transfers. The FY 2013-14
Recommended Budget for Child Support
Services is balanced while maintaining current
service levels.

CAO Recommendation
FY 2013-14 General Fund Baseline Budget
expenditures have increased by 2.5%, primarily
due to increases in salaries and benefits. This
increase is mitigated slightly by an increase in
revenue.
The FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget further
increases budgeted expenses by $1,763,531 in
both salary and benefit expenses, and services
and supplies charges. This increase is offset by
additional revenue of $7,443,501.
The Department currently does not have the
State allocations for FY 2013-14; the
Department has included estimated revenue
based on the Governor’s fiscal year 2013-14
Proposed Budget and historical allocation
information.
The FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget for
Employment and Human Services is balanced
while maintaining the current level of service.

CAO RECOMMENDATION
Baseline Budget:
The 2013-14 Baseline Budget for all programs
and funding sources in the Health Services
Department totals $1.068 billion and would
require $95.9 million from the General Fund.
This would be an $11.4 million increase over the
FY 2012-13 Budget.
Recommended Budget:
The FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget funds
expenditures at $11.4 million below the baseline
level. The County General Fund contribution to
the Department has been reduced by $11.4
million from the Baseline funding request and
$2.5 million below the prior year. The
Department is anticipating offsetting this
reduction in funding through efforts to drive
FQHC (Federally Qualified Health Center)
revenue in the hospital and clinics, thereby
maintaining the current service levels.
The FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget for all
programs and funding sources in the Health
Services Department totals $1.068 billion
dollars. Of this amount, $983.5 million, or 92%,
is funded from outside revenue. The balance of
$84.5 million, or 8%, is funded from County
general purpose revenue. The County General
Fund provides $26.7 million to the Hospital and
Clinics, $3.7 million to the Health Plan, and $54
million to the other programs within the
department. This totals $84.5 million in County
General Fund support to the Department
The Recommended Budget does not include
any funding changes that may occur in the
State’s FY 2013-14 budget. These changes are
unknown at this point.
Challenges:
The Department continues to face some major
challenges.
Federal Health Care Reform, the Affordable
Care Act, has a number of uncertainties. There
are two options for the expansion of Medi-Cal
still being considered – statewide or county
specific.
Although those who are eligible to enroll under
the Affordable Care Act will enroll over time,
some will remain uninsured because of their lack
of awareness of the programs, challenges in the
enrollment process, or inability to afford
subsidized coverage.
Some uninsured will be those who are ineligible
for subsidized coverage due to income or
immigration status, while others will be eligible
for subsidized plans, but still won’t be able to
afford the premiums. Some will lack coverage
for short time periods due to life transitions.
Access to care will continue to be a struggle for
many Contra Costa residents
The Department continues to prepare for
implementation at the local level while
monitoring possible changes to key provisions
and funding.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Department’s baseline budget fully funds
on-going services for FY 2013-14. Total
expenditures have increased by $146,125 from
the current year largely due to the allocation of
Building Life Cycle costs and increases in
permanent salary retirement costs.

CAO’s Recommendation
FY 2013-14 Baseline Budget expenditures
increased slightly in comparison to the FY 2012-
13 Budget, primarily through increases in
salaries, benefits and operating expenses.
Revenues resulting from increased animal
license collection are projected to be sufficient to
accommodate these increases. The FY 2013-
14 Recommended Budget for Animal Services is
balanced while maintaining current service
levels.

CAO’s Recommendation
The County currently and has for many years
contracted with the Contra Costa County Bar
Association to provide conflict legal defense
services through private attorneys. Costs had
been trending upward due to an increase in the
number of homicide and capital cases referred to
the Bar, many of which involve multiple
defendants requiring separate legal
representation. In 2010, the County negotiated a
new contract with the Bar that incorporated
improved cost controls and presumptive
maximum fees, which have helped to reduce
overall program costs.
The Recommended Budget provides for the
continuation of services with the Bar under
current contract terms. Due to a continued rise in
caseloads referred by the Public Defender
throughout fiscal years 2011-12 and 2012-13,
the Recommended Budget includes an increase
in appropriations estimated to be required to
reach a final disposition for the bulk of those
cases.
The level of service for this program is mandated
pursuant to constitutional requirements. Should
the recommended appropriations prove
insufficient to fund the requisite level of defense
services, it will be necessary to shift resources to
this budget center from other programs or County reserve.

CAO Recommendation
The 2013-14 Baseline Budget increases
expenditure appropriations by $2.19 million, or
7.1% and estimated revenue by $1.64 million, or
9.8%, resulting in an increase to net County cost
of $549,079.
The Recommended Budget increases net
County cost by $30,228, which funds a portion
of the Baseline Budget associated with building
lifecycle costs. The remainder of the difference
is achieved through the following, which
balances the departmental budget:
1. Increased Revenue – $700,000
Expand prosecution and management of
AB109 cases; Ensure compliance with
Marsy’s Law as it relates to the realigned
AB109 population.
2. Personnel Adjustments – ($181,149)
Salaries and benefits are increased to
provide additional expenditure
appropriations and flexibility in the District
Attorney’s Office for implementation of
various programming.
The District Attorney’s office continues to work
aggressively on new crime prevention initiatives
in addition to managing responsibilities
associated with AB109. The County
Administrator’s Office acknowledges this
continued effort and believes that the
Recommended Budget reflects a balance
between funding new initiatives and preserving
mandated, mainline prosecution responsibilities
within the District Attorney’s Office.
Note: The County Administrator has developed
recommendations based on service level impacts
communicated by the District Attorney’s Office. It is
acknowledged that the District Attorney is an elected
official and has ultimate discretion on how to best
deploy resources within his Office using
appropriations allocated by the Board of
Supervisors.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline Budget is decreased by
$2,114,237 primarily due to the removal of onetime
appropriations in the amount of $1.61
million from Law & Justice Systems
Development and prior year fund balance in the
amount of $494,377 from the Vehicle Theft
program. The Baseline Budget funds a new
Business Systems Analyst position established
in 2012-13 for support of the implementation and
administration of AB109 Public Safety
Realignment.
The Recommended Budget funds the Baseline
Budget in its entirety, resulting in a net county
cost of $1.9 million. The Recommended Budget
continues the General Fund subsidy to the
Justice Automated Warrant System (JAWS) in
the amount of $22,480.

CAO Recommendation
The 2013-14 Baseline Budget increases
expenditure appropriations by $3.65 million, or
5.9% and estimated revenue by $1.98 million, or
7.4%, resulting in an increase to net County cost
of $1.67 million. The primary driver of baseline
increases to net County cost are salary and
benefit expenses; specifically, retirement
expenses.
The Recommended Budget increases net
County cost by $823,702, which funds a
significant amount of the baseline increase over
fiscal year 2012-13. The remainder of the
difference is achieved through the following,
which balances the departmental budget:
1. Increase Vacancy Factor – ($641,299)
Establish a vacancy factor within the
department budget to account for savings
associated with positions that are currently
or will become vacant during fiscal year
2013-14.
2. Additional Public Safety Realignment
revenue - $200,000
Increased funding allocation to the Probation
Department for supervision and other
activities related to the new population
realigned from the State to counties through
AB109 Public Safety Realignment.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Public Defender’s baseline budget increases
net County cost by $542,405, which is wholly
attributable to net increases in salary and benefit
costs.
The County Administrator is recommending a
budget that funds a majority of the increases
resulting in a slight reduction of $88,585 in
temporary salaries. This reduction will have
minimal impact to departmental operations due
to the significant augmentation in permanent,
full-time staffing throughout fiscal year 2012-13.
Increases in staffing have resulted in a cessation
of referrals of clients to the Contra Costa County
Bar Association for legal services due to reduced
attorney caseloads.

CAO Recommendation
The FY 2013-14 Baseline Budget increases
expenditure appropriations by $15.01 million, or
7.8% and estimated revenue by $6.48 million, or
4.9%, resulting in an increase to net County cost
of $8,523,776.
The Recommended Budget includes a
$5,992,208 increase in net County cost over FY
2012-13. This amount funds a significant portion
of the Baseline Budget. The remainder of the
difference to balance the budget, $2,531,568, is
achieved through the following:
1. Increased Revenue – $1,577,829
Increases to revenue in the Field Operations
and Custody Services Bureaus to reflect
new revenue or reimbursements to
programs outlined in the Program
Modification List below.
2. Staff Vacancy Factor – $1,222,465
Establishes a vacancy factor within the
department budget to account for savings
associated with positions that are currently
or will become vacant during fiscal year
2013-14.
3. Increase Staffing for County Patrol –
($268,726)
Add two (2) Deputy Sheriff-40 Hour
positions in the Patrol Division to improve
patrol coverage and minimize service
delivery delays
In past years, we have agreed to permit an
unresolved funding gap in the Sheriff’s budget
that we attribute to savings that result from
normal staff turnover – a budgetary vacancy
factor. To avoid personnel reductions and permit
an augmentation to authorized staffing levels, we
have agreed to continue this practice and have
established the vacancy factor at $1.2 million for
fiscal year 2013-14. We have advised the Sheriff
to continue to recruit aggressively in order to
maximize staffing within authorized levels.
Should the Sheriff’s Office not achieve the
budgeted vacancy factor, we will return to the
Board later in the fiscal year with a
recommendation for a budgetary augmentation.
Note: The County Administrator has developed
recommendations based on service level
impacts communicated by the Office of the
Sheriff-Coroner. It is acknowledged that the
Sheriff-Coroner is an elected official and has
ultimate discretion on how to best deploy
resources within his department using
appropriations allocated by the Board of
Supervisors.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline Budget was decreased from the
current year budget by $355,459. This is due to
savings from adjusting baseline expenditure
appropriations for outside attorney fees and
witness fees to reflect prior year experience. In
addition, reimbursements to the Court
Collections Unit have been reduced as the unit
has had increased success in cost recovery
through the collections process. The impact of
baseline cost savings has been offset by a
reduction in fine and forfeiture revenue in the
amount of $332,720; specifically, Driver
Education and Recording fees.
The Recommended Budget funds the baseline
budget; resulting in a net county cost of $10.2
million. In better economic times, we have
historically budgeted in anticipation of three to
five open capital cases annually; however, due
to the very tight budget constraints, we are
recommending a budget that anticipates only
one capital case for the new budget year. It
should be noted that Superior Court programs
are mandated and should the recommended
budget prove to be insufficient, mid-year
augmentations will need to be made from the
County’s reserves or through mid-year
reductions in other County programs.
The Recommended Budget includes
appropriations in the amount of $15.1 million for
transfer to the State to subsidize the cost of the
local Superior Court, and $1.9 million for court
functions for which the County is financially
responsible under the Trial Court Funding Act
and Public Safety Realignment (AB 109)*. The

General Fund subsidy to the courts for non-Rule
810 court operations includes judicial benefits for
current judges who were serving as judicial
officers in 1997, collection services, court
probation officer services, legal defense
representation in capital cases, and other courtappointed
counsel.
*Note that the Sheriff’s Department earns revenue in
consideration for providing bailiff and security services to
the Court. These costs and revenues are reported in the
County Local Revenue Fund and the Sheriff’s Department
budget.

CAO’s Recommendation
The 2013-14 Baseline Budget contemplates
staffing of 24 engine companies. Historically, the
District has staffed 30 engine companies at 28
stations on a full time basis. In January 2011,
one of the two fire companies at Fire Station 1 in
Walnut Creek was de-staffed and in July 2012
one of the two fire companies at Fire Station 6 in
Concord was also de-staffed. In November
2012, the District had a ballot measure on the
General Election ballot to augment District
revenue for the continued provision of Fire
suppression services. The ballot measure was
not approved by the voters, resulting in the
closure of the following four fire stations,
effective January 2013: Fire Station 4 in Walnut
Creek; Fire Station 11 in Clayton; Fire Station 12
in Martinez; and Fire Station 16 in Lafayette.
The Baseline Budget reflects the continued
pressure on District reserve funding from annual
expenditure increases outpacing growth in ad
valorem property tax receipts – the District’s
primary source of operating revenue. The
increase in operating expenditures comes
primarily from the projected increase in District
contributions to employee retirement. Prior to
2011, the District’s pension costs were pooled
with other employer members of the Contra
Costa County Employees Retirement
Association (CCCERA). CCCERA de-pooled
assets and the Fire District is now paying its full
share of pension costs. The de-pooling of
pension assets by employer has had a
significant impact on the District beginning in
fiscal year 2011-12, when the Safety/Fire Tier
rate essentially doubled from 16.3% to 32.3%. A
summary of the increases to date are outlined
below, including fiscal year 2013-14.
Fiscal Year Safety/Fire Tier % Change
2010/11 16.3%
2011/12 32.3% 98%
2012/13 40.6% 26%
2013/14 46.9% 16%
In 2012, the Governor signed into law the Public
Employee Pension Reform Act (PEPRA), which
among other things, created new retirement tiers
for new hires effective January 1, 2013. For the
District, new hires will be included in PEPRA
Tier D-Fire at a rate of 43.5%, lower than the
existing Safety/Fire Tier rate for legacy
employees (pre January 1, 2013 hires). Because
the new tier only applies to new hires, it is not
expected that the District will realize cost
savings in the short term from the passage of
PEPRA. In addition, in February 2013, the
CCCERA Board approved a decrease in the
investment return assumption of 0.5%, from
7.75% to 7.25%. This decrease will add an
additional, significant burden to already
escalating pension costs for the District.
Preliminary estimates are an increase of
approximately $3.1 to $3.6 million depending on
the personnel composition of the department
and number of stations in service during fiscal
year 2014-15.
The 24 engine company model presented in the
Baseline Budget would require the use of all
remaining fund balance available in the
CCCFPD Operating Fund and a draw of
$571,475 from the District’s Pension Obligation
Bond Stabilization (POB) Fund. This scenario
would result in the District entering fiscal year
2014-15 with no fund balance available in the
Operating Fund and an estimated $3.4 million in
the POB Stabilization Fund. Considering the
structural imbalance and complete depletion of
the Operating Fund reserves under a 24 engine
company model, the County Administrator is
unable to recommend funding the baseline
budget as presented.
The County Administrator’s 2013-14
Recommended Budget includes the closure of
two fire stations, resulting in a projected savings
of $3.05 million and a reduction of 18 full-time
equivalent (FTE) positions. Under the
recommendation, one station would be closed
effective July 1, 2013 and a second station

would be closed effective January 1, 2014. This
22 station model is estimated to result in the
District ending fiscal year 2013-14 with a
positive fund balance in both the Operating Fund
and the POB Stabilization Fund in the amounts
of $2.5 million and 3.9 million, respectively.
It is important to note that the Recommended
Budget still balances only by using $6.89 million
in Operating Fund reserves. Also, capital
expenditures and other infrastructure needs
have been virtually unfunded for the last several
years and will remain as such with the 22 station
model. Capital expenditures are primarily
needed to replace aging fire engines, ladder
trucks, and other fire apparatus. In addition, the
District remains responsible for the upkeep of all
28 fire stations regardless of how many may be
in service at any one time. Continued failure to
fund capital expenditures will ultimately result in
an increase to deferred maintenance, which
becomes more expensive as the condition of
assets continues to deteriorate. Currently, all
efforts are being made to preserve service levels
to citizens within the District, resulting in funding
for capital projects being deferred.
This solution does not completely resolve the
structural imbalance entering fiscal year 2014-15
and additional reductions will be necessary to
balance the District’s budget in that fiscal year,
absent new revenue. Although the District has
made progress in managing the structural
deficit, future expenditure increases continue to
outpace future revenue increases through fiscal
year 2016-17. The County Administrator will
continue to work with the District to monitor
finances and operations throughout the year and
report to the Board should the Recommended
Budget need to be amended.

CAO’s Recommendation
Baseline costs reflect a $535,876 decrease from
the fiscal year 2012-13 Budget. This decrease
is primarily in other special departmental
expenses that included fund balance
appropriations from the fiscal year 2011-12
closing. Baseline revenue reflects a $22,222
decrease from fiscal year 2012-13 Budget. This
decrease in due to two factors: a reduction in
estimated property tax revenue of $14,722 and
the removal of a one-time grant in the amount of
$7,500. The Recommended Budget reflects a
decrease in temporary salaries of $17,300 and
an increase in fund balance available of $34,505
to balance the District budget.