CAO’s Recommendation
The Department of Agriculture has a number of
Standard Agreements and other revenue
distributions from the California Department of
Food & Agriculture (CDFA) and the Department
of Pesticide Regulation (DPR) as well as pass –
through money from the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA). The revenue
from these sources varies from year to year. The
Department will closely monitor these revenue
streams until they stabilize.
The Department is reorganizing many traditional
functions as a means of being more responsive
to community needs and providing staff with
greater career opportunities. The Department
has created a new full time job classification,
Agricultural and Standards Aide. The
Department plans to convert some Project
Permanent Intermittent Pest Detection Specialist
positions to this new classification.
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the
Department of Agriculture is balanced while
maintaining current service levels. Any
reductions in the County’s General Fund
commitment may limit the department’s ability to
fulfill the maintenance of effort requirement; and
potentially jeopardize future unclaimed gas tax
revenue. California Food and Agricultural Code
(FAC) Section 224 (g) states that counties must
maintain a certain level of County General Fund
support or risk the loss of unclaimed gas tax
revenue.

CAO’s Recommendation
The baseline net County cost reflects a
$418,524 increase from the fiscal year 2015-
16 budget. This increase is due in large part
to estimated salary and benefit increases and
charges for information technology and
building occupancy.
The recommended net County cost reflects a
decrease of $168,524 which represents
anticipated savings from vacant positions in
fiscal year 2016-17.
The Assessor’s Office has experienced a high
level of turnover in the past few years resulting
from resignations and retirements. The
Department currently has 19 vacant positions
out of 122 authorized positions, which
represents a 16% reduction in workforce.
Reduced staffing levels make it extremely
difficult for the Department to close the regular
and supplemental assessment rolls in a timely
manner, and make it difficult to meet the
statutory program obligations of the office.
The Assessor’s Office will continue to work
with the Human Resources Department to
recruit aggressively in order to maximize
staffing within authorized levels.

CAO’s Recommendation
Baseline Budget
The baseline net County cost represents a
$239,000 decrease from the FY 2015-16
Adjusted Budget.
Salary and benefit costs increased by $261,625
and are mainly due to increases in negotiated
Cost-of-Living-Adjustments, retirement benefits,
and employee group insurance. Services and
Supplies expense has been reduced from the
current year amount by $361,718, which will
offset the anticipated $1,596 decrease in
expenditure transfer and increase of salary and
benefits.
Revenues are estimated to increase overall by
$140,503.
Recommended Budget
The County Administrator is recommending no
reduction to the Auditor-Controller’s baseline
budget. The recommended net County cost will
provide the funding necessary to maintain
mandated services in FY 2016-17.

CAO’s Recommendation
This Budget covers the administrative
requirements of the Board’s operations.
Services and Supplies include the costs of
memberships in the California State Association
of Counties (CSAC), Association of Bay Area
Governments (ABAG), Urban County Caucus
(UCC) and National Association of Counties
(NACO). Services and Supplies also include
electronic support of the County Code as well as
funding for the Countywide Single Audit.
The County Administrator is recommending full
funding of the Board of Supervisor’s baseline
budget. The difference in appropriations
between prior year and current year is due to
fund balance in Board Mitigation Programs.
These funds will be added to FY 2016-17 at the
end of the current fiscal year when amounts are
known.
As has been budgeted in prior years, an
expenditure transfer of CC Futures monies will
offset costs of $67,500 in the District IV Office.
These funds are from deposits of Transient
Occupancy Tax received from the Renaissance
Club Sport and Embassy Suites properties that
were directed to the CC Futures budget unit. By
the end of the current budget year, the balance
of CC Futures monies will be approximately
$109,475. Since this recommended budget
includes a $67,500 transfer of CC Future
monies, it is anticipated that these monies will
be depleted in fiscal year 2017-18. Therefore,
general purpose revenues will be needed
starting in fiscal year 2017-18 to supplant these
funds so that the District IV Office can maintain
staffing parity amongst the other district offices.
The projected salary and benefit costs assume
that the District V Office will continue to receive
$100,000 of Keller Canyon Mitigation Funding to
support staffing needs and offset the additional
1.0 FTE budgeted for their office.
Annual allocations of $36,000 will continue to
support the operations of the twelve Municipal
Advisory Councils, which the Board of
Supervisors’ district offices oversee.

CAO’s Recommendation
The fiscal year 2016-17 baseline net County
cost decreased by $1,900,000 due to the
elimination of restricted prior year fund balance
for Plant Acquisition.
The budget for the Facilities Lifecycle
Improvement Program includes transfers and
revenue totaling $750,000 on a building costper-
foot basis for future projects along with a
$10,000,000 net County cost which reflects the
amount allocated to deferred facilities
maintenance and capital renewal from the
County’s Tax Losses Reserve.
The budget for Minor Capital Improvements
totals $1,500,000, which is available on an
emergency basis for minor improvements when
there is no other funding available.
The budget for Plant Acquisition includes
funding in the amount of $5,000,000, intended
as an on-going resource for construction and
repair of County facilities. The monies can be
used for capital projects and/or debt service for
a future infrastructure borrowing program.
The recommended net County cost of
$16,500,000 will provide the funding necessary
to maintain capital improvement efforts in fiscal
year 2016-17.
For more detailed information on current County
capital projects, please see page 477.

CAO’s Recommendation
The recommended budget for Central Support
Services reflects a net County cost of
$6,843,000. This amount will fund the
aforementioned departments, enabling them to
provide services into fiscal year 2016-17.

CAO’s Recommendation
Baseline expenditures are decreased from the
2015/16 budgeted level by a net of $587,336
due to the removal of funds carried forward to
FY 2015-16 from the prior year to be used
toward a replacement voting system; projected
reductions in elections processing costs; and
increases in salary and benefits for cost of living
increases.
Baseline revenues are increased from the prior
year budgeted level by $1,572,947 in
anticipation of increased cost recovery for the
November 2016 Presidential Election and a
slight increase in recording fees, as recording
volume continues to recover at a slow pace.
The Recommended Budget decreases salaries
and benefit costs by $71,514 consistent with a
proposed reorganization to correct span of
control issues, which will result in a net decrease
of 1 FTE position.
The department will be conducting the
November 2016 Presidential Election; the
largest and most complicated election of the 4-
year election cycle. The County must cover the
cost of County, State, and federal office
elections. Other jurisdictions that consolidate
their elections with countywide elections pay the
incremental costs of their elections.
Modernization and streamlined election
processes have reduced both expenditures and
agency reimbursements for election services.
The department strives to identify new revenue
sources and minimize election and department
costs wherever possible.

CAO’s Recommendation
Land Development Fund
DCD’s operations are funded primarily through
the Land Development Fund (programs funded
in the General Fund are discussed separately
below.)
DCD’s Baseline and Recommended Budgets of
$31,611,877 reflect an increase of $1,281,543
over the current year budget. Salaries and
benefits total $22,011,653, an increase of
$1,233,450 over the current year. The increase
can be primarily attributed to the annualized cost
of 7 additional positions (3 Engineers, 2
Principal Planners, 1 Grading Inspector, and 1
Principal Building Plan Checker) that were
added over the course of the fiscal year, for a
new total of 166 FTE positions. The baseline/
recommended amount for Service and Supplies
has increased modestly from last fiscal year, by
$791,401, to reflect DCD’s anticipated volume of
work activities brought on by the upward trend in
planning applications and building permits. The
baseline amount for Other Charges is decreased
by over $400,000 from FY 2015-16, primarily
due to a significant drop in DCD’s liability
insurance payments and other departmental
charges. Fixed Assets is increased by $90,000
in anticipation of computer server enhancements
necessary in the coming year. Overall, the
budget for land development shows a modest
increase. Expenditure Transfers and Revenues
projected for land development will continue
their upward trend. In FY 2014-15 revenue
exceeded projections by over $2 million.
Revenues in FY 2015-16 appear to be on track
to exceed projections again, and an upward
revenue trend is anticipated for FY 2016-17.
The Weatherization Program continues to
operate on a smaller scale after the loss of
ARRA and EECBG funding in FY 2013-14. The
budget this year is slightly higher than last year
primarily due to a Cap and Trade grant that will
compensate for the loss of funding from the Bay
Area Regional Network grant.
General Fund Programs
DCD administers numerous programs that are
budgeted in the General Fund, including Keller
Canyon Landfill Mitigation and Housing
Rehabilitation, which are local discretionary
programs, and a variety of federal grant
programs.
DCD’s Baseline and Recommended General
Fund budgets are $12,809,604, a reduction of
$109,984 from the current year budget. This is
primarily attributed to the elimination of 1 FTE
position in the Housing Rehabilitation program.
A General Fund subsidy of $285,000 is provided
for the county sustainability program. The other
line items (Services and Supplies, Other
Charges and Expenditure Transfers) reflect
budget adjustments to align with anticipated
reductions in federal programs.
Other Special Revenue Programs
DCD administers several special revenue funds,
one of which is the Abandoned Vehicle
Abatement Service Authority. DCD is
responsible for the collection and disbursement
of State funds to the cities and County for
reimbursement of costs related to the abatement
of abandoned vehicles. Another special
revenue fund is the Housing Successor Agency
trust fund. This fund provides funding for all
housing-related obligations and functions of the
former Redevelopment Agency, now the
Successor Agency.

CAO’s Recommendation
The $10 million contingency reserve was
eliminated in FY 2006-07 after remaining
basically unchanged for 16 years. The County
Administrator’s Office recommended that the
practice of appropriating $10 million for
contingency be discontinued and that the funds
be designated for Contingency on the General
Ledger. The recommendation was implemented
to offset a portion of the County’s $45 million
budget reduction in that year. The
anticipated impact of that recommendation
was that appropriations would no longer be
inflated and annually generated scarce
resources would not be required to balance
them.
The County Administrator reinstated the
contingency reserve in FY 2012-13. General
Fund contingencies include funding necessary
to provide continued County operations despite
economic uncertainties. As a general rule, a
contingency fund should be maintained at a
level sufficient to finance all issues/items which
may occur during the fiscal year, but were
unforeseen during the budget process. Failure
to appropriate a reasonable level of funding for
contingencies is not prudent and could likely
result in a “midyear budget crisis”. The County
Administrator recommends that the Contingency
for General Fund be budgeted at $10.75 million
for FY 2016-17. The appropriation will allow
funding for: 1) any unforeseen emergency that
the Board may need to fund during the fiscal
year; 2) appropriations without a dedicated
earmark to help to rebuild and grow the County’s
fund balance; and 3) appropriations for
technology projects to increase efficiencies and
economies.

CAO’s Recommendation
The baseline net County cost reflects a
$257,999 reduction from the fiscal year 2015-16
Adjusted Budget. This reduction reflects a onetime
allocation for office upgrades to fund
ergonomically functioning offices.
Salary and benefit costs are increasing by
$649,769 and are mainly due to the addition of
1.0 FTE position in FY 2015-16 and overall
increases in permanent and temporary salaries
and retirement costs. Baseline cost for services
and supplies reflect a reduction of $397,525 in
anticipation of salary and benefit increases.
Legal counsel and support services are
anticipated, which result in an estimated
increase of $676,662 in revenues and
expenditure transfers combined.
The recommended net County cost of
$3,000,000 will provide the funding necessary to
maintain services in fiscal year 2016-17.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline budget reflects a decrease of
$120,000 from FY 2015-16. Prior year fund
balance in the amount of $120,000 was
eliminated from the baseline budget for FY
2016-17. The budget is estimated based on
prior year trends of assessed valuations. The
actual return-to-source shares are determined
each year in the Fall.

CAO’s Recommendation
The FY 2015-16 budget did not include ad
valorem property tax revenues to the County from
the West Contra Costa Healthcare District due to
the timing of a transfer agreement for a three-year
funding bridge to Doctors Medical Center (DMC).
The West Contra Costa Healthcare District Tax
Allocation Waiver temporarily suspended the
allocation of District ad valorem property tax
revenues to the County in FY 2014-15; however,
the strategy was ultimately unsuccessful and
DMC closed in 2015. Contingent upon a revised
exchange agreement, the County will receive an
ad valorem transfer of between $2.5 and $3.5
million in FY 2015-16 from this source and each
year thereafter until the agreement is fulfilled
approximately FY 2023-24. Each year’s transfer
will appear as a negative net County cost in our
schedules.

CAO Recommendation
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the
Department of Information Technology reflects
no increase in net County cost because all cost
increases are charged out to service recipients.
Baseline expenditures are increased by
$818,104 from the 2015-16 Budget, reflecting
the addition of two Deputy Chief Information
Officer positions in February 2016 and increased
appropriations for specialized mainframe
services and support, software licenses,
hardware and software maintenance,
manufacturer annual cost increases, system
security, and the replacement of aging
equipment. Provision for specialized contract
services are augmented due to the retirement of
staff essential in supporting the County
mainframe and whose knowledge and skills are
scarce and no longer available within the County
workforce.
Wide Area Network (WAN) rates and telephone
line/port rates are increased by 2% from the
current year rates to offset the recommended
expenditure increases. A General Fund
allocation of $95,000 is recommended to be
maintained to offset unreimbursed costs related
to the implementation of the East Bay Regional
Communications System.

CAO’s Recommendation
The FY 2016-17 Baseline Budget decreased by
$13,708,672 from FY 2015-16. The net
decrease reflects the elimination of prior year
fund balance totaling $13,693,276 as well as a
decrease of $45,827 for anticipated reductions
in retiree health costs. Costs for the PeopleSoft
upgrade increased by a net of $30,431.
The FY 2016-17 recommended net County cost
of $5,500,000 reflects sufficient funding in order
to maintain the County payroll and benefits
system as well as funding for retiree health
benefits for Court employees and other retirees
that cannot be attributed, and therefore charged,
to current departments.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Recommended Budget for General Fund
departments relies on increases in General
Purpose Revenue to offset increases in the cost
of doing business. The most significant
increases in general purpose revenues from
year-to-year are due to increased assessed
valuation on current secured property tax.
During the economic downturn, growth in
assessed valuation, interest rates, and
Supplemental Property Tax revenues was
almost non-existent; since then assessed values
have begun to grow. Although the State Board
of Equalization has announced an inflation factor
of under two percent* (1.01525) for FY 2016-17,
the County Administrator’s Office is projecting
that assessed value growth will be at least 6%.
The 6% figure compares to current year growth
of 7.53%, FY 2014-15 growth of 9.09%, FY
2013-14 growth of 3.45%, and FY 2012-13
growth of 0.86%.
It should be noted that Recommended General
Purpose Revenues include $10 million in
transfers from the Tax Losses Reserve Fund for
deferred facility maintenance projects. This
extra $10 million is not a permanent source of
funding.

CAO’s Recommendation
The fiscal year 2016-17 baseline net County
cost increased by $105,259 from fiscal year
2015-16. The increase reflects estimated salary
and benefit costs of $313,485 as well as the
elimination of prior year fund balance totaling
$208,226. Restricted funding from Employee
Benefits and Employee Child Care are
rebudgeted at the end of each fiscal year.
The Department is requesting an additional
$90,000 from the General Fund for an annual
subscription to the LinkedIn Corporate
Recruiting Platform which provides strategic
sourcing, job targeting, and talent brand
development. This will allow Human Resources
to streamline its recruiting process by reaching a
large job seeking audience and targeting those
candidates searching for employment
opportunities within specified professions
employed by the County.
The Benefits division is requesting $77,000 to
add an Accounting Technician for work relating
to the Countywide PeopleSoft project. Costs for
this position will be recovered through the
Benefits Administration Fee.
The recommended net County cost of
$3,204,000 will provide the funding necessary to
provide services in fiscal year 2016-17.

CAO’s Recommendation
Baseline costs for salaries and benefits are
increased over the current year budget by
$329,952 due to the addition of 2.2 FTE
positions in FY 2015-16 and in anticipation of
cost of living increases. Baseline services and
supplies are reduced eliminate appropriations
for one-time purchases in 2015-16 of equipment,
computers, and materials. Baseline costs for
other charges are increased due to an increase
in building occupancy costs. The Library has
estimated an increase of 6% in property tax
revenue, which will enable the Library to absorb
increases to salaries and benefit costs.
The 2016-17 budget is recommended at the
Baseline level, which will permit the Library to
continue existing, and innovate new, programs.
The CAO and the County Librarian are working
together to develop a community library staffing
plan that will provide the maximum number of
operating hours within available resources.

CAO’s Recommendation
The fiscal year 2016-17 baseline budget
increased by a general fund net of $68,182.
Prior year Venture Capital funds totaling
$625,000 were eliminated. Appropriations of
$292,546 were added to account for the
elimination of Keller Surcharge funds transferred
from the General Fund. Building Occupancy
and Maintenance costs increased by a net of
$400,636.
The fiscal year 2016-17 recommended budget
increased by a general fund net of $781,422.
This reflects increased custodial hours to
general fund buildings as well as increased
hours for Stationary Engineers at the Martinez
and West County Detention Facilities. General
fund appropriations for also added for three
additional positions: a Steamfitter, an Electronic
Systems Specialist and a Lead Materials
Technician. The Steamfitter position will be
assigned to the Martinez Detention Facility to
handle daily routine maintenance operations and
assist in reducing the deferred maintenance
backlog. The Electronic Systems Specialist will
perform mandated testing and preventative
maintenance of fire and safety equipment in
County facilities. The Lead Materials Technician
will provide guidance to the County materials
management group supporting the Fleet and
Facilities Services divisions.
Additionally, the recommended budget includes
appropriations to add 5 additional positions as
well as two add/cancels in the Public Works
department. These positions are offset by
special revenues and/or project funds.
The additional positions and increased hours will
allow the Department to better manage
anticipated workflow in fiscal year 2016-17. The
County Administrator recommends the
additional positions to better meet the needs of
County departments and the management of
large scale environmental and capital projects.
The baseline budget for Fleet Services (Internal
Service Fund) increased by a net of $355,000 to
fund an increase in building maintenance costs
and equipment purchases. The recommended
budget adjustment of $22,190 in both
expenditures and revenues will allow for the
addition of 1 Equipment Mechanic and the
cancelation of 1 Equipment Services Worker.
The Road Fund Budget decreased by a net of
$5.1 million to reflect the elimination of prior year
fund balance. Revenue totaling $46,148,872
reflects anticipated federal funds from the
Highway User Tax, Federal and State grants,
Areas of Benefit, Developer Fees, Measurer J,
Contra Costa Transportation Authority and TDA
revenue. Funds will be used for general road
maintenance, road capital improvement, traffic
program, road engineering, road information and
services.
The Land Development Fund, which supports
engineering functions, was decreased by a net
of $45,805. The net fund cost decrease reflects
the removal of prior year fund balance.
Revenues were increased by $117,500 to reflect
anticipated revenues generated from land
development permits.
The Airport Enterprise fund, which supports
airport operations and capital development at
the Buchanan and Byron Airports increased
revenue by $1.8 million in anticipation of two
new Airport Improvement Program grants. The
net increase of $100,000 is the utilization of prior
year fund balance for work on the General Plan
Amendment.
Public Works continues to respond to the
growing challenges by proactively identifying
areas in its operations that can be modified,
streamlined, and/or restructured for better
service and cost efficiency, as well as
maintaining operations within their baseline
budget.

CAO’s Recommendation
Baseline Budget
The baseline net County cost represents a
$391,000 net increase over the FY 2015-16
Adjusted Budget. Salary and benefit costs
reflect an increase of $401,670. The addition of
a new Executive Secretary and Assistant Tax
Collector positions represent 64.7% of this
increase.
As homeowners for new purchases are forced
into impound accounts, the declining number of
new delinquencies has limited the amount of
service costs and redemption fees that have the
potential to be collected. In addition, investment
income is at a record low, as short term interest
rates remain well below 1%.
Recommended Budget
The County Administrator is recommending a
net County increase by $260,000, which reflects
the addition of 2.0 FTE positions. One new
Executive Secretary will alleviate the
department’s secretarial work in assisting with
sensitive, confidential and sometimes
controversial information about issues including
Labor Relations, litigation, staffing and
disciplinary actions. Due to additional services
put in place as a result of technological
advances and better business practices, one
Assistant County Tax Collector is needed to
oversee, supervise and ensure full compliance
with office policies and procedures as well as
with the state statutes and county ordinances.
The recommended net County cost of
$2,403,000 will provide the funding necessary to
provide services in fiscal year 2016-17.

CAO Recommendation
In the FY 2016-17 Baseline Budget expenditures
are anticipated to increase slightly compared to
the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget. This
increase is due to anticipated salary expense.
Federal Revenue is available to compensate for
projected increases.
The FY 2016-2017 Recommended Budget for
the Department of Child Support Services
maintains current service levels. There are no
reductions from the Baseline Budget.

CAO Recommendation
The Employment and Human Services
Department (EHSD) continues to reorganize key
bureaus to more efficiently and effectively
respond to community and administrative needs.
Recently, EHSD restructured the fiscal
administrative unit to better respond to emerging
funding opportunities and more effectively
submit claims to State and Federal funding
sources for services provided. Likewise, a major
restructuring of the systems for serving the
elderly and disabled population will be
completed in this fiscal year.
EHSD is proposing to add an additional 60
funded FTEs in order to be more responsive to
client’s needs, thus the CAO has asked the
department to eliminate a corresponding 60
vacant unfunded FTEs. EHSD regularly has in
excess of 400 vacant positions and has been
advised to continue their efforts to permanently
fill the positions they already have. To better
align the Department’s FTE figures with their
baseline budget salary and benefit costs, the
CAO has also asked the Department to cancel
50 additional FTE. The FTEs to be eliminated
are vacant unfunded positions, and result in the
recommended net FTE count of 2,224. EHSD
continues to struggle with position control. The
recommended FTE action is proposed to more
accurately reflect the needs of the department,
increase our ability to monitor financial
compliance, and to increase transparency with
our labor partners. The FTE reduction will not
have a fiscal impact on the department’s budget,
will not reduce the current level of service, nor
will it impact the filling of funded positions.
EHSD revenues involve a complex relationship
between the direct expenses to provide
services, the overhead expenses to support
direct service providers, and the funding
agencies determination of eligible services. The
Department projects anticipated revenue from
the various funding streams based on a
projection of services provided to eligible clients.
The FY 2016-17 revenue projection expects a
$527 thousand reduction from local sources
excluding general purpose revenue; a $6.6
million reduction from federally sourced revenue,
a $3.6 million increase from State revenues, and
a $3.5 million increase in general purpose
revenue support.
In FY 2016-17 EHSD anticipates an increase of
$5.3 million in salary and benefit expenses. This
is partially offset by an increase in the County
Baseline allocation (NCC) increased by $3.5
million and expected saving of $1.7 million while
positions are vacant.
As per the norm, EHSD does not yet have a
State funding allocation for FY 2016-17. The
Department has included estimated revenue
based on the Governor’s FY 2016-17 Proposed
Budget and historical allocation information.
EHSD will return to the Board of Supervisors in
the fall with a request for adjustments to the
appropriations should they be necessary once
the final allocations are received.
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for
Employment and Human Services is balanced.

CAO Recommendation
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget funds the
General Fund programs within the Health
Services Department at the baseline level. This
is an increase in expenditures of $162.2 million,
revenues of $154.2 million, and County general
funds of $8,074,760 over the fiscal year 2015-16
level. The bulk of the expenditure and revenue
increases are due to adjustments in outside
funding, particularly CCHP’s Enterprise Fund II.
The Health Services Department 2016-17
Recommended Budget is based on what is
currently known regarding federal and State
revenue that will be available in the next fiscal
year. The assumptions regarding State
revenues are based on the 2016-17 fiscal year
Governor’s Budget and may change as the
California State Legislature considers the
Governor’s recommendations. The Department
will return to the Board of Supervisors in the fall
with recommended adjustments should funding
from either the State or the federal government
significantly change.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget for all
programs and funding sources in the Health
Services Department totals approximately
$1.624 billion dollars. Of this amount, $95
million, or 5.8 percent is County General Fund,
including a $23.4 million contribution to the
Hospital and Clinics and a $3.7 million
contribution to the Contra Costa Health Plan.
The balance of nearly $1.529 billion or 94.2
percent is funded by outside revenue.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget maintains
the current, baseline spending levels. Service
levels may be adjusted depending up final
budget actions at the State and federal level.

CAO’s Recommendation
The fiscal year 2016-17 baseline net County
cost increased by $109,206 from the current
year’s adjusted budget. Additionally, the
department is requesting $70,794 in general
funds to add one clerical position to support the
office with the additional influx of demand for
Veteran services, which is mainly a result of
AB935 (Driver’s Licenses: Veteran Designation)
which was implemented in November of 2015.
The $67,875 baseline increase in services and
supplies will support the department’s ongoing
mission of supporting Veterans, their
dependents and survivors in obtaining VA
benefits. This increase will support the
department’s efforts to increase outreach
services and finalize workstation plans to
accommodate new staff.
The department is expecting an approximate
increase of $89,000 in revenues, mainly from
the California Department of Veteran Affairs.
The recommended net County cost of $995,000
will provide the Veterans Service Office with the
funding needed to provide services in fiscal year
2016-17.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Animal Services Department FY 2016-17
Baseline Budget increased by 5.1% compared
to the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget a
result of anticipated increases in operating
expenses and salaries and benefits.
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects
a 2.9% increase in personnel expenses, a
15.9% increase in services and supplies and a
10.5% decrease in Public Works vehicles
charges.
The Department anticipates an additional
$249,728 in City Contract revenue in FY 2016-
17. City Contract revenues are determined on a
capitated basis. A slight increase in Contra
Costa population, as determined by the
California State Department of Finance, in
concert with a fee increase of $0.18 per capita
will result in the increased City Contract
revenue. The Recommended Budget reflects
increases in License sales revenues in the
amount of $200,000 along with $250,000 from
the Animal Benefit Fund. Revenues resulting
from the above listed sources, along with an
increase of $50,088 in County General fund
allocation are projected to be sufficient to
accommodate the increased expenses.
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for
Animal Services is balanced and resulting in
expanded service levels.

CAO’s Recommendation
The County currently and has for many years
contracted with the Contra Costa County Bar
Association to provide conflict legal defense
services through private attorneys. Costs had
been trending upward due to an increase in the
number of homicide and capital cases referred
to the Bar, many of which involved multiple
defendants requiring separate legal
representation. Additionally, the Public Defender
has, from time-to-time been referring
misdemeanor cases to the Bar Association
during periods of heavy workloads. The
Recommended Budget provides for the
continuation of services with the Bar Association
in FY 2016-17.
The level of service for this program is mandated
pursuant to constitutional requirements. Should
the recommended appropriations prove
insufficient to fund the requisite level of defense
services, it will be necessary to shift resources to
this budget center from other programs or
County reserve.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Recommended budget funds the Baseline
budget and augments department operations by
an additional $798,862 by eliminating the
department’s FY 2015-16 vacancy factor in the
amount of $432,392 and adding 6.0 FTE new
positions; including, 4.0 FTE new Clerk-
Experienced Level position to assist with
implementation of the new case management
system deployed last year, 1.0 Clerk-Specialist
Level position to provide general administrative
support to the department and 1.0 FTE Clerk-
Experienced Level position to assist with
administrative support for the District Attorney’s
AB109 programs. The net cost of these
positions is $335,000, with the AB109 position
being offset by public safety realignment
revenue.
The Recommended budget also funds a modest
cost increase of $31,470, which is the difference
between adding 1.0 FTE Department Media
Relations Coordinator position and canceling 1.0
FTE Crime Scene Investigator position at the
request of the District Attorney.
-In addition to the clerical position identified
above, the Community Corrections Partnership
(CCP) funded $110,000 for improved
coordination of Ceasefire programs throughout
the County through the AB 109 budget process.
The new CCP funded activities are offset by
public safety realignment revenue and,
therefore, have zero net county cost associated
with them. A summary version of
recommendations can be found on the Program
Modification List at the end of this section.
The District Attorney’s office continues to work
on new crime prevention initiatives in addition to
managing responsibilities associated with AB
109. The County Administrator’s Office
acknowledges this continued effort and believes
that the Recommended budget reflects a
balance between continued funding of new
initiatives and preserving mandated, mainline
prosecution responsibilities within the District
Attorney’s Office. The County Administrator’s
Office will continue to monitor the District
Attorney’s budget and will provide an update to
the Board during the FY 2016-17 Mid-Year
Report to determine whether any budgetary
adjustments may be necessary.
Note: The County Administrator has developed
recommendations based on service level impacts
communicated by the District Attorney’s Office. It is
acknowledged that the District Attorney is an elected
official and has ultimate discretion on how to best
deploy resources within his Office using
appropriations allocated by the Board of
Supervisors.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline Budget is reduced from the current
year budget by $5,835,795 due primarily to the
removal of prior-year fund balance in the amount
of $5,362,500 from Law & Justice Systems
Development and $874,885 from the Vehicle
Theft program. The balance of the reduction
results from the combination of an increase to
salaries of $141,416 for cost-of-living and public
safety data systems staffing expenses, a net
increase in data processing expense of
$128,671 for the new case management
systems, a decrease in fixed assets of $25,000,
and a decrease to ACCJIN expenditure transfers
of $156,503. The Recommended Budget is
equivalent to the Baseline Budget.
All year-end balances for the ACCJIN and justice
case management systems are carried forward
to the new budget year to finance the continuing
development and maintenance of these
systems.

CAO’s Recommendation
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget
increases expenditure appropriations by $2.8
million or 3.9% to $74.1 million. This includes
anticipated increases in salary and benefit costs.
Additionally, the Department is anticipating
continued increases to operating costs
attributable to detention medical expenses as
well as court-ordered custodial care placement
trends. The recommended budget increases
estimated revenue by $2.7 million or 9.2% to
$31.6 million. The resulting net County cost of
$42.5 million funds the baseline services with
minimal impact to the Department. There is no
impact to the department’s continued vacancy
factor of $1.37 million.
While staffing ratios in the Juvenile Hall and the
Orin Allen Youth Rehabilitation Facility (Byron
Boy’s Ranch) meet minimum standards required
by law, they are not at levels that are considered
best practice. Furthermore, staffing levels
remain at a historically low rate. As a result of
the Federal Prison Rape Elimination Act, staffing
ratios will need to be maintained at 1 staff per 8
youth as of October 1, 2017. At the present time
the ratio is 1:10 at the Juvenile Hall and 1:15 at
the Byron Boy’s Ranch.
Increased staffing will also be needed to
continue to support the required implementation
of the new Behavioral Management System and
Core Correctional Practices at Juvenile Hall.
Working closely with the University of Cincinnati
Corrections Institute, progress has been made
to provide enhanced service to young men and
women committed to both the Youthful Offender
Treatment Program and the Girls in Motion
Treatment Program. Both the BMS and the CCP
programs will be implemented on the remaining
detention units in the near future. Challenges do
remain with maintaining fidelity to the programs
with the current staffing levels while, at the same
time, providing for the Title 15 operational
requirements of the facility.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Public Defender’s FY 2016-17
Recommended Budget increases expenditure
appropriations by $1,303,774 or 6.1%, and
estimated revenue by $195,954 or 11.6%,
resulting in an increase in net County cost of
$1,108,000 or 5.6%.
The Community Corrections Partnership (CCP)
funded the addition of one full-time legal
assistant, which enables the expansion of the
Clean Slate Program to encompass Proposition
47 services. The CCP also funded a pilot Failure
to Appear (FTA) Reduction Project for another
full-time Legal Assistant and a temporary Special
Assignment Deputy Public Defender.
Additionally, the recommended budget funds one
half-time Deputy Public Defender IV to provide
legal representation at parole revocation
hearings for State parolees transferring to
County jurisdiction under Public Safety
Realignment (AB 109).
At a total cost of $331,269, these activities are
entirely offset by public safety realignment
revenue and therefore have zero net county cost
associated with them.
The budget is balanced with no vacancy factor.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Recommended Budget includes a net
county cost of $81,000,000, which funds the
entire Baseline Budget. The remainder is
allocated towards reducing the FY 2015-16
vacancy factor by $1,995,247, from $4,242,168
to $2,246,921. The Recommended Budget also
adds (15) new Deputy Sheriff-Recruit positions
to help facilitate position management during
Academy classes. The new positions are not
funded, but are authorized and available to the
Sheriff’s Office for recruiting purposes.
New funding authorized during the AB 109 public
safety realignment budget process is reflected in
the Recommended Budget. Specifically,
$2,531,000 has been allocated to fund 1)
$731,000 in ongoing costs related to anticipated
reductions in inmate telephone commission
revenue following new rules released by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
governing interstate, inmate telephone calls and
2) $1.8 million in one-time revenue to partially
fund deferred maintenance at the West County
Detention Facility (WCDF). The new AB 109
funding results in no net county cost increase to
the department since it is funded by State sales
tax and vehicle license fee revenue allocated to
the County.
The Recommended Budget also includes an
estimated increase to Proposition 172 sales tax
revenue of $5.2 million, from $61.5 million to
$66.7 million. Proposition 172 revenue funds
core patrol and custody services within the
Sheriff’s Office budget. The estimated revenue
increases are due to 1) an increase in overall
statewide sales tax revenue, and 2) an increase
in the County’s pro-rata share of Proposition 172
statewide sales tax receipts.
In addition, the Recommended Budget reflects
the mutual termination of the police services
contract with the City of Oakley. The termination
is scheduled to take effect on May 7, 2016 and
the County will abolish 27 FTE positions to
reflect the discontinuance of this contract.
A summary version of recommendations can be
found on the Program Modification List at the
end of this section
Note: The County Administrator has developed
recommendations based on service level
impacts communicated by the Office of the
Sheriff-Coroner. It is acknowledged that the
Sheriff-Coroner is an elected official and has
ultimate discretion on how to best deploy
resources within his department using
appropriations allocated by the Board of
Supervisors.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline expenditures were increased from
the current year budget by a net of $86,180:
• Elimination of the one-time 2015-16 startup
provision in the amount of $128,000
approved by the Board of Supervisors on
February 3, 2015 to subsidize the Superior
Court’s start-up costs to implement Laura’s
Law, a court-ordered assisted outpatient
mental health treatment program.
• Decrease of $110,000 in costs to collect
court-ordered debt.
• Increase of $248,387 in the provision for
criminal defense of indigent offenders in
capital (death penalty) cases. While the
provision for capital case defense has been
increased by 50%, it may prove to be
insufficient depending on the progress of
current cases.
• Increase of $50,000 in the provision for
court-appointed counsel in non-capital
cases.
• Miscellaneous other adjustments
composing a net increase of $25,793.
Court revenues are increased conservatively by
just under 2% or $117,815 based on current
year projections.
The Recommended Budget is equivalent to the
Baseline budget, and includes appropriations in
the amount of $15.1 million for transfer to the
State to subsidize the cost of the local Superior
Court, and $2.3 million for other court functions
for which the County is financially responsible
under the Trial Court Funding and Public Safety
Realignment (AB 109)* Acts. The General Fund
subsidy to the courts for non-California Rule of
Courts 810 court operations includes the civil
and criminal grand juries, judicial benefits for
current judges who were serving as judicial
officers in 1997, collection services for courtordered
debt, court probation officer services,
legal defense representation in capital cases,
and costs for other court-appointed counsel.
The Recommended Budget for miscellaneous
non-General Fund programs provides for debt
service payments on the A. F. Bray Courthouse
and the Peter L. Spinetta Family Law Center in
Martinez. During FY 2015-16, the bonds for the
A. F. Bray Courthouse and a portion of the
bonds for the Peter L. Spinetta Family Law
Center will be retired, reducing the annual
obligations on the Courthouse Construction
Fund by $1.7 million. In past years, the County
has subsidized the Courthouse Construction

Fund, whose annual revenues have historically
been insufficient to meet the annual debt
obligation. The reduced debt obligation in FY
2016-17 will result in a surplus in the Courthouse
Construction and Criminal Justice Facility
Construction Funds. Also, as a result of the
reduced debt obligation, all balances in the
Family Law Center Debt Service Fund will
escheat to the County General Fund;
consequently, that budget is reduced to zero.
Note that Superior Court programs are
mandated and should the recommended budget
prove to be insufficient, mid-year augmentations
will need to be made from the County’s reserves
or through mid-year reductions in other County
programs.
*Note that the Sheriff’s Department earns revenue in
consideration for providing bailiff and security services to
the Court. These costs and revenues are reported in the
County Local Revenue Fund and the Sheriff’s Department
budget.

CAO’s Recommendation
The FY 2016-17 Recommended budget
provides for the funding of 25 fire stations, 26
fully functional engine/truck companies, one
limited functionality squad, and 352.6 FTEs. This
includes cost of living adjustments, benefit cost
increases, building and grounds maintenance
and repair projects, and capital and non-capital
equipment replacement. In contrast, the FY
2015-16 Recommended Budget funded 24 fire
stations, 24 fully functional engine/truck
companies, three limited functionality squads,
and 335.6 FTEs.
The District is primarily funded by property tax
revenues. In FY 2015-16, the District
experienced a 7.6% growth in secured property
assessed valuation and 6.9% growth in total
assessed valuation. This represents the third
consecutive year of growth in assessed
valuation after several years of declines. The
District received additional property tax
distributions during the course of the fiscal year
due to the dissolution of various redevelopment
agencies in the County.
The FY 2016-17 Recommended budget
anticipates a 6% growth in secured property
assessed valuation and the resumption of RDA
Successor Agency pass through payments from
the City of Pittsburg. The budget also anticipates
the continuation of some new sources of
revenue, such as emergency medical services

(EMS) first responder fees and sales tax for
enhanced EMS in the City of San Pablo.
These increases in revenue are allowing the
District to re-staff some of the operational
resources that were taken out of service during
recessionary years.
As noted in last year’s report, FY 2015-16
employer retirement contribution rates
decreased for most employers and rate groups.
In FY 2016-17 contribution rates will decrease
again due largely to prior year (2014) market
returns that exceeded the 7.25% investment rate
assumption. However, the rate decrease for the
Tier A Safety retirement benefit is being offset
by the gradual elimination of the 9% employee
subvention of the employer cost towards
retirement. The agreement to eliminate the
employee subvention of the employer rate
resulted from the last contract negotiations with
the District’s largest labor group, IAFF Local
1230.
The FY 2016-17 Recommended budget
balances by using approximately $2.4 million in
fund balance. The District has a policy to
maintain a minimum reserve of 10% of general
operating fund budgeted expenditures. Despite
the planned use of reserves to balance the
budget, the District continues to meet its reserve
requirements. It should be noted that $2.6
million of the District’s planned expenditures are
for the transfer of funds from the general
operating fund to the pension obligation bond
(POB) stabilization fund. The POB stabilization
fund can be used for very limited purposes –
such as extinguishing new retirement UAALs
and replenishing general operating fund
reserves. Therefore, after consideration of the
$2.6 million transfer, the FY 2016-17
Recommended Budget estimates a $200,000
increase to total available end of year fund
balance.
On January 1, 2016, the District became the
County’s exclusive operator of emergency
ambulance service (not including the areas
covered by the Moraga-Orinda Fire Protection
District and the San Ramon Valley Fire
Protection District). It is anticipated that the new
program will be cash negative for several
months, but expenditures are being secured by
anticipated receivables from the provision of
ambulance service.

CAO’s Recommendation
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects
a decrease of $263,637 in expenditures, which
is primarily composed of fund balance budgeted
in FY 2015-16. Recommended revenue reflects
a $47,401 increase from the FY 2015-16 Budget
based on prior year experience and anticipated
property tax increases of 6%. The District is
planning to use $18,603 of fund balance to
balance the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget.