LADWP water management. Runoff-year 2009 was the final year of the Interim Management
Program, so this year's pumping management is the second since 2004 to be managed according to the existing
Green Book. Key goals for FY 2012-2013 will be to accelerate development of water table based pumping
management for adoption into the Green Book; and to monitor and assess impacts of LA DWP water management on
the environment.
Green book modifications. Department staff will continue the effort to develop new methods of
groundwater management, evaluation of new and replacement wells, vegetation monitoring, surface water and
groundwater monitoring. Primary concerns/obstacles to be addressed during FY 2012-2013 are resolution of the
Technical Group's role in replacement well installation, agreement on how to achieve Water Agreement
environmental goals, and development of an effective vegetation monitoring program for assessing vegetation
conditions with respect to Water Agreement goals. We have budgeted for contractors to assist Department staff in
moving this long-delayed task forward.
Monitoring Programs. The Department will continue its ongoing program of monitoring soil moisture,
vegetation conditions, and groundwater levels. This ongoing program is related to managing groundwater pumping
and assessing the effectiveness of that management. Additionally, Water Department staff will conduct habitat
indicator species and rapid assessment survey monitoring responsibilities associated with the Lower Owens River
Project. The Water Department will continue planning, implementation, and monitoring activities for over fifty
mitigation projects associated with the Long-Term Water Agreement.
Caso/Hay Ranch. As provided for in the Conditional Use Permit for the Caso/Hay Ranch Groundwater
Transfer Project, the Department will continue to monitor the project, implement the modifications to the mitigation
plan that were adopted in FY 20I0-2011.
Integrated Regional Water Management Planning. During FY 2012-2013, the Department will
continue to participate in the Regional Water Management Group.
Statewide Groundwater Elevation Monitoring Program. During FY 2012-2013, in order to
comply with state requirements for groundwater monitoring, the Department will draft groundwater elevation
monitoring and reporting plans for numerous groundwater basins in the County and submit these plans to California
Department of Water Resources.
Lower Owens River Project. FY 2012-2013 marks the sixth yearof LORP implementation. Our goal
is to fulfill the County's responsibility for joint funding, management, and implementation of the LORP. The
Department will work with our consultants to complete the Recreational Use Plan and provide adaptive management
recommendations for the LORP, work with LADWP to monitor the LORP to assure that project goals are attained,
develop the annual workplans and reports, and explore funding opportunities for the project. The Department has
been working with a consultant to develop a recreational use plan for the LORP and will seek funding for Phase II.
The Department has also worked with LADWP and a consultant to conduct a study of alternative flow rates in the
LORP.
The Saltcedar Control Program will continue to treat and monitor saltcedar populations throughout the
Owens Valley but will focus primarily on control in the area of the Lower Owens River Project.
The WCB portion of the Saltcedar Control Program will continue to treat and monitor saltcedar populations
throughout the Owens Valley but will focus primarily on control in the area of the Lower Owens River Project,
although significantly reduced from FY 2011-2012.
Continue providing services and participations listed under accomplishments
 Continue having a close working relationship with other county/government agencies
 Continue outreach efforts
 Working collaboratively with CDV A Local lnteragency Network Coordinator in creating resource
directory, events calendar and recruiting volunteers to become Peer Specialists to help those that have
served in the armed forces.
To purchase the following for the District Attorney's office:
 (2) Laptop computers and carrying cases, not to exceed $3400
 (2) Digital Pocket Recorders, not to exceed $300
 Surveillance Equipment, not to exceed $1500.
 (3) !PAD notebooks, not to exceed $2800
 (3) Flashlights, not to exceed $400
 (3) Global Positioning Units, not to exceed $500.
To purchase the following for the Probation Department:
 (I) D/S Duplex printer, not to exceed $1200.
 (3) Webcams, not to exceed $450.
 Invoice RAN quarterly for CLETS Line, not to exceed $6,000.
To purchase the following for the Bishop Police Department:
 Invoice RAN for $5281.00 for reimbursement on upgrade/maintenance
 (7) Digital Cameras, not to exceed $830.
 I DSLR Camera, not to exceed $800.
 ( 13) Ink cartridges (black and color) not to exceed $3521.
 (1) Mini-tower computer, not to exceed $6!0.
To purchase the following for the Sheriff's Department:
 Upgrade and maintenance contract, not to exceed $10,562.
 Evidence Technician equipment, not to exceed $8300.
 Misc. Expenses not to exceed $2914.
The review and recommendation of a vendor and project manager to the Board of Supervisors for
the PTMS project that will allow the County to achieve a higher level of professional service to
the public in the area of property management.
 To begin the implementation of the PTMS project.
Begin and possibly complete the replacement of the County's outdated property tax software system.
Continue to upgrade equipment (car cameras, emergency equipment)
 Increase investigation needs for gang enforcement
 Train investigators in investigation of Missing and Exploited Children using available Federal Funds
 Staff OES and Homeland Security positions to meet the increasing demands by the State and Federal
Government Grants.
 Increase the level of community support we continue to enjoy by providing the public services within
our scope of responsibility and availability.
 Maintain the outstanding relationships developed with the Board and other County entities that allow
for better public services through cooperation.
 Stay connected to State Vine Program (Victim Information Notification Everyday)
 Continue to apply for grants for hiring, equipment, and programs
 Increase training for Department Personnel as Training Instructors
 Continue the program to make Search and Rescue available to meet any rescue need in the County, and
assistance elsewhere when requested, through improved equipment and training.
 Train other agencies in Emergency Services and Inoperable Communications
 Maintain, test, educate and familiarize the public with the CODE RED emergency notification system.
 Continue to coordinate the multi-agency Unified Command meetings
 Become FCC compliant with radio frequency narrow banding
Through our own use of the media continue to promote animal adoptions at the Shelter.
 Maintain a supportive affiliation with the local rescue and support groups and assist their efforts with offsite
adoption events.
 Promote the Department and the Shelter as being a part of the Inyo County Sheriffs Department. Publicize
the Inyo County Sheriffs Animal Shelter through media contacts and promote the services available and
that are provided by the Shelter.
 Ensure rabies vaccination compliance with an emphasis on license enforcement.
 Continue with our efforts to ensure that the public is served as promptly and as efficiently as possible.
 Reorganize the Rabies Vaccination Clinic Schedule.
Complete & implement the new Lexipol Custody Manual
 Repair and maintain aging jail facility infrastructure
 Continue to refine the jail management system software
 Dedicate more inmate work crew man hours to community projects
 Train more Correctional Officers as training instructors
 Provide more specialty training to custody staff in the field of courtroom and transportation security
 Continue to refine the 2012- 13 Court Security MOU and provide adequate security services to the court
and public
 Continue to meet all training requirements pursuant to STC and POST mandates
 Continue the outstanding relationships developed with the Board and other county entities that allow for
better public services through cooperation
Continue the maintenance and service contract with Sun Ridge Systems
Continue the Work Release Alternative Program to maintain the inmate population at manageable levels
 Continue to refine the "In Custody" jail management software to realize its full potential
 Continue to work with the courts to find ways to manage manpower resources to mutual benefit and
efficiency
 Maintain the excellent relationship between the Board and other county agencies that allow for effective
public service through cooperation
 Complete and implement the Sheriff's employee recognition - awards program
 Continue to explore innovative programs and procedures to retain our deputy sheriff and correctional
officer personnel in order to provide adequate levels of public safety and minimize the time and monies
used to recruit and train personnel
Continue effective communications between patrol and custody division supervisors/managers to best
manage existing manpower and training concerns
Continue maintenance and service contract with American Security Systems.
Our goal is to meet or exceed all regulatory mandates by STC and receive notification of compliance.
Install Flagpole
 Obtain signage
 Minor landscaping
 Award contract and complete the project
Upgrade facilities (Substations) for Patrol personnel
 Maintain staffing level up to allocated strength
Emphasis on training for Deputies as experienced Deputies have retired and replaced by entry level or
minimum experienced personnel
 Maintain the grant funded OHV program in preparation for the new "Adventure Trail" off road
program, which is being developed by the local advocates group, "AAPL."
 Continue the level of community support we continue to enjoy by providing the public services within
our scope of responsibility and availability
 Maintain the outstanding relationships developed with the Board and other County entities that allow
for better public services through cooperation
 Continue to look for grant funding for additional personnel, training, and equipment
 Continue the program to make Search and Rescue available to meet any rescue need in the County, and
assistance elsewhere when requested, through improved equipment and training
 Continue to reorganize Sheriffs Department Administration to provide more efficiency, better
supervision and more cost effectiveness
Reduction in methamphetamine production and distribution.
 Reduction in the availability ofmethamphetamine locally.
 Reduction in methamphetamine related offenses.
 Reduction in hazardous waste sites associated with methamphetamine manufacturing.
 Reduction in physical property damage associated with methamphetamine manufacturing.
 Reduction in medical responses associated with methamphetamine abuse.
 Support office expenses
Reduction in metharnphetamine production and distribution.
 Reduction in the availability ofmethamphetamine locally.
 Reduction in methamphetamine related offenses.
 Reduction in hazardous waste sites associated with methamphetamine manufacturing.
 Reduction in physical property damage associated with methamphetamine manufacturing.
 Reduction in medical responses associated with methamphetarnine abuse.
 Support the position of the !NET Legal Secretary Ill and office expenses.
Locate and eradicate marijuana cultivation sites throughout the county (one site confirmed, three others
suspected).
 Identify and apprehend all persons responsible for the cultivation sites.
 Obtain intelligence information through surveillance, fight operations, and public input.
 Reduce marijuana production and distribution.
 Reduce the availability of marijuana locally.
 Reduce illegal drug related crimes and offenses.
 Reduce the hazardous waste associated with marijuana cultivation.
 Maintain grant funding for operation of the !NET Task Force.
Goals for fiscal year 2012-2013 include maintaining and enhancing existing OHV patrol trucks and all
terrain vehicles (A TVs), providing reimbursement for overtime and patrol hours, providing safety gear, and
procuring one additional A TV and corresponding trailer.
Continue maintenance of county roads as funding allows
 Continue to employ asphalt maintenance strategies on select roads
 Maintain and improve utilization of the cost accounting system
 Finish the collection of delinquent accounts in Accounts Receivable, including and audit of all STIP
projects, as requested by the State Auditor
 Continue implementation ofBACT Plan provisions for on-road diesel retrofits
 Continue implementation of plan for CARB compliance of off-road diesel equipment
 Perform a fleet audit and equipment utilization review.
 Initiate a County-wide sign inventory and analyze their condition in order to ensure compliance with
updated Federal retroreflectivity standards.
 Complete I B projects
Complete construction of the Sabrina Bridge Replacement Project and close-out;
 Complete construction of the Nine Mile Canyon Road Guardrail Installation Project and close-out;
 Finish ES&P (Environmental Studies & Permitting) and PS&E (Plans, Specifications, and
Engineering) for the Independence Town Rehabilitation Project, and advertise for bids;
 Hire a consultant to perform environmental assessment for the Sunland Drive Bicycle Lanes/South
Bishop Resurfacing Projects;
 Obtain authorization to proceed with engineering for the South Bishop Resurfacing Project/Sunland
Drive Bicycle Lanes Project;
 Finalize a Cooperative Agreement with Caltrans to perform environmental assessment for the See Vee
Lane Extension Project, and begin the environmental assessment;
 Request authorization to proceed with engineering for the Independence Welcome Center Project
(Phase 2 of the Dehy Park Improvement Project).
 Request authorization to proceed with environmental studies and engineering for the West Bishop
Resurfacing Project.
 Complete I B projects.
 Keep project billings current.
Obtaining authorization to proceed is contingent upon adoption of the state budget and availability of
funds.
Continue development of improvements for County Airports.
 Continue construction and development of State Funded Road projects.
 Continue to assist with construction and development of Parks projects.
 Complete process for Tecopa Sewer Pond Repair.
 Provide administrative activities for town water systems, including oversight ofO&M contractor and
development and award of new O&M contract.
Continue development of TE Projects.
 Continue support for Deferred Maintenance projects.
 Continue with development and support of bridge projects.
 Work with Independence CSD for transfer of water systems.
 Work on Photovoltaic project.
 Continue work on consolidated office space needs.
 Continue administration of Local Transportation Commission.
 Continue to provide development review assistance.
 Continue to administer the County Surveyor contract.
 Continue to provide administrative support to other departments.
 Closeout the Energy Efficiency Project.
 Bid & award Lone Pine Sheriff substation expansion.
 Complete and closeout the ESTA Lighting Project.
 Complete and closeout the Water Department Window Replacement Project.
 Construct and closeout the Sheriff Gun Range Project.
 Update the County Building Code Ordinance.
Administer District and ensure that lighting fixtures are maintained.
 Perform an audit to ensure that the district is receiving the services for which it is being charged.
Continue to provide inspections and plan reviews in a timely manner.
 Continue to provide safety inspections, when required.
 Continue to inspect properties for safety hazards and issue abatement notices, when required.
 Complete revision to the Building & Safety handouts to reflect the Building Code requirements.
 Revisit cost analysis of building permit fees upon completion of findings report and request changes
through Board of Supervisors.
Continue to provide administrative support for district
 Administer O&M contract for preventive maintenance
 Continue capital improvement fund
 Obtain agreement with the Forest Service for sewer plant fees
 Prepare preliminary system evaluation
 Continue to seek grant funding for continued system improvements
 Purchase and install flow meter to better monitor system demands
 Continue to utilize best practices to minimize expense on a system with aging infrastructure.
 Award a three-year 0 & M contract.
 Purchase and Install a flow meter to assist in Waste usage calculations.
Continue to contribute funds to the capital improvement fund.
 Identify capital improvements that may be required.
 Initiate environmental and preliminary engineering studies for sewer main replacement.
 Provide 25% matching funds for $400,000 IR WMP grant
Update Deferred Maintenance priority list.
 Continue to investigate and implement opportunities to improve energy efficiencies in all County
facilities, especially building envelopes.
 Research potential security issues in County facilities and provide recommendations for improvement.
With Board concurrence, complete the following projects:
 Fire suppression repair projects in several County facilities.
 Repair/replace Drivit expansion joints at Jail facility.
 ReroofBishop Library, including asbestos abatement.
 Improve energy efficiency of Sheriff trailer in Shoshone.
 Update ADA Transition Plan (State and Federal project funding may become contingent upon this).
 Water Department HY AC Upgrade (funded through the Water Department)
As funding becomes available, evaluate the following projects:
 Repair South Street parking lot in Bishop.
 Repair Annex elevator.
 Pave Annex parking lot.
 Repair Courthouse driveway.
 Remodel Annex offices.
 Laws Depot roof.
 Repair Museum parking lot.
Proceed with archaeological data recovery activities and engineering for Phase 2 of the park
improvements.
Continue to operate and maintain airport facilities
 Continue to prepare projects for Terminal Area and other minor improvements.
 Continue to attempt to secure funding for future AIP projects.
 Continue to develop and implement airport ground leases.
 Develop Fire Suppression Well testing procedure and implement.
 Pursue obtaining custody of National Weather Service building.
 Investigate and implement alternative emergency eye wash station.
 Ensure perimeter fence remains in good repair.
 Improve efficiencies by combining Special Aviation and Operating Budgets.
 Provide resources and other support for Airport Improvement Projects.
 Complete roofrepair on large hangar.
Complete engineering, advertise for bids, and apply for FAA and CDA grants for construction of electrical
upgrade project.
 Apply for FAA and CDA grants for Airport Layout Plan Update and Narrative, and select consultant to
prepare ALP Update and Narrative.
 Apply for FAA and CDA grants, and select engineering consultant for Runway 16/34 Overlay Project.
 Apply for FAA and CDA grants, and select engineering consultant for Airport Signs and Markings
Inventory Project.
Continued payment of the Fire & Casualty Insurance
 Purchase of replacement bulbs for runway and taxiway lighting
 Develop test procedure for Fire Suppression Well
 Repair cracks on runway 16/34
Continue to maintain the airport at its current level including weed abatement and runway edge lighting.
 Investigate options and resolve the hangar door issue.
 Provide resources and other support for Airport Improvement Projects.
 Improve efficiencies by combining Special Aviation and Operating Budgets.
Complete segmented circle replacement and close out project
 Apply for FAA and CDA grants for an Airport Layout Plan (ALP) Update and Narrative
 Advertise Request for Qualifications and identify consultant to prepare ALP Update and Narrative
Repair asphalt patch near hangars
 Repair cracks on runway 16/34
 Provide financial relief to Independence Operating Budget, as needed.
Administer District and ensure that lighting fixtures are maintained.
 Perform an audit to ensure that the district is receiving the services for which it is being charged.
Continue with the purchase and installation of 20 additional meters, and meter boxes as needed. The 0 &
M contractor handles the installation of the meters.
Continue with the purchase and installation of additional meters, and meter boxes as needed.
DEPARTMENTAL BUDGET
Work cooperatively with the FBO for the continued maintenance and operation of the airport.
 Acquire and install Super A WOS system
 Develop a new FBO contract for bid and execution.
 Improve efficiencies by combining Special Aviation and Operating Budgets.
 Continue to keep airport in good repair in spite of limited funding.
Complete design of Runway 16/34 Improvement Project and advertise for bids.
 Complete and submit FAA and CDA applications for construction funding for Runway 16/34
improvements.
 Complete design of Terminal Building Replacement Project and advertise for bids.
 Complete and submit FAA and CDA applications for construction funding for Terminal Building
Replacement Project.
 Submit grant applications for and install new Super A WOS.
 Submit grant applications for and replace segmented circle.
Continue financial assistance for the Lone Pine Airport Operating Budget
 Make repairs to perimeter fencing as required
 Repair cracks in Runway/taxiway
Administer District and ensure that lighting fixtures are maintained.
 Perform an audit to ensure that the district is receiving the services for which it is being charged.
Continue with the purchase and installation of additional meters, and meter boxes as needed. The 0 & M
contractor will handle the installation.
Continue to provide level of service and support to county facilities as identified for prior year and improve
level of service and support wherever possible.
 Continue replacement program of inefficient HY AC equipment in all County facilities as funding allows.
 Review County Energy Conservation Measures and identify ways to reduce utility costs for all County
facilities.
 Assist with developing cost applied billing program for tracking Building & Grounds activities in order to
improve County Cost Plan charges.
 Complete negotiations and update of maintenance MOU with the AOC.
 Coordination ofbackflow device testing/repairs for some 30 backflow devices for the County of Inyo.
 Coordination/supervision of termite services for the Bishop County Services Building.
 Supervision of the replacement of the backflow device at the Independence Jail.
Continue to maintain the airport at its current level including keeping all navigation aids in serviceable
condition and keeping the runway free of weeds and debris.
 Repair runway lighting.
 Improve efficiencies by combining Special Aviation and Operating Budgets.
Continue with SB45 Project Planning, Programming and Monitoring.
 Continue administration of the Inyo County Local Transportation Commission.
 Continue to perform work elements listed in the Overall Work Plan, including completing the 2010-
2011 OWP, and implementing the 2011-2012 OWP, and developing the 2012-2013 OWP.
 Continue to coordinate with Caltrans on US 395 four lane projects.
 Continue implementation of the Regional Transportation Plan.
 Continue implementation of the Inyo County General Bikeways Plan.
 Implementation of the 2010 STIP
 Continue to perform administrative activities
 Development of the 2012 RTIP and STIP
 Continue administration and coordination of transit and the IDA
 Further examine the roles and responsibilities of the ICLTC and Eastern Sierra Transit Authority in the
establishment or reduction of transit routes
 Continued involvement with Rural Counties Task Force
 Continued involvement with the Eastern California Transportation Planning Partnership
 Continued inventory activities and implementation of Inyo County Pavement Management Program
 Hold unmet transit needs hearings
 Update the Inyo L TC website
 Update and expand survey of area roadways using Geographical Information Systems.
 Assist the City of Bishop in completing a circulation and land use plan
 Initiate bike and walkability audit of area schools
 Evaluate and review applications to designate County Roads as eligible for combined-use by OHVs
pursuant to Assembly Bill 628
Complete easement acquisition for tank site with Los Angeles Dept. of Water & Power.
 Continue to operate and maintain the system, utilizing O&M contractor.
 Complete process toward new 0 & M contract for water system, effective January 1, 2012.
 Complete installation of surge protection hardware.
 Continue to assist and coordinate with Independence CSD on all aspects of the transfer of the water system.
 Administer the upgrade budget.
 Secure grant funding for needed infrastructure improvements.
 If awarded funding, initiate and carry out projects funded by IRWMP program.
Continue to operate and maintain the system, utilizing O&M contractor.
 Complete process toward RFP for 0 & M contract for water system.
 Complete installation of surge protection hardware
 Administer the upgrade budget
 Complete intertie between LAD WP Well 413 and the distributio
Continue to operate and maintain the system, utilizing O&M contractor.
 Complete process toward new 0 & M contract for water system.
 Complete installation of surge hardware.
 Secure grant funding for needed infrastructure improvements.
 If awarded funding, initiate and carry out projects funded by IR WMP program.
 Administer the upgrade budget.
Review all eligible properties for a decline in value due to economic conditions. Make more assessor data
available to other departments and public on line through the Internet and the GIS Map.
 Review the responses to our RFP for a new property tax system
We continue to strive to:
 Service the citizens of Inyo/Mono Counties
 Respond quickly to issues and complaints;
 Maintain our I 00% rate of inspection for all weighing and measuring devices within Inyo and
Mono Counties to ensure equity for all transactions; and,
 To enforce the laws to the best of our ability.
Funding priority goals:
 We continue lobbying through the California Agricultural Commissioners' Association to gain
state and federal dollars through legislation and regulations,
 We continue to investigate contracting with other agencies to maintain a viable noxious weed
control program.
Continue to pursue long and short term funding opportunities through grant applications, outside
agreements, legislation, and program contracts
 Continue limited work on high-priority sites within LADWP lands, such as the LORP area
 Achieve treatment ofnon-LADWP invasive plant sites cataloged in the ESWMA GIS database
 Continue invasive plant population reductions
 Continue public outreach and cooperative weed control activities
The consequences of this invasive plant management program ending are extensive:
 Ceasing work for even one year negates all previous year's work and expended resources.
 It is a near certainty, if this program were to cease, that Lepidium /atifo/ium populations will grow out
of control, threatening both the local agricultural and outdoor tourism industries, and also local natural
resources.
 Seed banks resulting from lack of treatment can last decades, and cost millions of dollars to manage at
a later time.
We continue to strive for:
 Providing the public with a high level of mosquito control.
 Expanding our public education program.
 Assisting in the West Nile Virus Surveillance Program.
 Providing an efficient auditing and tracking system to keep the assessment to OVMAP area residents
correct and up to date.
 Maintain a vigilant posture concerning other vector borne diseases such as encephalitis and dengue fever.
 Revamp our adult mosquito surveillance system with innovative compressed C02 gas baited mosquito
traps.
Funding priority goals:
 Explore other funding opportunities such as contracts and grants to augment the mosquito control program.
 Continue to work with other local agencies to reduce mosquito breeding sources.
Implement the "Make Our Work Count" program for improved Federal Performance evaluations.
 Continue to monitor and implement Departmental "Best Practices" to improve productivity and
uniformity of work practices for both Inyo and Mono County office locations.
 Increase positive community contact with the implementation of additional outreach activities.
 Meet all State and Federal guidelines for Security by implementing a "paper free file"
environment for both Inyo and Mono County office locations.
 Continue to regionalize Contracts for Service.
The expected outcome of the following goals is to effect final disposition of each task. Direct measurement
of each plan's outcome will be, in some cases, in the collection of fees. Some estates will not generate fees, due
to the indigent nature of the estate, however fewer indigent burials will occur and bills to local businesses shall
be paid.
 Complete to final disposition, six (6) Summary or small estates with total value of less than $30,000.
Collect fees for services;
 Deposit unclaimed funds of six (6) estates to County Treasury and upon anniversary of 3 years, effect
transfer to Inyo County General Fund;
 Complete seven (7) Annual Accountings of Conservator's estates and collect fees for services;
 Maintain compliance with California Probate codes §§7605 & 2923 with respect to continuing education
requirements for Public Administrator Guardian Conservator and Deputy Public Administrator Guardian
Conservator;
 Investigate and if merited, petition Inyo County Superior Court, all referenced cases to Public
Administrator Guardian;
 Continue exceptional care ofConsrvatees' Person and Estates and Decedents' Estates effectively saving
direct and indirect costs to the County of Inyo and Individuals within the County;
 Sale one (I) conservatee's Real Property. Collect statutory fees for Services;
 Update Inyo county Public Guardian Fee Schedule to increase fees set in 2001.
Continue providing outstanding service and protection to the citizens of Inyo County.
2. Complete the strategic plan for the Probation Department
3. Use evidenced based practices to reduce the number of prison commits.
4. Continue collaboration effort in the Community Correction Partnership in compliance with PCl230 and
ABI09.
5. Continue revisions/additions to policy and procedure manual.
6. Implement a random drug testing program to improve outcomes.
7. Continue to utilize local training to further reduce general fund contribution for training.
8. Continue to upgrade departmental information technology.
9. Enhanced revenue opportunities through work w/CPOC and legislative advocates and grant opportunities.
I 0. Develop Pre-Trial Services program to help reduce the potential of jail overcrowding due to the passage of
ABI09.
11. Desig n and implement a department website.
Some of the goals for FY 2012-2013 include:
I. Continue providing outstanding service and protection to the citizens of Inyo County.
2. Continue developing an updated strategic plan for the Juvenile Division.
3. Through the assistance of the BPAI grant, implement second phase of the risk/needs assessment by
implementing the "YES" case plan in the Juvenile Division and Detention Risk Assessment Instrument
(DRAl) to all detained minors.
4. Continue revisions/additions to policy and procedure manual.
5. Continue to utilize local training to further reduce general fund contribution for training.
6. Train probation staff to facilitate an aggression replacement therapy (ART) program at the Juvenile Center
and in the community.
7. Continue to expand the gardening program through the Office of Education's ROP program.
8. Terrace the garden area to provide more grow space.
9. Implement a Future Farmers of America program.
10. Conti nue expanding the bicycle repair program at the Juvenile Center.
11. Training of all staff at the Juvenile Facility on the evidence based Change Companies Journaling program.
12. Update the existing camera and monitor system for better safety and security in the Juvenile Center, to be
paid for by YOBG funds.
Use evidenced based practices to reduce the number of prison commits.
2. Continue collaboration effort in the Community Correction Partnership in compliance with PCl230 and
ABI09.
3. Develop Pre-Trial Services program to help reduce the potential of jail overcrowding due to the passage of
ABl09.
To maintain a high level of customer service in an efficient and effective manner
 Continue the General Plan and Zone Code update
 Participate in and influence the Inyo National Forest Plan Update/Revision
 Continue to participate in the Hidden Hills solar project
 To meet all requirements relating to SMARA and the County's mining regulations
 Continue/Maintain efforts and coordination in the Desert Renewable Energy Plan, Renewable Energy
Transmission Initiative, CTPG, Natural Resource Advisory Committee, Desert Protection Act, Death
Valley National Park Backcountry Wilderness Plan, Saline Valley Plan, Solar PEIS, Owens Lake Master
Plan, Forest Service Planning Rule
 To maintain current information on the website; as mandated by Government Code section 56150
 To manage and coordinate the Southern California Edison Energy Action Plan
 Continue to monitor and participate in the DWP Owens Valley Solar Ranch
 To serve as the lead agency in preparing the Crystal Geyser Roxanne Cabin Bar Ranch EIR and Pine Creek
Village EIR
 Process land use and planning projects that require Planning Commission review
 Process Renewable Energy projects
 Continue to staff the Yucca Mountain Repository Assessment Office
 Continue to staff the Inyo LAFCO
 Continue to assist other departments and agencies in CEQA compliance
 Hire a Planning Coordinator
Process and consider applications for special district formations, annexations, and out-of-area service
agreements in compliance with the provisions of the Cortese-Knox-Hertzberg Local Government
Reorganization Act
 Enter into a contract with the Inyo County Planning Department to provide staff and legal services to the
Commission
 Maintain Inyo LAFCO membership and participation in CALAFCO
 Replace any vacant seats on LAFCO as necessary to keep LAFCO active
 Continue to establish written policies and procedures that encourage and provide planned, well-ordered,
efficient development patterns with appropriate consideration of preserving open-space lands within those
patterns as required by Government Code section 56300(a)
 Continue to maintain the Inyo LAFCO website in compliance with Government Code
Section 56661
 Continue to provide customer service and agency coordination, and updateand maintain information on
Special Districts located in Inyo County
Complete "mothballing" the Yucca Mountain Office, but also be ready to revive if necessary.
 Maintain a contract with Greg James in the event licensing proceedings unexpectedly recommence.
 Continue to participate in federal oversight of past expenditures.
 Complete the volcanology study being prepared by Gene Smith.
 Assist with continued groundwater monitoring in southeast Inyo County.
 Continue monitoring program developments within the Department of Energy, Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.
 Continue working with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, its working groups, and AULGs to monitor
DOE activities related to the License Application review process.
Continue to monitor federal legislation for amendments to the Nuclear Waste Policy Act via the web and its
network with the other A ULGs.
Increase access to medical and dental services for all populations.
 Assure public health preparedness and response for disasters.
 Monitor discussions about health care refonn to infonn policy & possible re-structuring discussions.
 Monitor changing inmate costs as it relates to new legislative mandates and implications for health care in the
facility.
 Pursue the feasibility of purchasing insurance for inmate health care.
Ensure that the program address the needs of emerging communities and populations, including women,
infants, children and minority populations.
 Increase linkages to culturally appropriate medical care for HIV-infected individuals. This will include
establishing referral sources within the county and with HIV specialists in other areas.
 Ensure that HIV services are available to all HIV-affected individuals in the geographic area.
 Decrease barriers to primary medical care and other supportive services.
 Utilize results of201 lcommunity assessment to address program delivery and community needs.
Continue to sustain provider systems to meet the needs of the eligible children of Inyo County for CCS.
 Develop mechanisms to share the availability of limited local skilled medical professionals to maximize
services to CCS eligible children.
 Continue to strengthen the relationships with families, by including parent participation in ongoing CCS
program evaluation activities, planning measures and staff training.
 Continue to strengthen the relationships between CCS staff and the schools by cross training and expanding
opportunities for collaboration.
Maintain current case management services for caseload of children with recruitment and training of a new
part-time Nurse Case Manager 8 hours per week.
 Continue to increase collaboration with outside agencies providing services to target population.
 Prevent Joss of paneled providers who are challenged by the State's Medi-Cal claiming system and may be
at a loss to resolve authorization and claiming issues without local representative of Medi-Cal.
 Anticipate the growing trend of underinsured children into the county caseload and address budget
implications of Health Care Reform Act.
Continue to increase enrollment of children in Healthy Families program and track utilization of insurance.
 Expand enrollment assistance to facilitate CHOP Gateway program.
 Continue to work with medical providers to understand and implement the CHOP program as a "gateway"
to MediCal and Healthy Families enrollment.
 Continue contact with each child accessing CHDP Gateway requesting health coverage access.
 Through the facilitation of the Inyo County Childhood Obesity Work Group, Team Inyo for Kids, maintain
an active and dynamic focus on the problem and develop and promote strategies in addressing the
prevention and treatment of obesity among lnyo's children.
 Further development of foster care nurse roles and responsibilities to address the needs of the children in
placement and those children preparing to transition into independent living as adults.
Continue disaster preparedness efforts and develop contingency plans in the event that the community is
isolated by a disaster.
 Continue outreach to high-risk children and families to provide information and resources to strengthen the
families' abilities to prevent child abuse or out of home placement, drug and alcohol abuse, domestic
violence, as well as addressing mental health issues.
 Continue to meet with the Death Valley School Superintendent, Sherifrs Office and key community
members to assess and provide services to the community.
 Coordinate quarterly meetings of the HHS Coalition in Southeastern Inyo with the HHS Director and/or her
designee's attendance.
 Continue to utilize the video-conferencing equipment in the Tecopa Community Center to access remote
services as appropriate.
Mental Health-General
 Increase use of trends data for decision-making with increased capability to monitor program use, capacity
and outcomes as well as other quality measures. Identify variables that improve or maintain positive
outcomes. Monitor Share Care system and support, making course correction as needed to ensure optimal
use of electronic healthcare record capability.
 Continue to evaluate most efficient & effective personnel strategy to meet community needs in a changing
environment.
 As part of our Health and Human Services Department, devise behavioral health strategies to meet the
challenges of AB 109, the transition to Department of Health Care Services, completion of transfer of
educationally-related mental health services and further integration with substance use disorder services
into primary health care.
 Plan and develop an integrated MHSA plan, incorporating all components.
 Increase involvement in statewide strategies in prevention and early intervention to result in improved
outcomes.
Child and Family Mental Health Services
 Implement an evidence-based anger management program for adolescents.
 Provide continued coordinated services as part of a system of care to best meet the needs of youth and
families within our community. Facilitate at least two youth social skills day camps. Continue active
involvement in the Wraparound strategy and other interventions in this endeavor.
 Increase the provision of family therapy services by at least 10% over this fiscal year to increase the
efficacy of services.
 Provide current level of weekly mental health services to Inyo County Juvenile Center, including training
to staff to ensure continuity of care and positive transitions into the community.
 Provide weekly access to mental health counseling to Tecopa area families using videoconferencing.
 Continue to operate at least 2 "friendship" groups for youth, aimed at improving behaviors and social skills.
 Provide case management services to 6 different school sites throughout the county each week.
Adult Mental Health Services: Clinic. Progress House and Wellness Centers
 Implement use of electronic notes at Progress House and complete Dr. First data input.
 Identify a pennanent wellness center site and identify ways to enhance integrated care.
 Provide Mental Health First Aid Training in at least three additional community settings.
 Evaluate and monitor Progress House capacity as part of adult system of care.
 Develop and implement monthly or bi-monthly consumer community involvement projects.
 Coordinate and collaborate with community organizations such as Methodist Social Services and Salvation
Army to identify strategies to increase natural community supports and identify gaps.
 Implement a Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT} strategy, an evidenced-based practice for adults.
Comply with State program requirements.
 Maintain a cost neutral program while implementing a newly approved fee structure.
 Employ current addiction treatment and education strategies for use in groups and share effective treatment
strategies across addiction services programs to enhance offerings.
 Continue to offer after hour group times to accommodate and support schedules of those who are
employed.
 Utilize ongoing satisfaction questionnaires in order to provide feedback to group facilitators.
 Continue to track sobriety in our Multiple Offender program.
Ensure uninterrupted services to seniors throughout the administrative transition from IMAAA to ESAAA.
 Identify ways to ensure the highest level of service, within the budgetary constraints, using needs
assessment information and utilization trends.
 Continue to implement and manage data within the new California Aging Reporting System (CARS) data
management system, which is required by the California Department of Aging in a manner that allows us to
be able to gather and compile data for reporting purposes for policy makers, the community and the State,
to ensure decision making is based on most accurate information available.
 Evaluate management, supervision, monitoring and service provision procedures for contracted services
and conduct monitoring in accordance with Title XXII, as well as the provisions of the Older Americans
Act.
 Continue to work to develop senior center computer access program to be linked to the main office for
more efficient tracking of services.
 Continue to actively address and monitor the corrective action items identified during the CDA monitoring
visit.
 Registered Dietitian to provide Farmers Market program for Inyo Seniors in Summer 2012, to promote
adherence to USDA guidelines of 5-9 servings of fruit and vegetables per day for better health.
Development of 5-year media plan. Create a long term plan that will help target key segments of our
population like business leaders and government officials with specially crafted messages to help
strengthen & sustain community commitment to early developmental services. Integrated into this plan
should be ongoing messages for the general public that highlight that early investment offers better
workers & citizens to our community, it saves money for our community government, and it helps children
fulfill the potential of their promise.
Continued investment in the Protective Factors Collaborative to leverage resources and save money, and
continue to find ways to cooperate so that we streamline services to children & families.
3) Build & backfill Access Databases to use our data to drive more of our decision making, targeting key
services needed for certain age groups in specific Inyo towns & communities.
4) Develop a strategic partnership with Inyo library services so that they are better equipped with books,
DVDs, and other tools to promote optimal parenting and early childhood development.
5) Develop a parental follow-up to CALI Kids, utilizing an evidence-based video series available in English &
Spanish, and offer a tricycle or bicycle with helmet as reward for completion of the class.
6) Find a host for a monthly fatherhood support group that will get dads engaged with an hour of learning &
an hour of play every month.
Implement and stay current with all new program requirements mandated by the State and Federal
governments.
 Maintain timely payments to care providers of foster children.
 Continue to review active cases to insure that all efforts to link eligibility to Federal regulations are applied.
 Increase the number of Wraparound families.
Continue to assist clients in developing the skills needed to enter or re-enter the workforce.
 Continue to assist clients in applying for Social Security and helping them through the appeals process.
 Continue to provide case management services and interventions necessary in maintaining a small caseload
while continuing to support the indigent residents of our county.
Ensure uninterrupted services to seniors throughout the administrative transition from IMAAA to LC.GOLD
and ESAAA.
Identify cost-effective ways to assist senior citizens to remain in their own homes as long as possible.
 Set up and maintain client data collection around needs and services in an effort to better inform future policy
decisions.
 Ensure congregate and home-delivered meals are planned and prepared consistent with those in the AAA
program, thus being approved by the Registered Dietitian for compliance with federal nutrition guidelines.
 Transition clients in this program to other state and federally funded programs, as appropriate, without
compromising client outcomes.
Increase access to dental care for children.
 Maintain an active and dynamic focus on childhood obesity and develop and promote strategies in
addressing the prevention and treatment of obesity among Inyo's children.
 Develop an understanding of the ongoing problem of women in Inyo County entering delayed prenatal care
which can result in poor pregnancy outcomes
 Develop an understanding of the incidence ofpreterrn births in Inyo County.
 Establish, maintain and recruit participation in the Inyo County Car Seat Program.
Public Assistance, Employment and Training
 Continue working on imaging all cases into the C!V system to achieve a paperless caseload and reduce
need for storage space for volumes of files.
 Continue MediCal and Food Stamp outreach, to identify families in need.
 Increase rate for federally-required client participation in work-related activities.
 Continue to identify needs & assist clients in developing the skills necessary in obtaining & retaining
employment.
 Expand case management and supportive services to obtain successful engagement of our hard-to-serve
CalWORKs population.
 Maintain compliance with State and Federal regulations.
 Continue work with local employers to identify barriers to workforce recruitment and retention.
 Restructure business processes to enhance customer service, efficiency and accuracy in processing
casework to promote teamwork and allow flexibility of staff assignments to meet departmental needs.
 Stay apprised of the development of the BrightSource energy project in south east county in an effort to
link participants into potential training programs and job opportunities.
Children's Services:
 Continue to provide quality child welfare services in order to ensure the health, well-being and safety of
children while striving to maintain the family unit by meeting the State & Federal requirements.
 Provide on-going support/problem-solving to caregivers with children placed in their homes in an effort to
promote stability for foster children.
 Continue to enhance the services available to foster children and former foster children through the
Independent Living Skills Program, as well as the THP-Plus program.
 Continue to provide a high level of placement services to CPS, Probation and Behavioral Health.
 Continue the Wraparound Program to reduce our group home placements for Child Welfare & Probation.
 Increase the number of children reunified with a parent within 12 months of their removal.
Licensing:
 Maintain or increase the capacity & quality of care provided in both foster family homes & family
childcare homes. Conduct recruitment activities in coordination with other agencies.
 Continue to provide training directly or fund training for foster parents to provide a higher professional
level of care for our foster children as well as to meet Title 22 Regulations of mandated training
requirements.
Child Abuse Prevention, Intervention and Treatment (CAP/Ti
 Coordinate child abuse prevention fund planning & child welfare system improvement planning processes.
 Implement the CAP!T funds based upon the County self-assessment to promote better outcomes for
families.
Adult Services
 Safely maintain at least four at-risk adults within their home community.
 Integrate services with IMAAA & other partners & identify options for cost efficiencies, as well as
increased outreach to homebound elders with complex issues of co-existing medical and mental health or
substance abuse.
 Work closely with the IHSS Registry to link clients to compatible providers to improve quality of services.
 Enhance the quality of Adult services by ensuring that all staff attend & complete all phases of the State
regulated IHSS training, as well as other available training on at-risk elderly and dependent adults. Disaster
Services.
Disaster Services
 Continue preparedness activities and trainings and ensure staff readiness for quick response in a disaster.
 Respond to emergency incidents under the provisions of the County Disaster Plan.
As part of Behavioral Health treatment/ intervention services:
 Provide a full array of addiction treatment to all ages to include assessment, group treatment, intensive case
management, psycho-education, and outreach as resources allow.
 Evidence increased integration of physical health, mental health and addiction treatment by the provision of
addiction treatment in a healthcare setting and the collection and monitoring of health data by addiction
counselors.
 As an active partner in ABl09, provide treatment services to persons within the community or jail settings.
Monitor outcomes, service utilization and cost.
 As a Drug-MediCal provider, appropriately bill for services to meet MediCal standards.
 As a result of participation in the perinatal program services at least 7 additional women will remain sober
for 6 months and provide the necessary support services through case management and referral sources to
assist clients to maintain sobriety and recovery during this period.
 Implement an electronic Healthcare record meeting privacy standards.
As part ofprevention services:
 Continue leadership and support for Youth Coalition in their efforts to educate their peers and the general
public on A TOD issues and to strengthen youth leadership and development.
 Continue work with BPD, ICSO, and the Eastern Sierra Tri- County Fair on changes in alcohol policy at
Fairgrounds.
 Continue education and recruitment of parents and other community members regarding underage drinking
issues and support for underage drinking prevention. Work with organizations, agencies, and groups for
social norm change in the areas of ATOD.
 Continued collaboration with Inyo County Superintendent of Schools office to provide technical assistance
to ICSOS to create prevention programs in schools that compliment HHS Prevention programs. Continue
and increase education and voluntary policy work with local school districts regarding alcohol and
marijuana use. Look for opportunities to talk with School Boards and administration regarding their
students use level.
 Continue creation/publication of prevention articles for monthly newspaper column.
 Facilitate better collaboration between local law enforcement, schools, courts, and probation to create
uniform practices when dealing with underage drinking, partying, driving, and other AOD issues.
 Conduct media campaign to target wide audience on a wide variety of topics related to underage drinking,
including the underage drinking at the Fair.
Continue to provide accurate and timely benefits to eligible families, following the federal and state laws
and regulations.
Fiscal year 2012-2013 represents the third year of a 3-year contract period covering 2010-2013. The plan
had four objectives: I) highlighting illegal sales of tobacco to minors and offering a possible solution, 2)
coordinating and collaborating with local middle school administration and teachers to facilitate a regular monthly
(or weekly) tobacco education lessons conducted as part of the students regular school day, 3) drafting a mission
statement and plan for reaching a wide and diverse population of Inyo County residents including different cultural
and socio-economic communities, and 4) coordinating and collaborating with local doctors and dentists to "ASK,
ADVISE, REFER" for their tobacco using patients. At the end of FY 2010-2011 and during the first months of FY
2011-2012, the objective regarding illegal sales of tobacco to minors was dropped and a new objective related to
secondhand smoke exposure in outdoor dining areas was created. All of the departmental goals for FY 2012-2013
have been written in the 2010-2013 plan approved by the Inyo County Board of Supervisors and the California
Department of Public Health, Tobacco Control Program.
 Continue leadership and support for Inyo County Youth Coalition in their efforts to educate their peers and
the general public on ATOD issues and to strengthen youth leadership and development.
 Continue to conduct evaluation activities related to objectives in the tobacco control plan, including final
evaluation reports.
 Continue coordination and collaboration with other agencies to promote prevention issues related to
ATOD.
 Work with organization, agencies, groups, and the community at large for social norm change in the areas
of ATOD.
 Coordinate and collaborate with other prevention programs to facilitate joint prevention efforts for targeted
populations and groups.
 Conduct face-to-face educational sessions with the owners and/or manager the thirty-seven (37) restaurants
with an outdoor dining areas regarding the benefits of smoke-free dining and possible adoption of smokefree
policy.
 Develop educational packets to be distributed during face-to face sessions at restaurants with outdoor
dining areas. Packets will include information regarding benefits of smoke-free dining, dangers of SHS
outdoors, and development and implementation of voluntary smoke-free policy. A model outdoor dining
policy will be included with the packet.
 Continue coordinated media campaign for two (2) objectives in the tobacco control plan.
 Finish presentations to middle school teachers and begin one-on-one technical assistance to teachers as
needed.
 Conduct Y, day training of Tobacco Use Prevention Curriculum at all middle school sites in lnyo County.
 Conduct training to all HHS staff on newest cultural competency/Low SES information and client tips.
Training will be conducted every year in order to build future capacity.
 Conduct follow-up visits to lnyo County doctors/dentist to provide more training or technical assistance in
utilizing the ASK, ADVlSE, REFER protocol and materials.
 Purchase 'no smoking' signage to provide to local businesses that voluntarily create a smoke-free outdoor
dining area.
 Conduct a detailed assessment of the Inyo County Retail Environment per the California Department of
Public Health, California Tobacco Control Program (CTCP) mandate and guidelines.
 Create a 'bridge year' tobacco control workplan for FY 2013-2014.
Conduct a 'Communities of Excellence' needs assessment in Winter 2013 in preparation for creating
objectives for the 2014-2017 Comprehensive Tobacco Control Workplan.
 Conduct an Inyo County Board of Supervisors workshop regarding the new direction CTCP has adopted
explaining how it minimizes the options Inyo County has related to objectives and goals for work in
Tobacco Control.
Continue active participation in Team Inyo for Healthy Kids workgroup by presenting action plan
developed from Cornell university course and continue participation in outreach events representing Team
Inyo for Healthy Kids.
 Continue to provide local WIC vendors (Vons, J & M Mini Market, Smart n Final, Carroll's Market) in
Inyo County with a local vendor liaison to communicate WIC program updates and policies to provide
excellent customer service to WIC participants.
 Train and implement second part of Baby Behavior Campaign to postpartum WIC participants. This series
will help prevent new moms from misinterpreting their baby's cues which can sometimes lead to
discontinuing breastfeeding and starting supplementation of formula.
 Provide on-going provision of Farmers Market program for Inyo WIC participants and IMAAA senior
program.
 Continued collaboration with Toiyabe WIC program, specifically in the area of breastfeeding promotion
and advertising by conducting monthly meetings for preparation of sixth annual Breastfeeding Awareness
walk.
 Provide outreach efforts to generate interests and follow through of potential WIC participants in
Southeastern Inyo County.
 Collaborate with Inyo County Dental Program to increase dental access for prenatal population .
Continue to perform outreach and expand services and involvement in southern Inyo County.
 Continue to maintain established involvement with the Employment Collaboration Group.
 Continue to develop new work experience sites throughout the County and support existing ones.
 Stay current on program regulations to ensure compliance with State and Federal regulations.
 Continue to monitor the needs of the program, the participants and the community in order to make
appropriate adjustments as needed.
 Coordinate with our Social Service programs, Probation, Child Support and other interested parties in our
efforts to ensure ongoing employment skills and training are available for our residents.
 Stay apprised of the development of the Bright Source energy project in Southeastern Inyo County in an
effort to link participants into potential training programs and job opportunities.
The Department's FY 2012-2013 Requested Budget represents an overall no change in expenditures, and
no change in revenues, when compared to the FY 2011-2012 Board Approved Budget. As a result, the Requested
Net County Cost has no change.
Personnel Costs are not applicable.
Continue outreach efforts and continue to provide services listed under accomplishments
 Celebrate the 20 I 3 centennial celebration of Cooperative Extension
 Recruit and hire a passionate and committed County Director/Advisor
 Support a third Master Gardener Training Class in early Spring, 2013, held in Bishop and also via distance
learning so that residents far from Bishop are able to participate.
 Develop localized gardening information to help residents achieve success gardening in our high-desert,
low-desert, and high-mountain climates.
 Provide instruction on food preservation.
 Increase the number of community garden partnerships.
 Continue to support and offer for the first time 4-H Military Club in Coleville
 Promote 4-H activities that focus on science, engineering and technology; healthy living; and citizenship.
Follow-up on any outstanding projects
 Hold at least one meeting for all lessees
 Coordinate with Board Clerk to advertise and fill vacant board positions.
Implementation and enforcement of new regulations, including the Aboveground Petroleum Storage Act,
the Groundwater Rule, the Enhanced Surface Water Treatment Regulations, swimming pool antientrapment
regulations, the landfill gas monitoring regulations, the transfat ban, the menu labeling
requirements, food handler certification regulations, graywater regulations, hazardous material businesses
electronic reporting regulations, continuing education requirements for REHS's, the new onsite septic
regulations (AB 885), ADA requirements for public pools & spas and the Safe Body Art Act
1' To work with Inyo Count)' Solid Waste Department and the LADWP in an effort to revise landfill permits
for the three active facilities in the Owens Valley (Bishop-Sunland, Independence & Lone Pine).
1' To continue the monitoring and regulatory activities of our existing programs. The resultant goal is a form
of consumer protection that can only be measured by the quality of living in Inyo County, i.e. the lack of
hazards, disease, and discomfort and the corresponding level of health and safety of the community.
1' To bring the EH Fee Schedule to the Board for its' five year review and discuss and implement any
changes and modifications. The existing fee ordinance allows for a 3% annual increase in fees.
1' To maintain good relationships with our county's residents, business owners and visitors by providing our
services in a thorough, timely and courteous manner and to make the best efforts in providing technical and
regulatory assistance as requested by our constituents.
Maintain a full staff of attorneys, investigators and support staff and hire another Deputy District Attorney
and Legal Secretary for the Independence office. This is necessary because most, if not all, Deputy District
Attorneys now work in the Bishop District Attorney's office. All cases are processed out of the Bishop
District Attorney's office due to the unavailability of support staff in Independence. The Independence
office has become a skeletal office at this time. We are unable to assist Commissioner Lee in Traffic Court
because we do not have an attorney available on Mondays. They are in Court in Bishop. We cannot
appear for arraignments on Wednesdays because of the lack of an attorney. They are too busy preparing of
evidentiary matters or are in trial or preparing for trial. The Court sets as many as (8) eight jury trials at the
same time. Preparation is time consuming even though (I) one case can go to trial.
 Another goal is to fully implement the realignment plan required by the State. This will become
challenging because the criminal mindset has changed from punishment to rehabilitation for certain nonviolent,
non- serious and non-sexual crimes. It is anticipated more defendants will decide to take their case
to trial knowing that if they lose they will not be going to prison and will receive County jail sentences.
 A perpetual goal is to continue to work with law enforcement and the community to ensure that the citizens
of Inyo County have a safe place to work and live.
Maintain a full staff of Criminal Investigators.
 Provide the highest level of professional law enforcement and investigative support services.
 Present accurate and timely investigations to support prosecutorial decisions which ensure continuing
public trust of the District Attorney's Office.
 Collaborative effort with local law enforcement agencies to support effective responses to crimes or
problems which impair the safety of quality of life for citizens of Inyo County.
Reduction in methamphetamine production and distribution.
 Reduction in the availability of illegal drugs locally.
 Reduction in illegal drugs related offenses.
 Reduction in hazardous waste sites associated with methamphetamine manufacturing.
 Reduction in medical responses associated with illegal drug abuse.
 Maintain grant funding for operation of the !NET Task Force.
Continue to provide training to California Highway Patrol, Bishop Police Department, Inyo County
Health & Human Services Department, Inyo County Probation, Inyo County Sheriff, Northern Inyo
Hospital, and Wild Iris.
 Continued involvement in the Inyo County Task Force subcommittee.
 Present at the Fall 201 I Domestic Violence Symposium.
 Services provision goals to 250 new victim clients and 750 continuing victims, 50 new witnesses, 6
presentations, and 6 trainings.
Expand services to the Unserved/Underserved Victims and Witnesses in the outlining areas and most
rural areas of Inyo County.
Expand services to the Unserved/Underserved Victims and Witnesses in the outlining areas and most rural
areas of Inyo County.
Continue to provide training to California Highway Patrol, Bishop Police Department, Inyo County Health
& Human Services Department, Inyo County Probation, Inyo County Sheriff, Northern Inyo Hospital, and
Wild Iris.



Participate in the planning and implementation of the 2013 Domestic Violence Symposium .
Services provision goals to 150 new victim clients and 500 continuing victims, 25 new witnesses, 6
presentations and 6 trainings.
Continued involvement in the Inyo County Task Force subcommittee.
Participate in the many of the Underserved populations outings and community functions.
Will continue to advocate for the Unserved/Underserved populations .
Expand services to the Unserved/Underserved Victims and Witnesses in the outlining areas and most rural
areas of Inyo County.
Continue to provide training to California Highway Patrol, Bishop Police Department, Inyo County Health
& Human Services Department, Inyo County Probation, Inyo County Sheriff, Northern Inyo Hospital, and
Wild Iris.
 Participate in the planning and implementation of the 2013 Domestic Violence Symposium.
 Services provision goals to 150 new victim clients and 500 continuing victims, 25 new witnesses, 6
presentations and 6 trainings.
 Continued involvement in the Inyo County Task Force subcommittee.
 Participate in the many of the Underserved populations outings and community functions.
 Will continue to advocate for the Unserved/Underserved populations.
The Office of County Counsel continues and will continue to provide high quality legal services and
representation to the County, its officers and employees in a timely and cost efficient manner. We continue to obtain
the best resolution possible for the County in litigation in which it is involved.
To implement the new fee schedule to establish, increase and decrease fees to more accurately reflect the
actual costs associated with certain services, contingent upon Board approval.
 To implement a program to perform civil marriage ceremonies in the County Clerk-Recorder Department.
 To complete the inventory of all records in the County Clerk-Recorder Department.
To conduct the November 6, 2012 General Election. This election includes the party-nominated offices of
President and Vice-President of the United States, run-off elections for Voter-Nominated, run-off elections
for supervisorial offices, School Districts, Hospital Districts, Inyo-Mono Resource Conservation District,
City of Bishop Council seats and statewide and local measures/propositions.
 Utilize the Student Poll Worker Program that was developed in FY 2011-2012. A few select students who
earn the privilege in a competitive process to participate as poll workers on Election Day will have the
educational opportunity to learn about government first hand.
To complete the Back-file Redaction Project. This project will consist of redacting digital images
from 1980-1995 to comply with state law.
 To complete the Official Records Preservation Project which includes restoration, preservation,
microfilming and digitally scanning of two Official Record books and 20 recorded maps.
 To compile and produce the 2011-2012 County Recorders Association of California (CRAC)
Statistical Report. All costs associated with producing this report are reimbursed from CRAC.
Continue to provide an efficiently run Coroner's Office at a minimal charge to the County.
Adopt a balanced budget within the constraints of funding reductions as a result of the State Budget.
 Continue the maintain core services at current levels.
 Manage the County's budget to maintain existing service levels.
 Hire a new Public Works Director
 Continue to develop a new governance structure for the regional Area Agency on Aging.
 Continue to support and strengthen the IR WMP process.
 Remain active in protecting local land use authority and limiting any further restrictions on public access to
public lands.
 Continued to participate in the Desert Renewable Energy conservation Plan (DRECP).
 Continue to work with the Sierra Nevada Conservancy regarding ownership of the Mt. Whitney Fish
Hatchery.
 Continue with the implementation of AB 109 to restructure local incarceration requirements.
 Continue efforts to evaluate the replacement of existing leased office space in the Bishop area with a
County owned facility through an innovative public/private lease/buyout partnership.
 Continue to identify the impacts to the County associated with the Hidden Hills Solar Energy Generation
Plant and seek mitigation through the California Energy Commission, the pennining authority of these
types of operations in California.
 Continue to assert the County's right for fonnal coordination with federal agencies.
 Continue to seek full payment of PlL T and full reimbursement for State and federally mandated programs.
 Continue efforts to develop a strategy to address the justice system in Inyo County, including reconciling
the disparity between the County being required to pay for public defender costs without the authority to
control the costs.
 Remain involved at the executive level with CSAC and RCRC on those issues that affect our County and
State.
 Continue to participate on a limited basis with NACo and Quad State Local Government Authority.
Continue to meet all State, Federal and other reporting and financial deadlines.
- Complete the process of updating the Propeny Tax software in conjunction with the Treasurer/Tax
Collector, the Assessor and Information Services.
- Continue to provide service and training to other departments and the public.
Continue to use this fund in accordance with County Policy by using it to make loans to other funds and to
use for unexpected decreases in revenue and/or increases in expenditures that cannot be absorbed within existing
Budgets. This reserve is to be used before using General Reserves and requires a 415"' vote of the Board of
Supervisors.
To continue to have this fund accrue interest.
Continue to serve your Board, County departments, and the public by providing a level of service
and satisfaction that exceeds the County's fiscal and staffing capacities.
 Continue to monitor the County Budget, and make recommendations to ensure ongoing fiscal
solvency in the face of increasing fiscal challenges.
 Examine departmental organization and staffing opportunities, with the objective of improving the
delivery of services and improving efficiencies while achieving long-term savings, personnel cost
neutrality.
 Implement the results of the employee Classification and Compensation Study.
 Complete labor contract negotiations with the LEAA, DSA, and ICPOA, and commence labor
negotiations with the Inyo County Employees Association (!CEA) and Elected Officials Assistants
Association (EOAA).
 Convene a 'solutions group' with interested County staff to explore ways in which the County and
employee bargaining units can work together to explore opportunities to maintain, enhance or
modify health insurance benefits with the goal of making health insurance costs more manageable
and predictable for all employees and the County.
 Develop a paid student-intern program in support of the Superintendent of Schools' ROP
accounting program, as well as other opportunities to provide local high school and college
student with work experience while benefitting County departments.
 Reinstate an employee recognition program.
 Work with your Board to successfully complete recruitment of key senior management positions
within the County including the Public Works Director and two vacant Deputy CAO positions.
 Work with the Assistant Clerk of the Board and Information Services in transitioning to an
automated agenda process for Board of Supervisors meetings, including reviewing and revamping
the agenda request submittal and approval process to extend timelines, improve the quality
communication of information to the Board of Supervisors and the public, and foster greater
collaboration between departments.
 Continue to work with developers and department heads to develop and evaluate conceptual plans
for the Consolidated Office Building project; coordinate public workshops regarding the project;
and, present the final conceptual plans to the Board of Supervisors for non-binding approval
consideration. If the conceptual plans receive non-binding approval, negotiate final project
documents for consideration by the Board of Supervisors.
 Continue to work with County Counsel and the Water department to proactively address waterrelated
issues and opportunities.
 Support Water department staff as requested or necessary in coordinating and completing Phase II
of the LORP Recreational Use Plan.
 Initiate negotiations with LADWP for a new Eastern Sierra Regional Airport lease complimentary
to the County's new airport easement.
 Complete mutually-desired modifications to the MOU between County of Inyo and Inyo County
Superior Court.
Issue Request For Proposal for Film Commissioner services, and amend County Film Permit
Ordinance.
 Further implement the County's Real Property Management Policy, beginning with a request from
the Big Pine Fire Department for the County to sell it the former Big Pine Library site and making
County-owned land in Independence available to the AOC for a new Independence courthouse.
Resolve land transfer issues with the Lone Pine Museum of Film History, and explore other
opportunities to productively use County-owned land.
 Continue to monitor and advise the Board of Supervisors, and worked with County departments,
on budget, policy and implementation issues related to Criminal Justice Realignment.
 Continue to represent County interests relative to mounting renewable energy facility development
pressures led, but no longer limited to impacts of the Hidden Hills Solar Electric Generating
System Project.
 Continue to assist Health and Human Services and the Board of Supervisors in serving the
County's seniors through the Eastern Sierra Area Agency on Aging (ESAAA) and Inyo County
Growing Older Living with Dignity (IC GOLD) programs.
 To the extent adequate funding exists, develop and sponsor community-specific, downtown revitalization
and economic development programs for Independence, Lone Pine, Big Pine and,
possibly, North Bishop.
 Continue to work with the Friends of Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery, the California Department of
Fish and Game, and the Sierra Nevada Conservancy regarding issues associated with the longterm
disposition and development of the hatchery.
 Identify and pursue opportunities to fund the LORP River Center Project in Independence.
 Work with Public Works department staff to further evaluate the feasibility and interest in
establishing limited commercial air service at the Eastern Sierra Regional Airport, and/or
providing inclement weather landing options for the Mammoth-Yosemite Airport.
 As time and resources permit, explore opportunities for inter-agency and regional partnerships to
maintain or enhance County services, including the possible creation of regional economic
development frameworks and initiatives.
 Further explore and implement the host of opportunities and initiatives to create long-term savings
for the County while meeting immediate capital and fiscal needs; including restructuring health
and retirement benefit obligations; pursuing photovoltaic energy systems on County buildings;
consolidating county offices; building new County facilities (such as a new Animal Shelter and
Agricultural department warehouse); and implementing energy efficiency initiatives.
 Goals contained in other budget narratives overseen by this Office; other opportunities forgotten;
or, that may arise.
With assistance from the County's real estate economist and County Counsel, continue to work
with developers and department heads to develop and evaluate conceptual plans for the
Consolidated Office Building project; coordinate public workshops regarding the project; and,
present the final conceptual plans to the Board of Supervisors for non-binding approval
consideration. If the conceptual plans receive non-binding approval, negotiate final project
documents for consideration by the Board of Supervisors.
 Work with Public Works to hire a consultant and develop, at a minimum, a draft application for
Part 139 certification as the next step in assessing industry, community and regulatory agency
interest in limited commercial air service at the Eastern Sierra Regional Airport.
 Continue to work with the Friends of Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery and Sierra Nevada
Conservancy - engaging the County's real estate economist as necessary-to implement the action
plan developed to evaluate to the transition of Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery from California
Department of Fish and Game ownership to the Sierra Nevada Conservancy and, ultimately, to a
third party such as the Friends of Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery, Inyo County, or another private
or non-profit entity.
 Continue to evaluate photovoltaic energy generation opportunities at County facilities in
Independence, including financing options and re-examining project development and
implementation strategies. If necessary, re-submit applications for rebate applications to offset the
cost of installing the arrays.
 Pursue requests from the Big Pine Fire District, Administrative Office of the Courts, and Lone
Pine Museum of Film History for the County to divest itself of property, in favor of these entities,
in Big Pine, Independence, and Lone Pine, respectively.
Complete the bid process for items that remain to be acquired
 Implement the remaining technology (computers, intelligent white-board and audio-visual equipment) in the Bishop
EOC facility
 Implement the remaining technology (computers and audio-visual equipment) in the Independence EOC
 Implement the remaining technology (computers, printers, intelligent white-board and audio-visual equipment) in
the Independence Jail facility
Complete a technical refresh of 100 of County end-user computers
 Complete a technical refresh of 25% of the core computing infrastructure including, application servers,
storage servers, data backup systems and network switching equipment
Continue to meet core needs of patrons in a challenging fiscal environment.
 Implement resource sharing, utilizing an affordable model.
 Provide the Board of Supervisors with quarterly updates regarding the status of Library automation efforts.
 Examine movement of books and staff among branches to achieve greater costs savings.
 Improve and update website.
 Encourage library staff to access courses in library science.
 Prepare a plan for the expansion of the Lone Pine Library.
 Continue system-wide inventory and retrospective conversion of the Library's records.
 Continue to evaluate branch library collections by subject area for improvement, and add new materials.
 Continue digitization of unique and fragile items for preservation and a future digital library.
Reduce expenses while maintaining a satisfactory level of service.
 Continue working with the Council of California County Law Librarians to locate new sources of revenue.
 Work with the local Court and legal community to coordinate public legal reference and assistance.
Continue to make emergency management enhancements a focal point for the County's emerging
Integrated Geographic Information System.
 Work with Information Services to finalize the EOC enhancements funded through Congressman
McKeon's federal appropriation.
 Continue to partner with Health and Human Services and other agencies to create and conduct
multi-agency emergency exercises requiring interoperability between agencies using "real time"
direct communications.
 Coordinate exercises with volunteer groups that will be utilized in emergencies (e.g. Hamm Radio
Club, Search and Rescue, Fire Departments, Salvation Army, etc.).
 Continue to seek grant opportunities to fund the costs of emergency equipment and supplies,
training, and exercise development.
 Increase coordination of effort between CAO and Sherill's Office staff with respect to program
administration between emergencies.
 Continue to conduct quarterly Unified Command meetings to strengthen multi-agency information
sharing and collaboration.
 Print and distribute the revised EOP and Emergency Field Operation Guides to all designated
recipients.
 Continue to assist the Public Works department in finalizing the installation of the NOAA
Weather Transmitter, and provide administrative support in closing out the USDA-Rural
Development Grant.
 Continue to send Inyo County management personnel to the CalEMA's California Specialized
Training Institute for specified emergency management training courses.
 Assist in finalizing the conversion of all County radios and repeaters to the mandatory narrow
band level.
Maintain a reasonable level of service commensurate with the County's fiscal and staff
constraints.
 Continue to pursue and maximize economic development opportunities associated with renewable
energy projects while ensuring such projects do not negatively impact County services and
programs.
 To the extent adequate funding exists, develop and sponsor community-specific, downtown revitalization
and economic development programs for Independence, Lone Pine, Big Pine and,
possibly, North Bishop.
 Support Water department staff developing Phase II of the LORP Recreational Use Plan.
 Continue to work with the Friends of Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery, the California Department of
Fish and Game, and the Sierra Nevada Conservancy regarding issues associated with the longterm
disposition and development of the hatchery.
 Identify and pursue opportunities to fund the LORP River Center Project in Indpendence.
 Work with Public Works department staff to further evaluate the feasibility and interest in
establishing limited commercial air service at the Eastern Sierra Regional Airport, and/or
providing inclement weather landing options for the Mammoth-Yosemite Airport.
 Continue to support the Digital 395 project, and identify opportunities to leverage the project for
long-term economic development.
 Revise the County's Film Ordinance to create a film permit and associated fee schedule.
 Through a Request For Proposals process, evaluate the current administration and support of the
Inyo County Film Commissioner.
 As time permits, develop Request For Proposals for specific manufacturing uses on County-owned
land consistent with the County's Real Property Management Policy.
 As time permits, explore the possible creation ofregional economic development frameworks and
initiatives.
 Continue to maintain strategic partnerships and alliances with key organizations and individuals,
and undertake projects to foster economic development opportunities in Inyo County.
Avoid being visited by events requiring expenditure from this budget unit, or contributing
additional revenue to this fund.
Continue to utilize these funds to enhance and protect the fishing and wildlife resources that are so very
vital to Inyo County. Additionally work with the Advisory Commission to monitor the revenues in this budget in
order to maintain its availability provide funds to enhance project opportunities.
Continue the enhancement of the Inyo County Integrated GIS Project. The remainder of the 2009
Grant funds will be used to hire a contractor to provide large scale GIS training to Inyo County
staff.
Continue to extend the GIS resources and tools developed over the past two years by procuring
essential GIS enhancements. The balance of the 2010 HSGP funds will be used to train staff on
the GIS equipment to fully maximize the GIS capabilities by empowering Emergency Response
personnel with the knowledge necessary to utilize the GIS system.
The 2011 HSGP objectives are To address and enhance: interoperable communications;
catastrophic planning; medical surge capabilities; citizen preparedness and participation; mass prophylaxis;
critical infrastructure protection; training for first responders; and, food and agricultural safety. To meet
these objectives, 2011 HSGP grant funds will be used to:
 Extend the County's Geographic Information System (GIS) resources and tools, developed over
the past two years, by procuring essential GIS enhancements.
 Meet Inyo County's need for an updated accurate and complete address point datasets to achieve
necessary GIS mapping accuracies.
Because of the urgency to move forward with this next phase of the County GIS project, and
because of the large geographical size of Inyo County and the shortage of GJS-trained County
staff, grant funds will be used to contract with a qualified firm to provide the GJS address points
for the system. Inyo County Emergency Responders will benefit greatly from this phase of the
GIS project through the creation of spatially accurate addresses accessible in GIS.
 Grant funds will also be used to send County staff to the annual ESRI GIS User Conference and
ESRI Homeland Security GJS Security Summit.
 During FY 2012-2013, grant funds will again fund the annual Reverse 911 Emergency Response
System database lease.
 The Sheriff's Office will send another staff member to Terrorism Liaison Officer (TLO) training.
Inyo County's 2012 HSGP allocation from the State is $64,160. This represents a 36% reduction
in funding from last year's allocation. And, the 2011 Homeland Security Grant allocation was reduced by
27% compared to the $190,745 the County received in 2005. Overall, the County now receives 66% less
from the State for the Homeland Security Grant Program compared to its original allocations.
The County has used HSGP funds to make great strides towards improving the GJS capabilities
and technical compatibility with other local emergency response agencies. Unfortunately, with the
reduction of revenue from the State, the County will be limited in purchasing any additional GJS
equipment.
 A large portion of the 2012 HSGP funds will be used to continue the enhancement and
maintenance of the current GJS database by renewing the ESRl software license agreement. This
will enable local agencies to continue to utilize the geodatabase for individual mapping purposes.
The current software license agreement will be expiring in March 2014, so a portion of the 2012
HSGP funds are going to be set aside to fund a portion of the cost (it is anticipated that the 2013
HSGP funds will pay for the remaining balance) of renewing of the license agreement for another
three-year term, through 2017.
 Funds will also be used to purchase the annual Reverse 911 Emergency Response System
database lease as well as continue to support GIS training by sending County staff to the annual
ESRI GJS User Conference and the ESRI Homeland Security GIS Security Summit.
Improve service to lnfonnation Services customers .
 Continue focus on high quality effort and consistent approaches to solutions
 Education/training on new technologies employed at the County
 Establish and publish fonnal policies and procedures
 Evaluate organizational structure of the division
 Complete or further the following technology related projects:
 Implement Agenda automation system
 Equip and configure three Emergency Operation Centers
 Expand capability of enterprise Geographical lnfonnation System
 Re-design and implement new County Inter/Intranet web site
 Implement a Voice over Internet Protocol commwiications system
 Upgrade desktop operating systems to Windows 7
 Continue analysis of computing environment security and continue implementation of security measures
 Issue and evaluate proposals for Countywide photocopying solutions
 Issue and evaluate proposals for County mail metering equipment and services
 Evaluate landline telephone service for the County
 Pursue improvements for broadband and telecommwiications access throughout the county .
 Continue support of Digital 395 Initiative
 Document capabilities and needs throughout the county
 Work with telecommunication vendors to fulfill needs identified
Complete the Sheriff's Gun Range Project
 Once the Sheriff's Gun Range project is completed work with CalEMA to close the Inyo Complex Fire
Emergency.
To continue to coordinate with third party administrator, outside legal counsel, and outside investigators on
workers' compensation claims, to conduct training for employees, and to sit on the Underwriting Committee and
Board of Directors of the CSAC Excess Insurance Authority.
Continue aggressive recruitment for all vacant positions.
 Provide employee supervision and performance evaluation training to all supervisory
employees.
 Complete new Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Inyo County Probation
Officers Association, Inyo County Correctional Officers Association, Deputy Sheriffs
Associations and Inyo County Employees Association (!CEA)
 Continue to provide a high level of services to employees and the public, and examine
opportunities to enhance efficiencies and expand services.
 Work with Information Services to streamline recruitment processes and make
department information available to employees and the public via the intranet and
internet.
 Training to employees on County Personnel Rules and Procedures and Policies.
 Continue to provide a high level of services to employees and the public.
 Implement the Countywide equity adjustments for affected positions.
Motor Pool plans to replace approximately twelve (12) vehicles for FY 2012-2013, due to high mileage and
replacement criteria being met.
 Increase fuel efficiency by purchasing the most fuel-efficient vehicles meeting County specifications.
 Install lighting at the Third Street Yard to guide employees in the dark and to deter thieves.
 Continue to surplus vehicles and equipment that have high mileage and meet the replacement criteria, and
offer the vehicles and equipment to the public through the sealed bid and public auction processes.
 Encourage County employees to utilize CFN fuel stations located in the unincorporated areas of the County
whenever possible for tax revenue purposes.
 Motor Pool will inspect each Motor Pool vehicle returned.
 Develop process to enhance adherence to vehicle maintenance schedules by staff with assigned vehicles.
 Evaluate maintenance and fee schedule for realistic replacement costs.
Motor Pool plans to replace fourteen (14) vehicles for FY 2011-2012 per the attached Motor Pool replacement
schedule at an estimated cost of$350,000.
 Jncrease fuel efficiency by purchasing the most fuel-efficient vehicles that meet County specifications.
 Continue to surplus vehicles and equipment that have high mileage and meet the replacement criteria and
offer the vehicles and equipment through the sealed bid and public auction process.
Information provided by the District Attorney's office suggests that the appeals process is moving
forward in the LaPlat murder case, and it is possible that professional services expenditures will begin to
accrue this fiscal year.
Maintain the highest possible level of service for visitors and researchers, commensurate with the County's
fiscal constraints.
 Work with the County Administrative Officer to hold a design competition for two Museum signs along
U.S. 395 on both ends oflndependence. Work with the Public Works Department to craft a bid proposal for
construction and installation of the highway "monument" signs, using the $50,400 Caltrans provided the
county for the signs.
 Install a computer that the public can use to view the Virtual Transportation Museum site, the Museum's
website, and the Museum's digital photo galleries (the computer would not provide access to the Internet).
 Install an exhibit showcasing commemorating the I OO!h Anniversary of the Los Angeles Aqueduct and
create relevant educational programs and events to compliment the exhibit. Collaborate with the Los
Angeles Department of Water and Power and other groups, locally and regionally, that are also celebrating
the Aqueduct's I OO!h anniversary.
 Create a Volunteer Program, based on current Inyo County volunteer guidelines, forms and policies, that
allows enthusiastic and knowledgeable volunteers to play a larger role in the operation of the museum,
creation of exhibits, maintenance of structures, and documenting collections and artifacts.
 Complete the Jane Bright Memorial Rock and Mineral Garden on the museum grounds.
 Continue to refine the "Anna and OK Kelley Gallery of Native American Life," which holds the Museum's
renowned exhibit of more than 400 Paiute-Shoshone baskets and other artifacts.
 Continue to expand the Museum's educational programs and presentations with guest speakers, slide
shows, and field trips throughout the year.
 Develop and sell a 2013 Eastern California Museum Calendar.
Remain fully engaged in the California Energy Commission certification process for the HHSEGS
project.
 Continue to support implementation of the County's Renewable Energy Development Ordinance.
 Ensure that the impacts of renewable energy projects on the County are fully mitigated and the
potential benefits from such projects are fully realized.
 Work with the Planning department, County Counsel, special counsel, socio-economic consultants
and other appropriate County departments to process a General Plan Amendment and Zoning
Reclassification for the HHSEGS project.
 Examine other initiatives that could be supported by this budget unit, including funding staff to
facilitate natural resource development issues, including: federal land use coordination, renewable
energy facility siting, and other resource-driven economic opportunities.
 Participate as a sponsor the Southern California Energy Summit 2012. The summit will focus on
renewable energy opportunities and issues throughout the State, and provide an opportunity to
develop partnerships to address these issues and opportunities with other local government
representatives while engaging State and Federal leaders on policy issues.
Repair the Millpond Recreation Park restroom
 Repair two foot bridges at Lone Pine Park
 Research credit card self-pay stations at campgrounds, and develop a pilot project
 Repair entrance restroom at Pleasant Valley
 Purchase new nets for the Millpond Tennis Courts
 Research best way to resurface Millpond Tennis Courts
 Evaluate Frisbee Golf course for Millpond Recreation Area
 Install a fence around the Millpond pump house
 Continue to evaluate Championship Bocce Ball courts at the Millpond Recreation Area, based upon
monitoring of the Bishop League
 Conduct tree trimming around the pond at Millpond Recreation Area and Tinnemaha Campground
 Replace small tools that were stolen from Lone Pine shop
 Replenish woodchips at Mendenhall Park play area
 Refurbish the Gazebo at Lone Pine Park
Support Public Works and County Counsel in resolving outstanding payment issues with project contractor.
 Evaluate Lagoon performance, and make additional improvements as necessary.
Continue the provision of mandated legal defense services.
 Continue to explore ways to minimize the County's public defender costs.
 Evaluate the functionality of the new four (4) contract arrangement for public defender services
and, if necessary, add a fifth, half-time contract.
 Engage in a continuous recruitment of contract public defenders to fill expected, unexpected
contract vacancies and ensure more cooperative contractors.
 Resume efforts to work with the judicial system - District Attorney, Courts, Public Defender, and
Sheriff - to identify and explore ways to reduce costs and improve the administration of justice in
Inyo County.
 Explore means to recover public defender costs from the less-than-indigent clientele that avail
themselves to these 'free' services.
Continue to provide loss prevention and loss control activities; work with departments to comply with
Federal and State statutes and regulations; coordinate and provide training for employees; work with departments in
policy development and implementation; continue to manage workers compensation and liability claims; and
administer insurance programs.
To continue to conduct investigations, analyze exposures, administer Claims against the County, work with
department heads and employees to minimize exposure to the County, and coordinate with outside legal counsel in
litigation against the County.
Continue to coordinate with Behavioral Health, Public Health, Sheriff and Probation staff on correctional
care Risk Management issues and quality assurance.
Accomplish Permit revisions of the recently acquired five (5) year Solid Waste Facility Permits
 Conduct Regional Council of Rural Counties ESJPA Household Hazardous Waste employee training.
 Operate new roll-off transfer/dump truck and perform Big Pine transfer station pick-up/delivery
operations. This will save approximately $5,000 per month in services contract costs.
 Reduce consultant contract costs by performing more compliance tasks in-house utilizing existing
!WM staff and Managing Landfill Engineer.
 Implement the countywide AB 341 CalRecycle State mandated "Mandatory Commercial Recycling"
(MCR) program.
 Re-evaluate the installation of truck/vehicle load scale at the Bishop-Sunland Landfill. Prepare cost
estimate and site plan for the installation. Once installed, begin test study on waste tonnages/fees
received.
 Continue the diesel particulate filter installation program for the On & Off-Road equipment.
Solicit applications for two rounds of grants for the FY 2012-2013 Community Project Sponsorship Grant
Program. The first round will fund fall activities and events occurring through November, 2012, and the
second round will fund events and activities during the rest of the fiscal year. Applications for both rounds
will be reviewed and ranked by a citizen panel, and a funding recommendation provided to your Board.
Administer and manage all FY 2012-2013 grant agreements and process payment requests.
 Work with the Board of Supervisors to review and, as directed, revise CSGP grant evaluation and award
criteria.
 Develop and issue a Request For Proposals (RFP) for Film Commissioner services.
 Continue work to amend the County's Film Ordinance to create a fihn permit and associated fee schedule.
 Evaluate development of a specific County-sponsored program to promote fishing in Inyo County,
including possible sources of funding.
 Execute and administer a short-term contract with Poimiroo and Partners for the Fall Color Publicity
Campaign, and continue to work with chambers of commerce and local businesses to identify publicity and
public relations opportunities.
 Staff will continue to respond to CTTC requests for information for press releases, story queries, photos,
and other publicity related to Inyo County, Death Valley and the Eastern Sierra.
 Conduct a $35,000 marketing campaign using media targeting the demographic and user groups most likely
to visit Inyo County.
 Continue to represent Inyo County on the National Geographic Sierra Nevada Geotourism Project, to help
the project and program grow, reach more potential visitors, and become financially self-sustaining.
 Evaluate opportunities for collaboration on regional marketing or promotional efforts with the County's
chambers of commerce, Mono County and other promotional groups.
 Continue to maintain and upgrade theothersideofcalifornia.com website and respond to information
requests from potential visitors.
 Continue efforts to clarify and secure ownership of the theothersideofcalifornia.com domain name.
Continue to provide funding to support social, cultural, recreational and performing arts
organizations, as well as area services agencies, all of which make significant
contributions to Inyo County.
 Efficiently prepare and administer County contracts with GIS recipients consistent with
County requirements that include verification of insurance coverage and being current on
all tax assessments.
 Identify ways to streamline the application and contracting processes for both staff and
applicants.