 Continued progress on revising Water Agreement vegetation monitoring programs
 Work for compliance with Sustainable Groundwater Management Act, including coordinating with entities in
Mono County and Indian Wells Valley to prepare to meet mandated timelines and requirements.
 Respond to and mitigate for drought-induced water shortages
 Continue conservative management and monitoring of groundwater in Owens Valley
 Continue to treat and monitor saltcedar in the Owens Valley
 Work with Cal Fire to burn saltcedar slash piles
 Continue Education as a Veterans Claim Representative to provide better job of advocacy and claims work
 Continue having a close working relationship with other county/government agencies
 Continue outreach efforts outreach by providing booths/ID cards at Fairs, Posts as needed
 Continue Coordinating transportation to VA Medical Centers
 Continue process of becoming completely automated by scanning and uploading claims directly into the VA
system
 To reimburse local Sheriff and other law enforcement agencies including probation for collection of DNA
specimens, samples and print impressions; for expenditures/administration costs incurred to comply with
Penal Code section 298(b)(5).
 Purchase 1 new Livescan machine for the Records Division of the Sheriff's Office.
 Purchase 1 mobile fingerprint device for the Probation department.
 Purchase 1 in car camera for the District Attorney's Office.
 Purchase 15 in car cameras for the Bishop Police Department.
 Maintain the maintenance agreements for 3 Livescan machines located at the Jail Facility and the Bishop
Police department.
 Update the Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance. Bring the Code into compliance with changes to California
Code.
 Continue to upgrade equipment (car cameras, personal cameras, emergency equipment), Maintain and
monitor the Sheriff's Office web site, Maintain, test, educate and familiarize the public with the CODE-RED
emergency notification system, Stay connected to State Vine Program (Victim Information Notification
Everyday), Continue to coordinate the multi-agency Unified Command meetings
 Increase investigation needs by combining County wide Investigators into MINT (Major Investigations &
Narcotics Team). Continue training investigators in investigation of Missing and Exploited Children using
available Federal Funds
 Staff OES and Homeland Security positions to meet the increasing demands by the State and Federal
Government Grants. Train other agencies / Departments in Emergency Services and Inoperable
Communications. Maintain, test, educate and familiarize the public with the CODE-RED emergency
notification system
 Increase the level of community support we continue to enjoy by providing the public services within our
scope of responsibility and availability, maintain the outstanding relationships developed with the Board and
other County entities that allow for better public services through cooperation. Continue the program to
make Search and Rescue available to meet any rescue need in the County, and assistance elsewhere when
requested, through improved equipment and training and volunteer recruitment
 Continue maintenance and certification for our Explosive Detection K-9 program
 To complete staffing requirements with the filling of the Animal Services Supervisor position and the hiring
of an Animal Shelter Attendant.
 Ensure rabies vaccination compliance with an emphasis on license enforcement.
 Promote the Animal Services Division and the Shelter as being a part of the Inyo County Sheriff's Office.
Publicize the Inyo County Sheriff's Animal Shelter through media contacts and promote the services that are
provided by the Shelter.
 Continue with our efforts to ensure that the public is served as promptly and as efficiently as possible.
 Maintain a supportive affiliation with the local rescue and support groups and assist their efforts with off-site
adoption events.
 Fill all existing vacancies in the correctional officer ranks.
 Meet annually STC training requirements with little to no outside training.
 Increase number of inmate programs provided.
 Increase collaboration with Re-entry Coordinator
 Implement 4019.4 policy to provide program credits.
 Continue the maintenance and service contract with Sun Ridge Systems
 Further expand inmate programs in the jail.
 Implement CPC 4019.4 policy.
 Update inmate rulebook and custody manual.
 Continue to train our staff in-house to minimize costs.
 Reopen Court MOU discussions with the Superior Court.
 Continue maintenance and service contract with American Security Systems.
 Our goal is to meet or exceed all regulatory mandates by STC and receive notification of compliance
 Attain full staffing levels.
 Achieve 100 percent compliance with STC training requirements this fiscal year.
 Provide nutritious meals for inmates in both the Jail and Juvenile Hall
 Maintain staffing level up to allocated strength. Emphasis on training for Deputies as experienced Deputies
have retired and have been replaced by entry level or minimum experienced personnel. Continue to look for
grant funding for additional personnel, training, and equipment
 Maintain the grant funded OHV program in preparation for the new "Adventure Trail" off road program,
which has been approved but is pending litigation
 Continue the level of community support we enjoy by providing the public services within our scope of
responsibility and availability. Maintain the outstanding relationships developed with the Board and other
County entities that allow for better public services through cooperation
 Continue the program to make Search and Rescue available to meet any rescue need in the County, and
assistance elsewhere when requested, through improved equipment and training
 Continue to reorganize Sheriff's Department Administration to provide more efficiency, better supervision
and more cost effectiveness. Start and maintain narcotic detection / tracking K-9 program
 Reduction in methamphetamine production and distribution, and availability of methamphetamine locally.
 Reduction in methamphetamine related offenses.
 Reduction in hazardous waste sites and physical property damage associated with methamphetamine
manufacturing.
 Reduction in medical responses associated with methamphetamine abuse.
 Support the INET daily operations including but not limited to office expenses, and training.
 Locate and eradicate marijuana cultivation sites throughout the county
 Identify and apprehend all persons responsible for the cultivation sites.
 Reduce marijuana production and distribution.
 Reduce the hazardous waste associated with marijuana cultivation.
 Maintain grant funding for operation of the INET Task Force.
 Continue off road patrol
 Provide ongoing maintenance to all OHV Detail equipment
 Train staff in any applicable updates to OHV regulations
 Be equipped to provide valuable information and education to the public
 Provide ongoing maintenance throughout the County
 Evaluate efficiency and effectiveness of Road Department Operations.
 Complete Construction of Ed Powers Rd Bicycle Lane Project
 Complete construction of DEHY park restoration project
 Complete South Bishop/Sunland Drive construction project
 Complete design of Carroll and Walker Creek Bridges
 Assist with Whitney Portal FLAP project
 Flesh out additional service redesign intiatives
 Continue to provide engineering support for various enterprise functions
 Continue to provide technical, administrative and fiscal support for all Public Works Department Operations
 Administer District and ensure that lighting fixtures are maintained.
 Replace lights as needed.
 Continue to operate and maintain airport facilities
 Continue to prepare projects for Terminal area and other minor improvements.
 Continue to attempt to secure funding for future AIP projects.
 Complete and Adopt Airport Layout Plan and Narrative
 Complete Comprehensive Lighting and Signage Project
 Award Crack Seal and Marking Project
 Award Terminal Security Fencing Project
 Continue meetings with local, regional, and Federal partners regarding future uses of the Bishop Airport
 Continue support to the Bishop Airport Operations.
 Develop back up inspection capabilities
 Provide Certificated Building Official
 Obtain agreement with the Forest Service for sewer plant fees
 Continue to provide administrative support for district
 Administer O&M contract for preventive maintenance
 Jail HVAC Upgrade
 Annex Boiler Replacement
 Big Pine Town Hall Roof
 Jail Sprinkler Replacement
 Various HVAC/Cooler Replacements
 Complete Construction
 Continue to maintain the airport at its current level including weed abatement (spraying) and runway edge
lighting
 Provide resources and other support for Airport Improvement Projects
 Secure grants to utilize remaining entitlement monies.
 Provide financial relief to Independence Operating Budget
 Administer District and ensure that lighting fixtures are maintained.
 Replace lights as needed.
 Begin building oprational database
 Ensure contract operator provides accurate on-time billings
 Develop preventative maintenance and replacement program
 Develop a prioritized list of necessary repairs/improvements
 Begin building operational database
 Ensure contract operator provides accurate on-time billings
 Develop preventative maintenance and replacement program
 Refine airport operations
 Increase both fuel and rental revenues
 Increase preventive maintenance activities
 Complete Airport Layout Plan and Narrative
 Prepare additional grant applications
 Continue financial assistance for the Lone Pine Airport Operating Budget
 Administer District and ensure that lighting fixtures are maintained.
 Replace lights as needed.
 Begin building operational database
 Ensure contract operator provides accurate on-time billings
 Develop preventative maintenance and replacement program
 Develop a prioritized list of necessary repairs/improvements
 Continue to provide the highest level of support and service as possible
 Continue to refine and become more efficient and timely at processing the Building and Maintenance billings
using CAMS
 Coordination of backflow device testing/repairs for some 30 backflow devices for the County of Inyo
 Continue with the replacement of inefficient HVAC equipment in all County facilities as funding allows
 Coordination/supervision of termite service for the County maintained buildings.
 Close out project
 Continue to maintain the airport at its current level including keeping all navigation aids in serviceable
condition and keeping the runway free of weeds and debris.
 Completion of Pedestrian Facilities Inventory for County and City
 Development of the FY 2016 Regional Transportation Improvement Program
 Fund completion of Project Study Reports by consultants.
 Fund City of Bishop completion of a Stormwater Master Plan
 Update Pavement Management Program
 Sustain 2014-2015 major accomplishments.
 Unceasing efforts to improve office efficiency.
 Unceasing efforts to cross train office staff.
 Assess benefits of eliminating contract valuations.
 Advance Assessor training/networking/public outreach opportunities.
 Provide excellent customer service to the citizens of Inyo/Mono Counties
 Respond quickly and effectively to issues and/or complaints
 Maintain our 100% rate of inspection for all weighing and measuring devices within Inyo and Mono
Counties to ensure equity for all transactions
 Bring device registration fees to realize more effective cost recovery for our Weights & Measures Division
 Begin testing of retail LPG meters in-house
 Continue to pursue long and short term funding opportunities through grant applications, outside agreements,
legislation, and program contracts.
 Continue limited work on high-priority sites within LADWP lands, such as the LORP area.
 Improve mapping methods and database.
 Achieve treatment of non-LADWP invasive plant sites cataloged in the ESWMA GIS database.
 Continue public outreach and cooperative weed control activities.
 Improve disease and emerging and invasive mosquito detection by using innovative traps and detection
equipment
 Explore other funding opportunities such as contracts and grants to augment the mosquito control program.
 Continue to work with other local agencies to reduce mosquito breeding sources.
 Initiate and contribute to a program contingency fund that will insure service during unexpected adult
mosquito outbreaks.
 Work with the Inyo County District Attorney's Office and Inyo County Superior Court to gain access to the
Court's electronic OneSolution case system to be viewable by child support officers to assist in locating
parents, and establishing and/or enforcing child support orders.
 Focus on core services training and develop a team approach to performance goals and service delivery
through ongoing team building and training.
 Continue to meet all State and Federal guidelines.
 Maintain excellent customer service.
 Increase collections for the wellbeing of families.
 Complete to final disposition all Summary estates with total value of less than $30,000.
 Deposit unclaimed funds of six (6) estates to County Treasury and upon anniversary of three (3) years, effect
transfer to Inyo County General Fund.
 Bring to final disposition a Formal Probate and collect fees for PAPG office and County Counsel of $22,806.
 Maintain compliance with California Probate Codes Sections 7605 & 2923 with respect to continuing
education requirements for Public Administrator Guardian Conservator.
 Present to Board of Supervisors an overview of PAPGPC duties and solicit direction regarding fulfilling
office obligations without a Deputy.
 Continue providing outstanding service and protection to the citizens of Inyo County.
 Use evidenced based practices to reduce the number of prison commits and local recidivism rate.
 Continue to upgrade departmental information technology by adding a new case management system.
 Complete the on-line policy and procedures for Department operations.
 Continue to utilize local training to further reduce general fund contribution for training.
 Continue providing outstanding service and protection to the citizens of Inyo County.
 Maintain the low numbers of juveniles placed out-of-county.
 Implement an upgraded case management system for the entire department.
 Broaden the use of best practice programs such as ART and Journaling.
 Complete major security upgrade project.
 Sustain alternative sentencing programs, treatment programs and offender supervision to keep the jail
population under 99.
 Reduce recidivism rates in Inyo County to less than the State CDCR parole average rate of 70%.
 Implement a case management system that will allow for the creation of baseline data and the creation of
benchmarks for success.
 100% of PC 1170(h) inmates will be released from jail with an evidence based case plan and a supervision
plan
 Enhance Inmate Work Program
 To maintain a high level of customer service in an efficient and effective manner to successfully implement
the County's planning programs, including the following: complete the Phase 2 REPG; begin work on the
North Sierra Highway Specific Plan and focused planning in SE Inyo County.
 Participate in and influence the Inyo National Forest Plan Update/Revision; continue/maintain efforts and
coordination in the DRECP, CTPG, WEC, Natural Resources Advisory Committee (NRAC), Desert
Protection Act, Saline Valley Plan, Owens Lake Master Plan/Project, DWP Solar Ranch project, and Forest
Service Planning Rule.
 Continue to implement the Crystal Geyser/Roxane Bottling Plant and Coso Geothermal projects; continue the
General Plan and Zoning Code update and environmental review; continue to assist the Public Works
Department with the Adventure Trails project; finalize an Energy Efficient Revolving Loan Fund (EERLF)
to finance energy efficient projects for County facilities; continue to monitor proposals to list and designate
critical habitat for three Sierra amphibians pursuant to the FESA, as well as other USFWS and California
Department of Fish and Wildlife proposals, and; continue to assist other departments and agencies in CEQA
compliance.
 To meet all requirements relating to Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (SMARA) and the
County's mining regulations.
 To maintain current information on the website, as mandated by Government Code section 56150, process
land use and planning projects that require Planning Commission review, and continue to staff the YMRAO
and Inyo LAFCO.
 Enter into a contract with the Inyo County Planning Department/Office of County Counsel to provide staff
and legal services to the Commission. Maintain Inyo LAFCO membership and participation in CALAFCO,
which provides training to LAFCO Commissioners and staff at annual and staff conferences. Continue to
update of the Independent Special District information. Provide a high level of customer service
 Process and consider applications for special district formations, annexations, reorganizations, out-of-area
service agreements, and others in compliance with the provisions of the Cortese-Knox-Hertzberg Local
Government Reorganization Act
 Work with Mono County in development of a Memorandum of Understanding for Exchange of Principal
County Status for Spheres of Influence Changes.
 Continue to maintain the Inyo LAFCO website in compliance with Government Code Section 56661.
Replace any vacant seats on LAFCO as necessary to keep LAFCO active.
 Address liability issues to allow other public agency employees to accompany County personnel in County
vehicles.
 Maintain a contract with counsel in the event licensing proceedings unexpectedly recommence.
 Continue working with the AULGs to monitor DOE activities related to the License Application review
process, advocate for additional funding as appropriate.
 Participate in federal oversight of past expenditures, as necessary.
 Continue to monitor groundwater in Southeast Inyo County with the USGS and other interested agencies.
 Attend Devil's Hole Workshop and acquire a new plotter and overhead projector.
 Continue to provide quality health care to minors in the correctional system and in foster care.
 Assure public health preparedness, response priorities, policies, and plans are in place in preparation of a
disaster.
 Continue to fulfill Public Health mandates including communicable disease investigation and reporting, TB
control, pregnancy testing, and immunization services.
 Monitor the availability of health and dental services throughout the community, and assess gaps in health
care access in light of the changing healthcare environment under the Affordable Care Act.
 Encourage individuals and families to establish a health home with community healthcare providers, while
continuing to provide or find a safety net of services to ensure and track that those who are left without
affordable health insurance have access to basic health care services.
 Provide medial case management training to one nurse in the public health department and train a second
staff member as an ADAP enrollment worker.
 Increase knowledge of HIV/AIDS disease process among Public Health staff by taking advantage of
available webinars and conferences.
 Ensure that the program addresses the case management needs of all eligible clients.
 Increase linkages to culturally appropriate medical care for HIV-infected individuals by maintaining
relationships with referral sources within the county and with HIV specialists outside the county.
 Provide medial case management training to one nurse in the public health department and train a second
staff member as an ADAP enrollment worker.
 Increase knowledge of HIV/AIDS disease process among Public Health staff by taking advantage of
available webinars and conferences.
 Ensure that the program addresses the case management needs of all eligible clients.
 Increase linkages to culturally appropriate medical care for HIV-infected individuals by maintaining
relationships with referral sources within the county and with HIV specialists outside the county.
 Maintain CCS case management services for the current and growing caseload by training a new nurse case
manager and providing cross training to existing nurse staff.
 Continue to increase collaboration with outside agencies that provide services to the target population to
ensure that client medical and transportation needs are met.
 Ensure coordination and effective links to the new Medi-Cal Managed Care plans in order to increase
insurance coverage for families and children.
 Continue to sustain the MTP services to meet the needs of the eligible children of Inyo County for CCS.
 Establish resources to provide MTCs more regularly with local specialized medical staff.
 Continue to strengthen the relationships with families, by including parent participation in ongoing CCS
program evaluation activities, planning measures and staff training.
 Continue to strengthen the relationships between CCS staff and the schools by cross training and expanding
opportunities for collaboration.
 Assist families with case management needs based on findings from CHDP exams.
 Continue to work with medical providers to understand and implement eligibility for CHDP preventive
exams under the Medi-Cal program.
 Collaborate with local pediatricians to assist with appropriate referrals for various needs, such as obesity
prevention, as identified in CHDP exams.
 Improve foster care nurse case management to address the needs of the children in placement and those
children preparing to transition into independent living as adults.
 Continue disaster preparedness efforts and develop contingency plans in the event that the community is
isolated by a disaster, including the community potluck event that support the community's maintenance of a
food bank that ensures families have adequate access to food in the event of a crisis or other emergency.
 Continue outreach to high-risk children and families to provide information and resources to strengthen the
families' abilities to prevent child abuse or out of home placement, drug and alcohol abuse, domestic
violence, as well as addressing mental health issues.
 Coordinate quarterly meetings of the HHS Coalition in Southeastern Inyo with the HHS Director and/or her
designee's attendance, including outreach to community partners such as the Death Valley School District.
 Continue to utilize the videoconferencing equipment in the Tecopa Community Center to access remote
services as appropriate and provide assistance in accessing services, including, but not limited to CalFresh,
Medi-Cal, Behavioral Health Services, cash assistance and other supportive services as identified.
 Increase capability and use of technology in two areas: 1) Implement the Virtual Health Record product to
include the development of work flows and trend analysis and a shared record capability and; 2) begin use of
telemedicine to increase access in the jail and other settings.
 Develop coordinated and integrated services across settings to include jail and re-entry services to contain
costs and reduce recidivism.
 Develop and expand the wraparound approach to target at-risk families to reduce out-of -home care through
reaching younger children and families impacted by behavioral health issues. Implement trauma-informed
interventions as part of these efforts.
 Implement expanded offerings at the new wellness center site to target transitional age youth with
co-occurring disorders as well as adults with unstable living environments. Develop peer supporters to assist
with care.
 Increase integrated care at Progress House and capability to respond successfully to address behavioral health
crisis.
 Comply with State program requirements, including appropriate staffing with certified Addiction Counselors
and maintain counseling group sizes of no more than 15 individuals.
 Maintain a cost neutral program.
 Continue to employ current addiction treatment and education strategies for use in groups and share effective
treatment strategies across addiction services programs to enhance offerings.
 Continue to offer after hour group times to accommodate and support schedules of participants who are
employed during daytime hours.
 Utilize ongoing satisfaction questionnaires in order to provide feedback to group facilitators.
 Ensure the well-being of seniors served through ESAAA, by coordinating with other HHS programs and
community partners, ensuring the broadest safety net possible.
 Continue to evaluate and assess options to reduce costs while maintaining the highest level of services to
seniors, including, but not limited to recruiting, training and supporting at least one additional volunteer in
the Ombudsman program, as well as an additional 5 volunteers to serve in various capacities.
 Continue to implement and manage data within the new California Aging Reporting System (CARS) data
management system, which is required by the California Department of Aging in a manner that allows us to
be able to gather and compile data for reporting purposes for policy makers, the community and the State, to
ensure decision-making is based on most accurate information available.
 Evaluate management, supervision, monitoring and service provision procedures for contracted services
(Mono County and CA Indian Legal Services) and conduct monitoring visits and technical assistance in
accordance with Title XXII, as well as the provisions of the Older Americans Act.
 Work closely with WIC, SNAP-Ed, MCAH, and other Inyo Public Health & Prevention programs to
streamline our services and messages to create coordinated access for the families we serve.
 Implement the first stages of our Triple P and Ages & Stages Networks, recruiting community partners,
training staff in new systems, and educating parents regarding these new resources.
 Create a plan for connecting at-risk children ages 0-5 with intensive support from Behavioral Health to
change the trajectory of their development
 Continue to provide family strengthening supports in early literacy, language acquisition, and developmental
play in a way that engages at-risk families.
 Connect low-income families with young children to critical aids in crisis like diapers, safe sleep or play
resources, donated books & toys, plus referrals to WIC, Medi-Cal, CalFresh, SNAP-Ed, or employment
resources.
 Implement and stay current with all new program requirements mandated by the State and Federal
governments, ensuring federal linkage to funding to the fullest extent possible.
 Divert out of home placements to the fullest extent possible, with a continued focus on diversion from
placement in group home settings out of the area.
 Using a diversity of funding resources, continue to review the local Wraparound program and further develop
the program in a manner that promotes the best outcomes possible for families.
 Divert or reduce the length of time people are receiving cash assistance by assisting clients in developing the
skills needed to enter or re-enter the workforce, including involving the General Relief clients in the
enhanced training provided by our Employment unit, as Subsidized Employment is implemented in our
CalWORKs/Welfare to Work program.
 Reduce the length of time individuals are accessing General Relief and recover General Relief money by
assisting clients in applying for Social Security and helping them through the appeals process as needed.
 Continue to provide case management services and interventions necessary in maintaining a small caseload
while continuing to support the indigent residents of our county.
 Ensure a broad-based safety net of services is available for our most vulnerable, isolated seniors, connecting
them to alternative resources as appropriate.
 Evaluate effectiveness of the IC-GOLD services and continue to identify ways to reduce the County General
Fund costs by coordinating with other resources and adjusting program services as appropriate.
 Fully implement the fee-based homemaker/personal care services, ensuring all seniors have a safety net
available while they apply for IHSS and, if not eligible, have the ability to purchase limited services.
 Actively conduct volunteer recruitment efforts throughout the county with a goal of increasing volunteer
hours at each site, as well as establishing opportunities to sponsor seniors with financial support.
 Improve awareness of SIDS prevention through public information outreach and participation in community
events.
 Continue to support means of access to dental care for children and pregnant women.
 Maintain an active and dynamic focus on childhood obesity promotional and prevention activities.
 Continue participation in the Inyo County Car Seat Program for injury prevention.
 Enhance supportive services available through Employment and Eligibility by strengthening our employment
services through continued implementation of comprehensive Employment Readiness workshops;
implementation of Subsidized Employment services; enhancing support services to employers who accept
job placements; implementing Family Stabilization services to help divert or reduce access of cash assistance
programs by families; and, providing high quality, respectful customer service to individuals and families
who are accessing public assistance.
 Ensure the safety and well-being of children by providing high quality child welfare services to children and
their families, including connecting families to supportive services, including their own external support
networks.
 Ensure the safety and well-being of seniors and dependent adults by effectively assessing needs, identifying
appropriate interventions and connecting to appropriate resources to help maintain the highest level of
independence safely.
 Conduct regular, quarterly licensing recruitment events for both Child Care and Foster Care providers,
including regular orientations in an effort to increase the capacity for foster care placements, as well as child
care slots available to working families.
 Continue working across HHS Department divisions to coordinate and enhance available prevention,
intervention and treatment services to better support clients served through Social Services and other
departmental programs.
 Expand the MRT jail group to both male and female inmates and provide the opportunity for new enrollees
three times per year and establish an outpatient MRT program with a minimum of 3 offerings per year. This
would be a closed group.
 Work closely with the AB109 Re-entry Coordinator both within and outside of the jail setting in identifying
and providing addiction treatment services for this population.
 Increase Drug Medi-Cal billing as allowable through the waiver regulations.
 Increase coordination of services with physical health care.
 Increase the percentage of high risk parents in all Prevention parenting classes by 2%.
 Continue to provide accurate and timely benefits to eligible families, following the federal and state laws and
regulations.
 Recruit and maintain at least 7 new members to the 2 Youth Coalitions to strengthen coalition membership
and collaboration.
 Conduct 24 one-hour Youth Coalition lunchtime meetings at 2 high schools to continue to promote healthy
lifestyles among youth and foster youth leadership.
 Create and conduct 10 tobacco prevention presentations to groups of elementary, junior high, or high school
students at events, such as health fairs, drug prevention events, and after school activities.
 Involve Youth Coalition members in supporting community norm change and cessation by conducting 3
radio and print ad campaigns in English and Spanish.
 Recruit and collaborate with an advisory committee made up of 5-10 casino workers, patrons, and tribal
members to work on community education and implementation of a smoke-free policy for the Bishop Paiute
Casino.
 Continue active participation in Team Inyo for Healthy Kids workgroup. Continue participation in outreach
events representing Team Inyo for Healthy Kids.
 Continue to provide local WIC vendors (Vons, and Smart n Final) in Inyo County with a local vendor liaison
to communicate WIC program updates and policies to provide excellent customer service to WIC
participants and provide quarterly technical assistance visits and support.
 Continue development of collaboration with other service providers to promote and enhance increase
utilization of Farmers Market vouchers along with continuance of Farmers Market Program for Inyo WIC
participants and ESAAA senior program.
 Continued collaboration with Toiyabe WIC program, Inyo County First 5 and Snap ED specifically in the
area of breastfeeding promotion for preparation of 9th annual Breastfeeding Awareness walk in both Bishop
and Lone Pine.
 Collaborate with Inyo County Public Health, First 5 and HHS Prevention Services to participate in annual
2015 Jamboree health fair to continue to promote "Re-Think Your Drink" campaign to combat childhood
obesity.
 Continue active participation in Team Inyo for Healthy Kids workgroup. Continue participation in outreach
events representing Team Inyo for Healthy Kids.
 Continue to provide local WIC vendors (Vons, and Smart n Final) in Inyo County with a local vendor liaison
to communicate WIC program updates and policies to provide excellent customer service to WIC
participants and provide quarterly technical assistance visits and support.
 Continue development of collaboration with other service providers to promote and enhance increase
utilization of Farmers Market vouchers along with continuance of Farmers Market Program for Inyo WIC
participants and ESAAA senior program
 Continued collaboration with Toiyabe WIC program, Inyo County First 5 and Snap ED specifically in the
area of breastfeeding promotion for preparation of 9th annual Breastfeeding Awareness walk in both Bishop
and Lone Pine.
 Collaborate with Inyo County Public Health, First 5 and HHS Prevention Services to participate in annual
2015 Jamboree health fair to continue to promote "Re-Think Your Drink" campaign to combat childhood
obesity.
 Market the available employment registration services to residents throughout the community, with an
emphasis on clients served by county programs, including, but not limited to, Employment and Eligibility,
Probation, Behavioral Health.
 Stay current on program regulations to ensure compliance with State and Federal regulations.
 Conduct Master Food Preserver Basic Training to increase volunteer capacity to offer preservation
workshops
 Update MOU between Inyo County and the University of California
 Implement a California Certified Naturalist Program in Inyo and Mono counties
 Continue to expand the 4-H program and complete the 4-H biosecurity research project
 Offer educational programs in support of gardeners and beekeepers
 Follow-up on any outstanding projects
 Hold at least one meeting for all lessees
 Coordinate with Board Clerk to advertise and fill vacant board positions.
 Follow-up on any outstanding projects
 Hold at least one meeting for all lessees
 Coordinate with Board Clerk to advertise and fill vacant board positions
 To advertise for, seek, locate and hire a CUPA specialist to fill the open position that now exists.
 To continue to work with the LADWP, the BLM, and the Inyo County Solid Waste Department to revise all
of the solid waste permits for our five active landfill sites.
 Amend our Fee Ordinance to include a category for lodging complimentary breakfast permitting, which has
not been regulated in the past.
 To continue to maintain good relations with our County's residents, visitors and our regulated community by
providing our services in a thorough, timely & courteous manner, and to provide technical and regulatory
assistance as requested. We will continue to use education as our primary enforcement tool regarding
regulatory issues.
 Maintaining public peace and security in Inyo County.
 Continue to work towards improving collaborative relationships with allied law enforcement agencies.
 Continue to work to improve the administration of justice in the criminal courts by minimizing
inconvenience to the public and victims of crime.
 Consistent and fair administration of justice.
 Implementation of an integrated case management system.
 Maintain full time staffing of Criminal Investigators.
 Present accurate and timely investigations to support prosecutorial decisions to ensure public trust in the
District Attorney's Office.
 Provide optimal level of professional law enforcement and investigative support services for our community
and the citizens of Inyo County.
 Increase collaborative efforts with local law enforcment agencies to support effective responses to major
crimes or problems which impair the safety of quality of life for the citizens of Inyo County.
 Continue to provide excellent levels of service to those victimized or witnessing crime.
 Continue to leverage grant funds to ensure maximum training opportunities for our Victim Witness Assistant.
 Maximize coordination and elimination of duplication of efforts between District Attorney Victim Services
and other Non-Government Organization and service providers.
 We have made strides in reducing our paper subscription services from $18,404 in the 2013-2014 fiscal year
to $11,200 in the 2014-2015 fiscal year to a projected $10,064 in the coming fiscal year. We will continue to
work to reduce and eliminate paper subscriptions maintaining only those most valuable to our service
delivery and as feasible moving to updating only every other year. This will result in expected continued
savings.
 Discussions are continuing with Mono County regarding creation of a regional electronic law library that
could be accessed by staff in both offices and would result in savings to both offices. The cost per attorney
for electronic services goes down as the number of attorneys using the services goes up.
 As attorneys we are required to attend continuing legal education courses in order to keep our licenses active.
In addition, this is a vehicle to keep staff fully informed on topics of direct relevance to our service delivery.
We will endeavor to attend courses on line, when feasible.
 We will continue discussions with Mono County in an effort to develop a continuing legal education program
where conference attendees teach what they have learned to those who did not attend. If we succeed we will
have well educated attorneys in both counties at a reduced cost.
 To continue to serve as co-chairperson of the Legislative Committee of the California Association of County
Clerks and Election Officials (CACEO). This committee studies pending legislation, meets with members of
the California legislature regarding bills of interest and reports on the status of all legislation to the members
of the association.
 To continue to perform civil marriages and expand on other services associated with civil marriages to
generate revenue, such as rings, flowers, memorabilia. Other counties have implemented this practice and
donated excess funds derived to a local charity or fund.
 Complete Vault Inventory and assess the damage of books and restoration.
 Conduct the November 3, 2015 UDEL Election. This election includes all community services districts,
sanitary districts and fire districts in Inyo County.
 Conduct the June 7, 2016 Presidential Primary Election. This election includes the office of President, Vice
President, US Senate, Congress, CA Assembly, Supervisor and Board of Education races.
 Participate in a pilot project to create a Toolkit for Elections Officials funded through the Knight News
Foundation.
 Full migration to a statewide voter registration database as required by the Federal Help American Vote Act
of 2002, utilizing grant monies.
 Development of an audio-enabled accessible Sample Ballot Booklet, utilizing grant funds
Page 1 of 4
381
 Official Records Preservation Project 3 for Archive Microfiling of approximately 20,400 Mining Location
Notices Images. These notices currently only exist in paper format. By creating a microfilm copy, the County
Recorder's office is ensuring that these valuable records will be preserved permanently.
 Ongoing redaction of Day-Forward and Backfile redaction continues.
 Facilitate a project with the Assessor's office to locate deeds to over 800 DWP owned parcels.
 Continue to provide an efficiently run Coroner's Office at a minimal charge to the County.
 Adopt a balanced budget to maintain service levels, and manage funding reductions as a result of State and
Federal budget actions.
 Remain active in protecting local land use authority and limiting any further restrictions on public access to
public lands.
 Continue to support the consolidated office building in Bishop and other service redesign recommendations
to help reduce the general fund deficit.
 Support the 21st Century Obsidian Project to provide expanded digital broadband services in the County
 Remain involved with CSAC, RCRC, NaCO, Quad State and Western Counties Alliance to help protect the
interests of Inyo County.
 Update the Cash Handling Policy.
 Develop and implement a purchasing card program.
 Provide the County fiscal staff with a Time Keeper Training.
 Continue to provide service and training to other departments and the public.
 Continue to use this fund in accordance with County Policy by using it to make loans to other funds and to
use for unexpected decreases in revenue and/or increases in expenditures that cannot be absorbed within
existing budgets. This reserve is to be used before using General Reserves and requires a 4/5th vote of the
Board of Supervisors.
 Continue to accrue interest and leave reserves intact.
 Start a major software upgrade for the County's financial System (IFAS)
 Airport
 New Courthouse
 Consolidated Office Building
 Mt Whitney
Finish the project by constructing security fencing around the perimeter of the new facility.
 Public Works and the Administration departments will continue to provide oversight and direction over the
project until the security fencing is complete.
 Complete Tech Refresh as per plan for fiscal year 2015-2016
 Complete the Bishop Courtyard Project in conjunction with community partners.
 Complete the majority of retrospective conversion of the Library's records.
 Focus on preservation of local history materials, including digitization for public access.
 Continue with essential improvements to the Lone Pine Library, including access and HVAC.
 Expand and improve the Central Library if adjacent space becomes available.
 Revitalize the Law Library Board of Trustees.
 Restore online and print access to legal materials.
 Continue working with the Council of California County Law Librarians to locate new sources of revenue.
 Work with the local Court and legal community to coordinate public legal reference and assistance.
Staff will continue to make emergency managment and preparedness a priority by working with CalOES and
CSTI encouraging them to continue to bring emergency managment trainings to Inyo County and/or offer the
trainings free of charge to help defray the travel costs associated with being an isolated rural county.
 Staff will work with contracted consultant to assist with the update of the Inyo County Emergency
Operations Plan.
 After working with the Planning and Public Works department to apply for and receive a FEMA
Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Grant, Administration will continue to work with Planning and Public
Works staff to administer the $150,010 grant by moving forward with an RFP for consultant services and
providing the grant managment and administration for the development of the Inyo County Local
Multi-Juridictional Hazard Mitigation Plan.
 Staff will continue to participate on the weekly CalOES Drought Task Force conference calls and advise the
Board of new developments as they occur, which includes notifying the public of recovery assistance
opportunities for those impacted by the drought.
 Staff will continue to provide grant administration and fiscal support for the Homeland Security Grants and
will seek new grant opportunities to fund the costs of emergency equipment and supplies, training and
exercise development.
 Revise County's film ordinance to create film permit and associated fee schedule
 Creation of regional economic development framework
 Maintain strategic parnerships and alliances with key organizations and individuals to foster economic
development opportunties in Inyo County
 Identify and pursue opportunities to fund the LORP River Center Project in Independence
 Develop and sponsor community-specific, downtown re-vitalization and economic development programs
for Independence, Lone Pine, Big Pine and possibly North Bishop
 Continue to utilize the fine funds to enhance and protect the fishing and wildlife resources
 Work with the Advisory Commission to monitor revenues to ensure funds to enhance project opportunities
 Work with the Advisory Commission to protect fishing and wildlife resources during the drought
 Administration will continue to provide disaster response support to the County of Inyo and it's residents.
 Administration will continue to provide fiscal and grant administration support to the Planning and Public
Works departments for the completion of the Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan project.
 Complete Statham Hall Heater Installation - $4,500
 South Street Window Replacement and South Street Building Insulation - $30,600
 Big Pine Veteran's Path and Parking Lot Paving - $161,050
 BOS Meeting Webcast - Independence - $60,000
 Lone Pine Sheriff Substation Parking Lot - $75,000
 Staff will attend ESRI - GIS training and conference to keep the GIS Coordinator and the Sheriff's Office up
to date on new emergency mapping technology.
 Renew the Reverse 911 database lease to update and strengthen the alert and warning system and enhance
communications between the Sheriff's dispatch and residents during an emergency.
 Administration and Sheriff's staff will work with contractor on updating the Emergency Operations Plan.
 Purchase 5 rescue liters which will benefit the local fire departments, search and rescue, Health and Human
Services and law enforcement to enhance the Disaster Response Capabilities during all hazards and
emergencies.
 Purchase new GIS software and updates to further enhance the GIS database and enable the Police
Department, Sheriff's Department and Fire Departments to utilize the geodatabase for mapping purposes.
 Complete or further technology projects that have been approved or may be approved
 Pursue improvements for broadband and telecommunications access throughout the county
 Improve service to Information Services customers
 Reorganize Information Services staff structure
 Continue to coordinate with Third Party Administrator for workers compensation
 Continue to work with outside legal counsel
 Continue to work with outside investigators on workers compensation claims
 Continue training for County employees
 Continue to sit on the Underwriting Committee and Board of Directors of the CSAC Excess Insurance
Authority
 Continue to administer the Affordable Care Act mandates
 Service Awards
 Implement a youth work program
 Continue aggressive recruitment for all vacant positions
 Near completion of the project by 2015-16 year end.
 Provide support to all team members as needed and keep the project moving forward.
 Publish the RFP and move forward with awarding the contract for consulting services to the most qualified
applicant.
 Planning and Public Works departments will attend public meetings and assist the consultant in collecting
data and information for the HMP
 Planning and Administration will work together to submit timely Quarterly Reports to CalOES.
 Review and reevaluate motor pool charges in order to allow departments to begin to benefit from the new
Enterprise contract.
 Continue to systematically retire vehicles and equipment that have high mileage and meet the replacement
criteria and replace them with the most fuel efficient vehicles possible
 Explore opportunities to increase efficiency through automation and additional staff training.
 Provide for the replacement of at least 16 vehicles, including six Sheriff's patrol vehicles.
 Increase utilization of CFN fuel stations located in the unincorporated areas of the County whenever possible
in order to maximize tax revenues.
 Planned replacement of sixteen (16) vehicles per the Motor Pool replacement schedule at an estimated cost
of $483,000.
 Review and reevaluate motor pool charges in order to allow departments to begin to benefit from the new
Enterprise contract.
 Install a new exhibit featuring current and historic photos of the Owens Lake and create programs and events
to explore the Lake's history and current uses. Programming will likely include the Metabolic Studio, Great
Basin Unified Air Pollution Control District, the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, Friends of
the Inyo, Audubon Society, Friends of the Eastern California Museum.
 Create permanent exhibit on the construction of the Los Angeles Aqueduct by condensing the current,
100-photo LA Aqueduct exhibit to fit the new permanent exhibit space.
 Work with the Public Works Department, Caltrans and the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power on
the design and construction of two "monument" signs on north and south ends of Independence, and also
erect directional signs to the Museum using the same design themes.
 Work with local artists and sign makers to help the County Parks Department create small informational
kiosks in County Parks that highlight some of the surrounding area's more notable features and attrractions.
 Continue to work with the Friends of the Eastern California Museum to guide their financial support of the
Museum (which last FY Totaled more than $12,000) with regard to exhibit creation and installation,
advertising and promotion, events and programs,and fundraising.
 Continue to support implementation of the County's Renewable Energy Development Ordinance, including
current efforts to update the General Plan's treatment of renewable energy facility locations and trasmission
corridors.
 Ensure that the impacts of renewable energy projects on the County are fully mitigated and the potential
benefits from such projects are fully realized.
 Examine other initiatives that could be supported by this budget unit, including funding staff to facilitate
natural resource development issues.
 Implement online campground reservations
 Make major repairs and enhancements to several facilities including the Diaz Lake, Millpond Park and
Pleasant Valley restrooms, the Mendenhall Park lighting system and the Lone Pine Gazebo
 Tree Trimming at Dehy Park, Taboose Campground, Tinnemaha Campground, Baker Creek , Mendenhall
Park, Izaak Walton Park
 Increase programming in the parks
 Rehab "B" Section at Diaz Lake
 Resolve outstanding issues with contractor and evaluate any additional repairs that may be necessary.
 Continue the provision of mandated legal defense services.
 Continue to explore ways to minimize the County's public defender costs.
 Continue efforts to work with judicial system partners - District Attorney, Courts, Public Defenders,
Probation and the Sheriff's Office - to identify ways to reduce costs, enhance efficiencies, and improve the
administration of justice in Inyo County.
 Work with County Counsel on legal issues regarding retention and destruction of old case files with the goal
of ultimatley eliminating the $3,400 in storage expenses the County pays for the storage of old Public
Defender files.
 Develop means to recover public defender costs from the less-than-indigent clientle that avail themselves to
these "free" services.
 Continue to achieve the most favorable prices available for the purchases of essential general office supplies.
 Work with departments to comply with Federal and State statutes and regulations
 Work with departments in policy development and implementation
 Continue to manage workers compensation and liability claims
 Administer Insurance programs
 Continue to work with the County Wellness Committee
 Continue to conduct investigations, analyze exposures, and administer Claims against the County
 Coordinate with outside legal counsel in litigation against the County
 Work with department heads and employees to minimize exposure to the County
 Continue to coordinate with Behavioral Health, Public Health, Sheriff and Probation staff on correctional
care Risk Management issues and quality assurance
 Work with CalRecycle JPCU staff on completion of Inyo County Independent Review process
 Provide additional training to employees with emphasis on HAZWOPER training to meet Household
Hazardous Waste Program Requirements
 Increase education and outreach programs for recycling and diversion in Inyo County
 Continue providing Household Hazardous Waste (HHW) collection events on a quarterly basis at each
landfill and the Big Pine transfer station. Sixteen (16) HHW events planned for FY 2015-2016, free to Inyo
County Residents
 Continue to increase recycling and diversion opportunities for county residents including curbside recycling
and tire amnesty events
 Continue to create attractive, effective print and online advertisements and refine the mix of print and digital
ad campaigns (within the $35,000 budgeted for Advertising) to create a consistent marketing message seen
by targeted groups of potential visitors. Continue to enhance and expand theotherside web page.
 Coordinate with the Bishop Chamber of Commerce Marketing Committee to assure the Chamber's expanded
marketing campaign does not overlap with or duplicate the County's marketing efforts.
 Facilitate submissions by local photographers and businesses to the California Fall Colors website, and
provide Inyo County content for the site. Respond to all media inquiries about Inyo County and provide
information to the Visit California website and PR programs.
 Complete various contacts to organizations and individuals the Board approves for fiscal support from the
ACR budget.
 Evaluate the benefits and drawbacks of implementing an Inyo County Film Permit Fee for the Board's
consideration.
 Continue to try to identify a level of funding, commensurate with the County's fiscal means, to continue
supporting the County's long-term GIS partners.
 Due to the fiscal challenges confronting the County during the preparation of the Fiscal Year 2015-2016
Budget, the Department is again requesting 95% of the funding provided in years prior to FY 2014-2015.