A majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with salaries and benefits. This
budget unit is primarily funded by general purpose revenues of the General Fund through an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost. There are no major changes in expenditures and revenue
expected in FY 2016-17. Due to geographic variances in district size the travel costs will be
captured in Special Services, budget unit 1040.
The recommended budget provides adequate resources to assist the Supervisor in performing the
various duties and functions required of the governing body. The department is currently
authorized five permanent positions. The recommended budget provides the department with
funding for three full-time positions and two part-time positions. The department is eliminating the use of one part-time extra help position to absorb the reduction in Net General Fund Cost and
does not anticipate the use any of its Budgeted Savings Incentives (BSI).
The recommended budget requires the
department to leave two positions vacant and unfunded and to further identify unspecified salary
savings in the amount of approximately $59,500.
The recommended budget provides adequate resources to assist the Supervisor in performing the
various duties and functions required of the governing body. The recommended budget provides
the department with funding for five authorized positions, of which two are part-time positions.
Services and supplies remain relatively flat. The recommended budget requires the department to
use approximately $55,134 in Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits in order to meet the Net
General Fund Cost reduction.
The majority of expenditures for the department are associated with staff costs and supplies
necessary to perform the functions of the office. The budget unit is funded primarily by an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost. Additionally, the department receives reimbursement of
staff costs for eligible administrative and debt management activities. These reimbursements
account for the majority of charges for services and expenditure transfers transactions.
Charges for services revenue has been reduced to reflect the upcoming end of chargeable
services being provided to Kern Medical Center, and the recent conclusion of chargeable
services provided to the Department of Human Services. The remaining charges for services
revenue represents administrative services for new oil and gas trust funds. Expenditure
reimbursements are anticipated to increase primarily due to charges to the Board of Trade for
performance of additional administrative and managerial duties.
The department is able to absorb personnel cost increases, anticipated retirement payouts and the
initial 5% NGFC reduction by holding one position vacant and unfunded and using
approximately $111,062 in accumulated BSI credits. The entirety of the planned BSI usage is for
one-time costs, which will allow the department to sustain current service levels for a longer
period of time. The recommended budget includes $120,000 in additional NGFC allocation to
fund local and state-mandated water activities. Economic development activities and services
provided by the Kern Economic Development Corporation, at a cost of $175,000, have been
transferred from this budget unit to the Board of Trade budget unit, 1812.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1) Senior Administrative Analyst
position, and the deletion of one (1) Administrative Analyst I/II/III position. The proposed
addition and deletion will allow for the County Administrative Office to perform additional
functions for the Board of Trade as discussed above. The cost of the Senior Administrative
Analyst position will be reimbursed from the Board of Trade budget unit using savings generated
from a vacant management position. The department plans to hold vacant and unfunded one (1)
Administrative Analyst I/II/III position at a savings of approximately $160,000.
The majority of the Clerk of the Board expenditures are associated with salaries and benefits for
staff to support the functions of the Board of Supervisors and assessment appeals processing.
Services and supplies expenses include office supplies, application maintenance and assessment
appeals costs. The department is primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
Charges for services represent reimbursements for processing assessment appeals applications.
The recommended budget includes an increase in salaries and benefits which include an
expected one-time retirement payout. The department is using $35,548 in Budget Savings
Incentive (BSI) credits in order to absorb the 5% reduction in NGFC and was allocated an
additional $36,573 to cover the retirement payout.
The recommended budget includes holding one (1) Deputy Clerk of the Board I position vacant
and unfunded. Following a retirement, one (1) Deputy Clerk of the Board II position will remain
vacant and unfunded to meet the budget guideline. One extra-help position may be added to
alleviate service level impacts for the remainder of the fiscal year.
A majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with special projects activities,
such as costs for the County’s single audit contract, contributions to other agencies and
consulting services for the AAB, legislative review and updates and sales tax analysis. Salaries
and benefits include the countywide payments for group life insurance premiums and the
replacement benefits offered by the County pursuant to Section 31899.4 of the Government Code and the Kern County Replacement Benefits plan. The budget unit is primarily funded by an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
Contributions to Other Agencies
The Special Services budget contains recommended contributions totaling approximately
$294,303 to various non-profit agencies for performance of cultural or humanitarian services
benefiting the public. Due to budgetary constraints affecting the County General Fund,
contribution allocations have been recommended with a reduction of 50% from the previous
fiscal year. The following contributions are included in the recommended budget:
 Alzheimer’s Disease Association of Kern County: $30,134
 Arts Council of Kern: $46,360
 Bakersfield Museum of Art: $23,180
 Bakersfield Symphony: $46,360
 Center for Blind and Visually Impaired: $18,114
 Community Action Partnership of Kern County (CAP): $46,360
 Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA): $46,360
 Kern Literacy Council: $9,619
 Valley Fever Vaccine Project: $23,180
 Volunteer Center of Kern County: $4,636

The recommended budget includes an allocation of $47,500 for each District Supervisor to
support activities within their respective areas. This amount includes a reduction of 5% from the
previous year. In addition, approximately $1 million of Supervisorial carry forward discretionary
funds is budgeted under services and supplies. The recommended budget includes contributions
to the Local Agency Formation Commission, the Kern Council of Governments, and the Kern
County Museum.
The recommended budget includes $155,000 in consultant fees and other costs; a majority of
these costs are associated with the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act requirements.
Additionally, travel costs for the Board of Supervisors will be accounted in this budget unit to
accommodate the geographic variances in district size.
Revenue sources are limited to supplemental roll assessment fees and property tax administration
charges for cost reimbursement for activities of the Assessment Appeals Board.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for
positions required to perform the financial functions of the County. The department receives
some reimbursement for services but is primarily funded by general purpose revenues of the
General Fund through the allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
The recommended budget expects an increase in Charges for Services revenue as a result of
billings for payroll services to Kern Medical Center during its initial transition period to a
hospital authority. The department is able to absorb the 5% NGFC reduction without the use of
Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits by holding seven positions vacant and unfunded.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of three (3) Accountant I/II/III positions and one
Fiscal Support Specialist position. An addition of three (3) Senior Accountant positions is
requested in an effort to retain experienced accountants.
The recommended budget includes holding vacant and unfunded the following positions: four (4)
Accountant I/II/III positions, one (1) Senior Accountant position, one (1) Programmer position,
and one (1) Fiscal Support Assistant position.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for
positions required to perform the banking and property tax collection functions of the County.
The services and supplies expenditures originate from banking fees, as well as costs related to
printing and mailing tax bills, and equipment upgrades. The department is primarily funded
through charges to participants in the treasury pool for banking and investment services, various
property tax delinquency charges, and an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
Changes in expenditures from FY 2015-16 actual totals are primarily the result of services and
supplies increasing by $207,474 as a result of anticipated increases in costs associated with
banking fees, mailing, and printing. The recommended budget includes appropriations for the
purchase of a replacement network switch and three multi-function high speed printers to replace
those that are not operational. The department is using $230,733 in Budget Savings Incentive
(BSI) credits in order to meet the 5% NGFC reduction. There are no significant operational
impacts at the recommended Net General Fund Cost.
The preliminary recommended budget provides the department with funding for 30 full-time
positions, and five extra help positions, which is the same as FY 2015-16.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for positions
required to perform the functions of the Assessor’s office. The department is funded primarily
through an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. In addition, the department receives revenue for
reimbursement of costs for the administration of property taxes and supplement property taxes as
statutorily allowed.
The recommended budget includes the department using $127,000 of its accumulated Budget
Savings Incentive (BSI) credits to offset the one-time purchase of cashflow software. The
department expects Supplemental Assessment Fee revenues to increase allowing the department
to absorb the 5% NGFC reduction without any service level impacts.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for 99 out of 106 authorized
permanent positions. The recommended budget holds seven positions vacant and unfunded: one
(1) Draft Technician I/II/II-Engineering Technician I/II/III position, five (5) Appraiser I/II/III
positions and one (1) Petroleum Geologist position. The department anticipates no service level
impacts.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with supplies and staffing costs
for positions required to establish and support the information technology platform for the
County. The division pays for internet, storage, phone and IT maintenance and is reimbursed by
charging departments for the cost. In addition, the division receives an allocation of Net General
Fund Cost.
Capital assets and Net General Fund Cost are anticipated to be significantly lower due to onetime
costs related to the new CJIS replacement project. The FY 2015-16 budget included $4.9
million in capital assets appropriations and Net General Fund Cost allocation for the license and
implementation of the replacement of CJIS. There is one GIS Server capital asset included in the
recommended budget at a cost of $26,500.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. The recommended
budget holds the following authorized positions vacant and unfunded: one (1) Technology
Services Division Chief, one (1) Fiscal Support Specialist, one (1) Senior Systems Analyst, one
(1) Database Analyst I/II, two (2) Programmer I/II-Systems Analyst I/II, one (1) Systems
Programmer I/II, one (1) Network Systems Administrator, one (1) Information Systems
Specialist I/II/III/Sr., and two (2) Help Desk Technician I/II/III, at an annual savings of
approximately $1.5 million.
The budget unit is primarily funded through charges for services to other departments and an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost (NGFC). The majority of the expenditures for this budget
unit are associated with staffing costs for positions required to perform the legal functions of the
County. The appropriations in the other charges category includes $1.14 million for uninsured
litigation, or legal matters requiring litigation not covered under the County’s General Liability
or Workers’ Compensation self-insurance programs. This amount is exclusive of in-house staff
costs. In addition, $4 million for coverage of potential uninsured litigation cost associated with
Measure “E” litigation is budgeted in Appropriation for Contingencies, Budget Unit 1970. Those
appropriations will only be used if actual uninsured litigation costs exceeds the $1.14 million budgeted. The costs associated with uninsured litigation in FY 2015-16 was approximately $4.6
million, an increase of approximately $3.5 million from FY 2014-15, primarily due to costs
associated with Measure “E” litigation.
The department has accrued Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits in the amount of $1,332,040.
The recommended budget includes the use of $254,280 in BSI credits to cover the operating
costs of the department, and to mitigate the 5% reduction in NGFC.

Salaries and benefits have increased to reflect all authorized positions being funded, as well as
planned retirement payouts of approximately $162,000. Services and supplies reflect a slight
increase primarily due to professional services for water litigation costs.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of one (1) vacant Accountant I/II/III position.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for positions
required to perform the functions of the department. The department is funded by an allocation
of Net General Fund Cost. However, the department also receives reimbursement of staff costs
for administration of the County’s health benefits programs and is reimbursed for the expenses of
purchasing employee service awards to recognize employees for their years of service.
The Civil Service Commission portion of this budget provides resources for Commission
meeting expenses in the amount of $27,000, hearing officer service fees in the amount of
$20,000, travel expenses in the amount of $3,000, supplies in the amount of $3,000, and salaries
and benefits for the Civil Service Commission Secretary in the amount of $71,000. The Civil
Service Commission approved this budget in accordance with County ordinance 3.04.040, at its
meeting held April 11, 2016.
The former Personnel Department and the Health Benefits Division of the County
Administrative Office underwent a reorganization in FY 2015-16. The additional staffing and
resources from the Health Benefit functions are the primary cause of increased expenditures. The
change in revenue in FY 2015-16 forward reflects the reimbursement for staff costs associated
with the transferred Health Benefits employees. This revenue is anticipated to decrease in FY
2016-17 due to adjustments in staff time allocations that should reduce billable costs. The
recommended budget will allow the division to maintain current levels of service.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. The division plans
to hold vacant and unfunded one (1) Office Services Technician-Confidential position, for an estimated savings of $74,000. The division does not anticipate any service level impacts from the
position vacancy.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing and supply
costs for the positions and materials required to perform the legally mandated election functions
of the County. The largest revenue source for the budget unit is charges for election services
provided to other entities, and general purpose revenue received from the General Fund through
the allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
The recommended budget provides funding for the General Election in November and a
potential special election in June. The department is able to absorb the 5% NGFC reduction of
$180,996 through a reduction of services and supplies. In FY 2015-16, the department purchased
the Dominion Democracy Suite system for $1,267,670 which is offset by Help American Vote
Act (HAVA) grant funds. This contributes to the decline in revenue and expenditures for the FY
2016-17 as compared to FY 2015-16.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing and supplies
costs for the positions and materials required to perform the assigned functions. The division
receives some reimbursement for services but is primarily funded by an allocation of Net
General Fund Cost (NGFC).
The recommended budget provides the division with funding for 100 permanent positions, which
requires the use of $569,460 of accumulated BSI credits. Total staffing is in line with prior year
actuals, which will allow the department to maintain similar service levels. Charges for services
revenue is anticipated to decline primarily due to the expiration of a custodial services agreement
with the Mental Health Department, and the termination of purchasing services to Kern Medical
Center.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. The following
sixteen authorized positions will be held vacant and unfunded: two (2) Administrative
Coordinator, two (2) Communications Technician I/II/III, three (3) Building Service Worker
I/II/III, three (3) Maintenance Worker I/II/III/IV, one (1) Office Services Specialist, one (1)
Office Services Technician, one (1) Mail Clerk I/II, one (1) Real Property Agent I/II/III, one (1)
Buyer I/II/III, and one (1) Security Attendant I/II at an annual savings of approximately $1.6
million.
The General Services Division continues to review and evaluate the acquisition of utility services
and commodities to attain the best rates possible. Services and supplies are budgeted to cover the
anticipated cost of utilities. Charges for services and other financing sources revenue are
primarily collected from customer entities for services provided, and general purpose revenue
received from the General Fund through the allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

The anticipated increase in services and supplies expenditures is primarily due to expected
changes in electricity, gas, and water rates. A portion of increased expenditures are offset by
increased revenue collected from service recipients. Services and supplies also includes
$109,000 in appropriations to cover general liability insurance costs for certain claims that are
not attributable to any specific department. The anticipated decrease in other charges expenditures is primarily due to the retirement of a Court facility central plant capital lease
obligation.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for
positions required to perform project related services. The costs are offset by revenue received
for services provided, primarily from charges to capital and major maintenance projects.

The recommended budget includes an increase in salaries and benefits compared to prior year
actual primarily due to increases in employee benefit costs. Charges for services, other financing
sources and expenditure reimbursements are adjusted to reflect anticipated staffing costs and
project workloads.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. The budget holds
one (1) Engineering Aide I/II/III position, one (1) Construction Project Inspector I/II/III position,
and two (2) Engineer I/II/III positions vacant and unfunded for an annual savings of
approximately $609,000. Although staffing costs for this division are largely offset by service
charges, the anticipated FY 2016-17 project workload is insufficient to fund all authorized
positions.
The table below contains a list of the recommended projects for FY 2016-17. For each project,
the project cost, any offsetting revenue or special purpose funding, and the Net General Fund
Cost (NGFC) are presented. The projects listed in the table below include 23 projects with a
combined NGFC of $277,999. Revenue for this budget unit includes $5.1 million for projects
started in prior fiscal years. The recommended projects are in accordance with the County’s
objective of evaluating and meeting the County’s infrastructure needs. These recommended
projects were identified by both the General Services Division and other operating departments
as urgent unmet maintenance and facility needs.
The majority of expenditures for the department are associated with economic development
activities and staffing costs for positions required to perform the functions assigned. The
decrease in salaries and benefits is due to the transfer of certain administrative and managerial
duties to the County Administrative Office. The expenditures will now be realized in services in
supplies. The remaining increases in other charges and services and supplies are primarily due to
the transfer of economic development grants and agreements to this budget unit from the County
Administrative Office and Special Services budget units. These transfers will better align the
purpose of the programs with the mission and function of this department. The department is
primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. Other revenue sources include
event ticket sales, advertising, and reimbursement of marketing and promotions costs.

Services and supplies costs cover the procurement of specialized services for video production as
well as the reimbursement of administrative costs of the Assistant County Administrative Officer
to Employers' Training Resource, and a Senior Administrative Analyst to the County
Administrative Office. The recommended budget will allow the department to maintain current
levels of service.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. The department will
hold vacant and unfunded one (1) Marketing and Promotions Assistant/Associate position, for an
estimated savings of $108,000. The department will also hold vacant and unfunded one (1) Chief
Communications Officer, and will reimburse the County Administrative Office for the cost of
performing the administrative and managerial duties previously performed in this budget unit.
The division has budgeted $2.7 million within services and supplies to reimburse the Public
Works Department to fully staff the operations of the Engineering, Surveying and Permit
Services division. Major revenue sources include services provided to other County departments
and the public. The remainder of funding is fulfilled through a Net General Fund Cost allocation.
Expenditures are budgeted to remain similar to FY 2015-16. Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) functions formerly performed at the division have been reorganized within the Information
Technology Systems division of the General Services department in order to centralize GIS
within the County.
The recommended budget allows for the department to maintain current service levels but
General Fund reductions will require the use of $43,700 of the division’s $163,958 accumulated
Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits.
All staff formerly employed within the department were transferred to the Public Works Internal
Service Fund effective July 2015.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs necessary to
provide the services and perform the functions of the division. Services and supplies
expenditures are primarily for the various insurance policies managed by the division. These
insurance costs, and all staffing costs, are charged directly to customer departments. These
charges come in as expenditure reimbursements and charges for services.

The recommended budget includes an increase in salary and benefits costs, primarily due to
expected one-time retirement payouts, and temporary vacancies in FY 2015-16. The services and
supplies category is anticipated to decrease as a result of Kern Medical Center transitioning to
the Kern County Hospital Authority. Charges for services and expenditure reimbursements have
been adjusted to reflect the planned expenditures.
Due to significant declines in discretionary revenue sources, primarily property taxes from oil
and gas properties, no new capital projects are included in the recommended budget. All
outstanding project requests have been deferred and will be addressed when resources become
available. The recommended budget includes one rebudget for the South Shafter Sewer project at
an NGFC of $19,128. Revenue for this budget unit includes $4,190,907 for projects started in
prior fiscal years. This prior year revenue is being utilized to meet County Major Maintenance
needs. In order to fund those needs, an operating transfer out of $4,190,908 has been budgeted in
other financing uses.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated to payments to the State for court
operations, and the required maintenance of effort (MOE) payment effective when the municipal
courts transitioned to the State. The courts collect fines, forfeitures and traffic school fees that
are deposited to the County in this budget unit and are used to offset the costs. The court
collections are not sufficient to cover the costs incurred; and, therefore an allocation of Net
General Fund Cost is required.
The recommended budget, compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget, remains relatively
similar. Services and supplies are expected to increase from the prior fiscal year’s actuals due to
the increase in the court facilities transfer payments as a result of amendments approved to share
the cost of utilities at the Superior Court Complex and the Bakersfield Justice Building. Revenue
in this budget unit are for fines and forfeitures collected by the courts throughout the County,
which fluctuate annually. The budget includes funding to meet the County’s statutory fiscal
responsibilities to the State and the courts.
The primary expenditures of the division are for staffing necessary to complete all assigned
functions. The estimated revenue from licenses, permits and fictitious business name filings is
anticipated to fully offset expenditures.
The recommended budget provides a level of funding to permit the County Clerk to continue
serving the public without any impacts to service levels. During FY 2015-16, marriage license
fees were increased contributing to the overall revenue growth expected in FY 2016-17.
The recommended budget will fund six (6) permanent full time positions, including one (1)
Office Services Technician position added in FY 2015-16. One (1) Office Services Assistant
position remains as an authorized part-time position servicing the Ridgecrest area, which
remained vacant during FY 2015-16 due to hiring difficulties. In addition, two (2) extra-help
positions are recommended to maintain levels of service. The department has budgeted $19,894
of Budget Saving Incentive (BSI) credits to cover additional staffing costs.
The recommended budget will fund six (6) permanent full time positions, including one (1)
Office Services Technician position added in FY 2015-16. One (1) Office Services Assistant
position remains as an authorized part-time position servicing the Ridgecrest area, which
remained vacant during FY 2015-16 due to hiring difficulties. In addition, two (2) extra-help
positions are recommended to maintain levels of service. The department has budgeted $19,894
of Budget Saving Incentive (BSI) credits to cover additional staffing costs.
Services and supplies are budgeted to cover a portion of eligible costs for extraordinary
emergency response services that are not reimbursable by any other sources. This budget unit is
entirely funded by the General Fund through an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

The Board of Supervisors established this budget unit in FY 2015-16 in anticipation of future
extraordinary costs resulting from response efforts for locally declared emergencies. No
reimbursements to departments were processed during FY 2015-16. Funding for FY 2016-17 is
established to cover eligible unanticipated costs for locally declared emergencies.
Services and supplies provide for anticipated expert witness expenses, jurors’ stipends, office
supplies, travel reimbursement and other support cost. The County provides an allocation of net
General Fund cost to fund the activities of the Grand Jury in accordance with California Penal
Code sections 888-939.91.

In FY 2015-16, the department transferred one Senior Office Services Specialist position from
the Grand Jury to the Office of County Counsel. This transfer was made to better provide
supervision of the Senior Office Services Specialist position and offer continuity of support to
the Grand Jury. The recommended budget provides the funding necessary to allow the
department to perform indictments as requested by the District Attorney and attend Grand Juror
training. The two major expenditures in services and supplies include juror fees in the amount of
$84,599 and $65,177 for anticipated expert witness expenses. The 5% reduction in Net General
Fund Cost allocation from FY 2015-16 will be absorbed by a reduction in services and supplies
with no significant level impact.
The majority of expenditures for this program are allocated to the Kern County Bar Association
that is paid to administer the program and provides representation to the indigent clients of the
metro area. In the outlying areas of the County, attorneys are paid directly for services provided.
This budget unit is primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. In addition, the
budget unit receives intergovernmental revenues from State aid for trial court funding and State
reimbursements for the cost of representing incarcerated defendants.
The recommended budget provides sufficient resources to meet the County’s constitutional
mandate of providing legal representation. Expenditures in this budget unit are dependent on the
number of cases referred to the Indigent Defense Program, which fluctuate annually.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing costs necessary to continue to
investigate and prosecute criminal cases. Approximately half of the department’s expenditures
are funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost (NGFC). Other major sources of revenue
include funding from the State for special prosecutions and investigations within the Prison and
Special Investigation Units. The department also receives approximately $5.7 million of Local
Public Safety Funds (Proposition 172) and an allocation of 2011 realignment funds of
approximately $2.3 million to mitigate the impacts of the State prison realignment under
Assembly Bill 109 (AB 109).

The recommended budget will require the department to use all of its accumulated Budget
Savings Incentive (BSI) credits, $1,059,446, and use $332,860 in uncommitted BSI transferred
from the DA- Forensic Sciences Division to mitigate all layoffs.
Appropriations for salaries and benefits will decrease over the prior year due to the department’s
planned use of BSI credits and the necessity to unfund five 5 vacant positions resulting in no
layoffs. The department’s reliance on $1,392,306 in BSI credits to balance its budget will
necessitate layoffs once exhausted, likely in fiscal years 2017-18 and 2018-19.
The department originally requested to replace 10 vehicles at a cost of $190,000. After the
preliminary budget was approved, the department submitted a revised budget excluding this
purchase, which will allow the department to focus resources on core departmental priorities.
Revenue in the recommended budget is anticipated to remain relatively stable from FY 2015-16
actual. The estimate for AB109 is anticipated to increase slightly and Local Public Safety
(Proposition 172) funds will decrease over the FY 2015-16 actual. Services and supplies will
decrease slightly over FY 2015-16 adopted budget, primarily attributed to a decrease in
Professional and Specialty Services, which will assist the department in achieving the 5% NGFC
reduction.
Increased NGFC of $20,836 from the preliminary budget is recommended to mitigate the
increased insurance rates due to the departure of Kern Medical from the County’s self-insurance
program.
The FY 2016-17 recommended budget includes funding for 218 of the department’s 225
currently authorized positions and will not result in any layoffs. The department’s full-time
equivalent staffing for FY 2015-16 was 211 while 218 will be funded in this year’s budget, an
overall increase in filled positions that will require the department to use $1.4 million in one-time
BSI funds.
The department has indicated that unfunding and holding vacant three Deputy District Attorney
positions will result in a significant reduction in the department’s ability to prosecute
misdemeanor cases and will result in several classes of less serious misdemeanors from being
considered for prosecution.
The budget for Child Support Services is maintained in a special revenue fund and does not
receive a General Fund contribution. This budget is funded entirely from State and federal
subvention revenue and other departmental revenue. The majority of expenditures are associated
with staffing costs to perform the functions of the department. Services and supplies expenses of
$3.7 million include rents and leases, utilities, and office expenses.

The recommended budget includes sufficient revenue for the department to continue to provide
its current level of services and meet State program goals and objectives. While there are no
major expenditure and revenue changes, costs are anticipated to increase slightly due to an
increase in contract service costs, utilities, building rent, and higher salaries and benefits due to
the rising employee benefit costs and an increase in filled positions.
The recommended budget includes funding 179 of the 204 authorized positions with no additions
or deletions. The department intends to fill all authorized positions despite staffing difficulties
experienced in prior years and will hold 25 positions vacant and unfunded throughout FY 2016-
17. The budget funds 15 extra help positions compared to 23 extra help positions funded with
salary savings in FY 2015-16.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and operating costs necessary to
achieve the department’s mission of providing high quality legal representation. These
expenditures are funded primarily by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost (NGFC). Other
sources of revenue include $4.8 million of Local Public Safety Funds (Proposition 172) and an
allocation of 2011 Realignment to mitigate the impacts of the State prison realignment under
Assembly Bill 109. The department has an uncommitted balance of $1,123,845 of accumulated
Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits.
The recommended budget provides an adequate level of funding to provide legal representation
for defendants accused of criminal offenses when appointed by the Superior Court and will allow
the department to retain all of its accumulated BSI credits. As with past years, the department has
continued to experience workload increases. In FY 2015-16 the Public Defender received 46,853
case appointments, which represents a 1.5% increase from last year and a 4.3% increase over two
years ago, representing the department’s ability to serve more clients even with reduced
resources. Services and supplies are expected to increase due to the costs associated with
defending high-profile cases, often requiring expert services. The department is able to meet the
constraints imposed by the decreased NGFC through increases to 2011 realignment and prudent
budget practices.
An increase in NGFC of $11,878 over the preliminary budget is recommended due to the
departure of Kern Medical from the County’s self-insurance programs.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for 96 of the department’s 99
authorized positions. The department will unfund two vacant (2) Deputy Public Defender
positions and one (1) vacant Chief Public Defender Investigator position. The recommended
budget also includes funding for four extra help positions.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and operating costs necessary to
achieve the department’s mission of providing local law enforcement agencies with scientific
analysis and testing. These expenditures are funded primarily by an allocation of Net General
Fund Cost (NGFC). Other sources of revenue include $212,581 in Local Public Safety Funds
(Proposition 172), $313,021 from the state primarily for the elimination of the DNA backlog, an
allocation of 2011 realignment funds to mitigate impacts of the State prison realignment under
Assembly Bill 109, and other revenue derived from fines and forfeitures.
The recommended budget will require the department to commit $490,849 of its $851,496 in
Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits and transfer $332,860 to the District Attorney’s Criminal
Division to mitigate the 5% reduction in NGFC.
Salaries and benefits will be lower than FY 2015-16 as the department plans to hold one position
vacant throughout the year. Services and supplies, primarily for consumable supplies necessary
for laboratory testing and service contracts necessary to properly maintain the high-tech
equipment, is budgeted to increase over prior years as expenses fluctuate annually depending on
service needs. Revenue will change slightly as 2011 Realignment funding is anticipated to
increase.
The recommended funding level will allow the department to pursue its mission and operate
under ISO/IEC accreditation.
An increase in NGFC of $3,678 from the preliminary budget is recommended to mitigate
increase insurance rates due to the departure of Kern Medical from the County’s self-insured
insurance program.
The preliminary recommended budget provides the department with funding for 36 of the
department’s 38 authorized positions. The department will unfund one vacant (1) Forensic
Laboratory Technician position and one (1) vacant Office Services Technician position.
Unfunding these positions will allow the department to maintain its mission, operate in
accordance with ISO/IEC standards, and transfer $332,860 of BSI to the District Attorney’s
Criminal Division to mitigate layoffs. The department requested the addition of a Programmer position; however, due to the continued decrease in on-going resources and the department’s use
of $490,849 in one-time BSI credits toward on-going costs, the additional position is not
recommended at this time. Should the department pursue charging other agencies for services an
ongoing source of revenue would be available to support the new position.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and operating costs necessary to
provide patrol operations for the County’s unincorporated areas and operate the County’s adult
detention facilities. The budget also includes costs related to the following: Coroner, public
administrator, civil unit, court services, specialized investigations, communication and
administrative functions. These expenditures are funded primarily by an allocation of Net
General Fund Cost (NGFC). Other sources of revenue include $47.2 million in Local Public
Safety Funds (Proposition 172) and an allocation of 2011 Realignment of $28.4 million to
mitigate the impacts of the State prison realignment under Assembly Bill 109 (AB 109). The
department charges for services for providing housing and transportation for federal prisoners
and law enforcement services to the City of Wasco.
The recommended funding level will provide the Sheriff’s Office with the resources to conduct
mandated coroner and public administrator functions but will have significant impacts on
detentions and law enforcement services due to the elimination of sworn positions and
consolidation of services. The department’s 5% NGFC reduction equates to $5,914,317. The
reduction is offset by an increase in NGFC of $2.5 million for pension cost escalation.
Impacts of the recommended funding level include the continued consolidation of the
Buttonwillow substation with the Delano substation and the Boron substation with the Mojave
substation, elimination of the Vice and Major Violator units resulting in the reassignment of
staff, and the reassignment of one Sergeant from the East Bakersfield substation enacted during
mid-year reductions in FY 2015-16. In addition, to achieve guideline the Sheriff's Office will be
required to unfund 143 positions which was originally anticipated to cause up to 10 layoffs
during the preliminary budget; however, all layoffs have been mitigated by the Sheriff’s
willingness to hold 25 Detention Deputy positions vacant for a portion of the year in-lieu of
layoffs. While no layoffs are planned, the department identified 7 of its 13 Deputy Trainees that,
at the completion of the academy in September, may not be hired if no funded vacant Deputy
Sheriff positions are available.
Additionally, holding 25 Detentions Deputy positions vacant and unfunded for a portion of the
year is only a temporary solution as the department will soon need to begin hiring detentions
staff to ensure their ability to staff the AB900 jail facility in September 2017.
The recommended budget will also have the following significant impacts:
 Closure of the Ridgecrest Jail which will require booking officers to travel to Mojave.
This action will result in additional time away from an officer's area of responsibility for
both the County and surrounding law enforcement jurisdictions.
 Reduction of flight hours resulting in decreased surveillance and support capabilities vital
to supporting ground units.
 Partial closure of Central Receiving Facility resulting in inmates being transported to and
from Lerdo more frequently.
 Reductions to staffing in specialized units resulting in reassignment of staff and less
follow-up on gang and narcotics investigation.
 Reassignment of two Deputies from the Rural Crimes Task Force.
 Consolidation of Rosamond and Mojave substations, resulting in the closure of the
Rosamond substation.
 Inability to replace 52 aging fleet vehicles.
Expenditures related to salaries and benefits will decrease due to positions being unfunded in FY
2016-17 versus FY 2015-16, while health benefit rates will increase again this year. Services and
supplies will increase as expenses offset by 2011 realignment (AB 109) and inmate welfare
funding will rise. The department also budgeted for the lease purchase of vehicles originally
planned for FY 2015-16 but deferred due to prior budget reductions, in addition to a lease
payment for the purchase of additional vehicles in FY 2016-17. Overall, the lease payments of
$1.4 million equates to $6.6 million of new and replacement of patrol utility vehicles and other
inmate transportation vehicles including a 55-passenger bus.
Revenue is anticipated to increase slightly over FY 2015-16 as inmate welfare, Cal-ID, and AB
109 funding will increase the total revenue by nearly $2 million. Other sources of revenue will
vary slightly.
An increase in NGFC of $538,121 from the preliminary budget is recommended to mitigate the
increased insurance rates due to the departure of Kern Medical from the County’s self-insured
insurance program.
The department currently has 1,348 authorized positions. The recommended budget includes the
addition of one (1) Computer Forensic Specialist position and the deletion of one (1) Evidence
Technician position. The recommended funding level will also require the department to hold
143 positions vacant and unfunded throughout FY 2016-17 but mitigates all layoffs.
Additionally, the department has indicated their desire to seek funding in the amount of
$1,325,197 for FY 2016-17 to recruit and train 53 Deputy Sheriff Trainees in order to backfill for
a portion of the anticipated attrition over the next 16 months plus an additional $3 million to
mitigate impacts.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and facility costs related to the
supervision of adult offenders and legally detained minors. A significant portion of these
expenditures are funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost (NGFC). The department
receives $10 million through State and federal funding which offsets a portion of its
expenditures. Other financing sources account for the largest portion of revenue which includes
$13.1 million of Local Public Safety Funds (Proposition 172), approximately $24.5 million in
2011 realignment to mitigate the impacts of the State prison realignment under AB 109, and
$4.75 million in juvenile realignment funds.

At the recommended funding level, the department will have no significant service level impacts,
although the department will continue to cope with large caseloads as individuals continue to be
released from jail back into the community under the department’s supervision.
Revenue in the recommended budget associated with Title IV-E program has decreased to $1
million from $6.7 million in FY 2012-13 due to a change in billing requirements for
administrative activity. This reduction has come with no corresponding service level reductions,
resulting in an increased General Fund burden mitigated by the 70-80 funded vacancies
historically held by the department.
Local Public Safety Funds are anticipated to decrease slightly while AB 109 and Community
Corrections Performance Incentive (SB 678) revenue continues to provide resources and
accounts for an overall increase in revenue over the FY 2015-16 actual of approximately $2.2
million.
Salaries and benefits cost is expected to increase in FY 2016-17 as health benefits rates rise. In
addition, the department has budgeted to fill all but 22 positions while historically averaging 75
vacancies over the past three years. Services and supplies are expected to increase over the FY
2015-16 actual due to increased spending associated with AB109, which is offset by revenue.
The recommended budget also includes the procurement of a number of information technology
related capital assets necessary to support the implementation of a new criminal justice
information system.
An increase in NGFC of $117,298 is recommended over the preliminary budget due to an
increase in insurance rates due to the departure of Kern Medical from the County’s selfinsurance
program.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for all but 22 vacant authorized
positions and 74 extra help positions. The department will delete one (1) Senior Office Services
Specialist position, two (2) Fiscal Support Technician positions, one (1) Office Services
Assistant position, one (1) Network Systems Administrator position, and one (1) Systems
Analyst/Programmer I/II position. The department will add one (1) Senor Human Resources
Specialist position, two (2) Human Resources Specialist I positions, one (1) Technology Services
Supervisor position, and one (1) Help Desk Technician I position for a net savings of $89,000.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and operating costs necessary to
achieve the department’s mission. These expenditures are funded primarily by property taxes
collected in budget unit 1114 in the Fire Fund of approximately $87.77 million, a decrease of
nearly $11 million from FY 2015-16. In FY 2014-15 a transfer of property tax base revenue, in
the amount of $18.4 million, between the General Fund and the Fire Fund in lieu of a direct Net
General Fund Contribution (NGFC) for fire protection services was approved by the Board of
Supervisors. This resulted in no direct NGFC beginning in FY 2014-15. However, due to a
reduction in property tax revenue and sustained expenditures in light of lost revenue associated
with a prior SAFER grant, the department requested an NGFC of $12,996,661. However, the
recommended budget includes only a contribution of $7,842,978 to mitigate some of the
anticipated service level impacts.
Other major sources of revenue for the Fire Department include charges for services from other
municipalities for whom the Fire Department provides fire and emergency response services
totaling $28.5 million and a $7.57 million allocation of Local Public Safety Funds (Proposition
172). This includes reimbursement revenue from other agencies for fire suppression costs
budgeted at $3.6 million. Historically, reimbursements fluctuate dramatically depending on the
severity and number of wild land fires during any given year, and the department may receive
additional revenue throughout the fiscal year. Additional funds would be recognized and
appropriated mid-year to cover overtime and other costs associated with fire response on behalf
of other agencies. Other charges for services also include agreements with several cities and
neighboring counties to facilitate reimbursement of costs of services provided.
The Fire Fund is facing a $17.5 million deficit for FY 2016-17 primarily from the loss property
tax revenue. The recommended budget proposes a four-year deficit mitigation plan that phases in
on-going budget reductions that are estimated to total nearly $12 million by FY 2019-20 while
providing a General Fund contribution estimated at $32 million through FY 2020-21.

The recommended budget proposes a contribution from the General Fund of $7,842,978 as part
of a four-year plan to ensure the Fire Fund is self-sufficient and can scale back operations over
this period of time. Even with the proposed NGFC allocation, the Fire Fund will still have
significant impacts.
The four-year plan for the Fire Fund requires the following elements, assumptions, and service
level impacts:
 The Fire Fund will deplete all of its reserves and designations in the amount of
$5,658,180 in FY 2016-17;
 Ongoing Services and Supplies reduction of $500,000 from the submitted budget;
 Ongoing revenue estimate for a first responder fee in the amount of $500,000 to be
presented to the Board in 2016;
 Reassign three Inyokern Airport Fire Engineers, beginning September 1, 2016 for an
ongoing cost savings, which amounts to $456,500 for FY 2016-17;
 Implement hybrid staffing model at Fire Station 11 for an ongoing annual overtime cost
savings of $439,096;
 Eliminate the Air and Wildland division as-of November 1, 2016 for an ongoing annual
savings in extra-help of $609,924; and
 Eliminate extra-help at an ongoing annual cost savings of $305,158.
In addition to the measures above, the General Fund will contribute $3,988,933 per year through
FY 2020-21 for the pension cost increase identified in FY 2015-16, for a total amount not to
exceed $19,944,665 over the next five years. It is anticipated, barring any major retirement plan
cost increases, the department will realize the same amount in savings when the 1995 pension
obligation bonds are paid off, at which time the department will no longer need this portion of
the General Fund contribution.
The remaining FY 2016-17 deficit, currently estimated to be $7,974,707 after the above items
are implemented, will be offset by a General Fund contribution in the amount of $3,603,401, or
50% of the deficit, while the remaining deficit will be absorbed by the Fire Department through
the application of $323,043 in fund balance available and $2,904,971 in increased property tax
revenue estimates. An additional General Fund contribution in the amount of $250,644 is
recommended due to the increase in insurance rates which results from the departure of Kern
Medical from the County’s self-insurance program. The remaining FY 2016-17 deficit of
$1,143,292 must be achieved through cost saving measures. This includes holding vacant
positions through attrition, civilianization of the fire prevention staff, and changes to the way
safety employees on an administrative assignment are paid when engaged in non-administrative
duties, such as wildland firefighting. The recommended budget mitigates all proposed layoffs
and requires the department to exercise extreme financial discipline in this, and future, fiscal
years.
The General Fund contribution will be funded from reserves and designations of the General
Fund. Ultimately, the Fire Fund will be expected to mitigate the ongoing deficit over a four year
period similar to General Fund departments. In the absence of this multi-year plan, the Fire
Department would have to reduce the budget by nearly $12 million or 7.4% this fiscal year. This
long-term austerity plan follows the same approach as the long-term plan implemented for the
General Fund departments and will require an annual General Fund contribution through FY
2019-20 of 50% of each year’s projected deficit for a total cumulative contribution for operations
of $11.9 million over the next four years.
The total General Fund contribution is recommended at $7.84 million, while the department is
expected to achieve cost reductions of $3.45 million, or 1.74%, for FY 2016-17.
The recommended budget proposes holding 47 positions vacant and unfunded through FY 2016-
17.
The County Contribution – Fire budget unit appropriates supplemental funding from the General
Fund to the Fire Fund to support general operating expenses. Appropriations within this budget
unit will be transferred to the Fire Department’s operating budget 2415 and is included in that
budget unit under the revenue category of other financing sources.

In FY 2014-15 a transfer of property tax base revenue between the General Fund and the Fire
Fund in lieu of a direct Net General Fund Contribution (NGFC) for fire protection services was
approved by the Board of Supervisors. This resulted in no direct NGFC during FY 2014-15 and
FY 2015-16. For FY 2016-17 the Fire Department continues to receive $18.4 million through the
direct contribution of property taxes and has now requested an NGFC in the amount of
$12,996,661 to avoid service level reductions due to the loss of property tax revenue related to
oil and gas properties. Through further analysis and development of a long-term plan, the
recommended contribution amount is $7,842,978, which includes a contribution for pension cost
increases in the amount of $3,988,933, $3,603,401 for operations and $250,664 for increased
insurance rates. Additional details available in Budget Unit 2415 – Fire.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staff costs. These expenditures are
necessary to provide mandated inspection services in the field of agriculture and weights and
measures. Vehicles and fuel charges comprise a majority of the operating expenses.
The department is funded through charges for phytosanitary services, weight and measures
registration fees, reimbursement from State contracts, a portion of the State’s pesticide mill
assessment and the County’s portion of unclaimed gasoline tax. The department also receives an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

The recommended budget allows the department to operate at current service levels without the
use of Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits. Expenditures are expected to remain similar to
FY 2015-16. Revenue, particularly associated with State contracts has increased slightly and has
been budgeted solely based on what the department has already been awarded. Additional State
contracts may be awarded throughout the year, and consistent with prior years, the department
plans to recognize new revenue throughout the fiscal year as it is received. The department will
meet their proposed 5% reduction through holding vacant positions unfunded throughout the
fiscal year.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for 48 of the departments 49
currently authorized positions. The department will continue to utilize a significant number extra
help staff to assist with seasonal workloads related to State contracts.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with labor costs from the
Public Works Internal Service Fund. The division has budgeted nearly $1.4 million within
services and supplies to reimburse Public Works to fully staff the operations of the Code
Compliance division. The division receives reimbursement for cleaning areas subject to illegal
dumping and revenue from code enforcement violation fines. The division is primarily funded by
an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
The recommended budget allows for the department to maintain current service levels but
General Fund reductions will require the use of $33,000 of the division’s $81,664 accumulated
Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits.
The FY 2015-16 expenditures includes the release of $490,000 in Blight Remediation
designation for various projects within Kern County. The FY 2016-17 budget does not include
appropriations from this designation, the division will seek approval for this funding from the
Board of Supervisors throughout the year as projects arise. The division’s budgeted revenue will
increase slightly due to increased reimbursement for illegal dumping clean-up paid out of the
Solid Waste Enterprise Fund.
All staff formerly employed within the department were transferred to the Public Works Internal
Service Fund effective July 2015.
The majority of the expenditures of the division are associated with labor reimbursement costs
and plan check consultants. The division has budgeted nearly $6 million within services and
supplies to reimburse the Public Works Department to fully staff the operations of the Building
Inspection division. The primary source of revenue for the division is building permit fees. The
volatility of housing development within Kern County has resulted in conservative permit
revenue budgeted for FY 2016-17. However, large scale solar projects in recent years have
brought significant amounts of unanticipated permit revenue to the Building Inspection Fund.
Services and supplies in addition to salary reimbursement to Public Works is budgeted at $1.2
million to be used for consulting services, solar and wind energy surveying and zoning services.
The budget also includes appropriation for contingencies in Budget Unit 2624 in the amount of
$550,000 to mitigate uncertainties.
The fund balance as of June 30, 2016 was $5.4 million. The division anticipates low levels of
building permit requests in FY 2016-17, that will be alleviated by using $2.9 million of fund
balance available. The remaining fund balance in the amount of $2.5 million, will be added to
the general designation for use in future years.
The recommended budget will allow the division to maintain or exceed current levels of service.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs and service
and supplies required to perform the functions of the department. Most of the revenues for this
department are derived from customers for recording and providing copies of documents. In
addition, operating transfers in are received from various other special revenue funds listed in the
summary of revenues that contribute to the functions of the department. The department receives
a contribution from budget unit 2705 from pass-through revenue comprised of a $1 fee per
recording transaction.
The recommended budget includes an increase in expenditures primarily due to the appropriation
for contingencies from the department’s ending fund balance of $821,260, which the department
will use toward any unanticipated operational costs. Capital assets of $31,000 are appropriated
for the purchase of a network server and replacement of a network printer. The department
expects an increase in revenue based on prior year activity, specifically in Charges for Services
and the 2705-Contribution to Recorder budget unit. The department does not receive a NGFC
contribution for operations.
The contribution is funded by revenue generated from a $1 fee charged on subsequent pages of
certain document transactions. The $1 fee is passed through the General Fund to the Recorder in
order to achieve compliance with Government Code section 27361(b). The fee collected can only
be used for the Recorder’s functions. The recommended budget includes an anticipated increase
in charges for services based on prior year activity.
The majority of expenditures for the agency are associated with staffing costs for positions
required to perform administrative and technology services for the Planning and Public Works
departments as well as Kern Sanitation Authority and the East Kern Air Pollution District. The
division is primarily funded through charges to non-General Fund departments in addition to an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
The recommended budget includes an increase of $111,200 in salaries and benefits from the FY
2015-16 adopted budget due to the funding of one (1) Programmer position that was unfunded in
FY 2015-16 and a personnel reorganization that resulted in additional cost to the department that
will be reimbursed by the Planning and Natural Resources department. Appropriations have been
included for the purchase of one (1) core switch and one (1) replacement microwave transmitter
to support communications with the County Administrative building. The recommended budget
provides funding to maintain current levels of service, the division has reduced extra-help costs
in FY 2016-17 to meet the budget guideline.
The recommended budget includes funding for 10 authorized permanent positions and one (1)
extra-help position. Changes from FY 2015-16 adopted budget includes funding for one (1)
Programmer position that was unfunded in FY 2015-16, this position is reimbursed entirely by
the Planning and Natural Resources department.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs and
contracts with external legal and environmental consultants. The department receives significant
revenue from applicant fees, oil and gas permitting and reimbursements for costs related to
contracts. The recommended budget includes $670,000 for RENEWBIZ projects. The remaining
funding is primarily an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
The recommended budget provides the department funding for 47 of 48 authorized positions,
leaving one (1) vacant Planner position unfunded. The FY 2016-17 recommended budget
includes revenue and associated costs related to oil and gas permitting and additional revenue
from the increased hourly composite rate billed to applicants for applicant initiated projects. The
department anticipates $2 million in revenue from these sources to offset associated costs in FY
2016-17.
The recommended budget includes funding for 10 currently vacant positions that were added
earlier in FY 2015-16 related to the increased workload for oil and gas permitting. The
department has budgeted to leave one (1) vacant Planner position unfunded in order to absorb
reductions to the net General Fund cost.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and operating costs necessary for
field services which include local rabies control in accordance with California Health and Safety
Code and animal shelter services. These expenditures are funded primarily by an allocation of
Net General Fund Cost. Other sources of revenue include animal license, animal redemption and
adoption fees as well as reimbursement from the Cities of Tehachapi and Arvin for shelter and
enforcement activities. The department receives a portion of the 1991 health realignment
revenue.

The recommended budget provides funding to maintain services at a relatively status quo level
and will allow the department to provide resources necessary to maintain a high level of care for
County animals.
Salaries and benefits cost will remain flat as an additional position is unfunded to achieve the 5%
Net General Fund Cost reduction. Services and supplies reflects a decrease as the additional
$250,000 in spay/neuter funding provided in the prior two years has not yet been transferred to
the operational budget. However, $200,000 in spay/neuter funding is included in the
Appropriations for Contingencies, budget unit 1970 and will be transferred to the department
upon final budget adoption. A spay/neuter grant received by the department from Petco will
make up the other $50,000 in spay/neuter funding to ensure a total of $250,000 is available to the
department for these activities in FY 2016-17.
While not included in the budget, the Board recently approved an increase in the department’s
fees for service. Operational changes associated with the separation from the City of Bakersfield
and moving toward a no kill shelter have increased the cost of care necessary to facilitate a live
release including spay/neuter, veterinary care, and feeding necessitated the revision. Any
additional revenue will offset the actual cost of service and will be recognized mid-year when
receipts are known.
An increase in NGFC of $11,402 is recommended due to the increase in insurance rates as a
result of Kern Medical’s departure from the County’s self-insurance programs.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. The department will
unfund four (4) vacant Animal Care Worker positions, one (1) vacant Marketing and Promotions
Associate position, one (1) vacant Special Projects Manager position, and one (1) vacant Animal
Control Officer position. These positions represent a vital role in ensuring the department meets
its goal of becoming a no-kill shelter by 2020; however, budget constrains make holding these
positions necessary. Extra-help is budgeted to be used as-needed to maintain shelter operations.
Road Fund activities are funded primarily from highway-users sources. Funding consists of
State and Federal fuel taxes (Gas Tax), local sales taxes, and development fees. Labor costs
within this division account for $23.5 million or 42% of total expenditures. The majority of
remaining expenditures for this budget unit are associated to equipment, supplies and materials
required to construct, service, and maintain public ways. The division receives some
reimbursement for services provided and is also funded by an allocation of $4 million in Net General Fund Cost for road maintenance budgeted in the Contribution to Public Works Budget
Unit 3016.

The amount of Highway Users Tax Account (HUTA) revenue allocated from the State for FY
2016-17 has decreased by approximately $2 million from the FY 2015-16 allocation for a total
$8 million reduction since FY 2014-15. To offset the reduction in HUTA revenue, the division
has deferred the purchase of several capital assets and decreased locally funded paving and
sealing projects by $2 million. Though the division will realize a reduction in HUTA revenue for
FY 2016-17, Federal Aid revenue is budgeted to increase $12 million from revenues received in
FY 2015-16 with the anticipation of project reimbursements.
The fund balance as of June 30, 2016 was $15.3 million. The fund balance is sufficient to cover
the FY 2016-17 Net Fund Cost of $8.8 million with the remaining $6.5 million increasing the
fund’s general reserves balance.
The County Contribution – Public Works budget unit will appropriate supplemental funding
from the General Fund to the Public Works Internal Service Fund to support countywide
maintenance which may include emergency, and ongoing improvement projects. Appropriations
within this budget unit will be transferred to the Public Works Internal Service Fund and will be
reflected in that budget unit under the revenue category other financing sources.

In January 2015 the Board of Supervisors approved the formation of a Public Works
Department. A portion of what has previously been allocated to the General Fund Contribution
to Roads will now be distributed to the General Fund Public Works Department to be spent on
countywide local projects including equipment acquisitions. The FY 2015-16 contribution
included unspent funds that were previously allocated to the Roads Department. The FY 2016-17
contribution has decreased 5% from FY 2015-16 base contribution to mitigate the fiscal impacts
within the General Fund. The anticipated impacts from this reduction in FY 2016-17 will be
reduced resources available for road maintenance and locally funded projects.
Other Financing Uses of $328,473 are available for transfer to the Airports Enterprise Fund to
fund the cost associated with capital facilities, including debt service. This budget unit contains
no revenue as the AEOA revenue is collected within Budget Unit 1112 discretionary revenue as
property taxes for the General Fund.

The recommended budget includes $49,720, which is an 18% increase in General Fund
contribution over FY 2015-16 actual as a result of growth in property tax allocations within the
defined are of the AEOA.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs necessary to
provide the services and perform the functions of the department. The largest revenue category
for the department is intergovernmental, which is comprised of revenue received from the State
and federal government. This revenue is intended to cover the range of services provided by the
department. Charges for service revenue is generated from document recording, clinic fees, case management fees, laboratory fees, and other sources. The department also receives an allocation
of Net General Fund Cost.

The increase in salaries and benefits when compared to prior year actual is primarily due to an
anticipated increase in filled positions. A portion of the increase in employee costs will be
recovered through increased charges for services. The recommended budget includes $15,000 for
the acquisition of one (1) virtual server. Services and supplies is increased partially due to the
planned purchase of a mobile clinic that will service areas of need, and a lab upgrade project.
Intergovernmental revenue is anticipated to increase primarily due to changes in grants and
allocations, and the shifting of the nurse home visit program to a greater reimbursed funding
source, and the anticipated reimbursement increases due to additional filled positions.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1) Health Education Assistant I/II
position, and two (2) Medical Investigator positions, and the deletion of two (2) Stock Clerk
positions, and one (1) Supervising Nurse position, for a net savings of approximately $28,000.
The department has indicated that the position deletions will not result in lay-offs.
The recommended budget holds the following authorized positions vacant and unfunded: one (1)
Contracts Administrative Assistant, one (1) Public Health Project Specialist, one (1) Billing
Office Specialist III, one (1) Fiscal Support Specialist, six (6) Public Health Nurse Jr./I/II, one
(1) Public Health Epidemiologist, one (1) Public Health Laboratory Director, one (1) Deputy
Public Health Officer, and two (2) Public Health Aide I/II at an annual savings of approximately
$2.0 million. The recommended staffing levels are above prior year actuals and no significant
service level impacts are anticipated.
Operating expenses of $52.5 million are comprised mostly of contracted and specialized
professional services, and make up the majority of the department’s expenditures within the
services and supplies category. Staffing expenses of $71.3 million are the other major
expenditure category for the department. Together, these expenditure categories support
programs and clinics that provide mental health services to County residents. State, federal, and
realignment revenue are provided through sales tax, vehicle license fees, Medi-Cal, Mental
Health Services Act (MHSA), the Assembly Bill 109 (AB 109) Public Safety Realignment
program, and federal grants.
The department’s primary sources of revenue in FY 2016-17 are Medi-Cal Fees, Realignment,
and MHSA funding. Funds for the programs operated within this budget unit are provided by
sources outside the General Fund. In order to qualify for some of the funding from the State, a
County General Fund contribution in the amount of $771,124 is required and is appropriated in
the Mental Health – County Contribution budget unit 4127. In addition to the General Fund
contribution, $402,624 in 1991 Realignment Vehicle License Fee revenue and $225,795 in onetime
prior year 1991 Realignment growth funds are included.

The department added 44 new, permanent, positions at the end of FY 2014-15 to meet the
increased demand on services resulting from implementation of expanded Medi-Cal services
under the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Despite efforts, the department continues to have
difficulty filling its 587 authorized permanent positions. Recently the department restructured its
human resources function to work in tandem with the Human Resources Division of the County
Administrative Office to ensure staff is available to provide services.
Under ACA, the newly eligible population qualifies for 100% reimbursement under the Federal
Financial Participation reimbursement methodology. After 2016, Medi-Cal will cover no less
than 90% of costs on a permanent basis for newly eligible Medi-Cal beneficiaries. Overall, the
department’s revenue and expenditure are increasing compared to FY 2015-16 due to the
increased staffing level costs and corresponding increase in Medi-Cal and MHSA revenue.
In 2011, the State realigned the assignment of program and fiscal responsibility to local
governments (2011 Realignment). The services that were previously funded with 1991 Mental
Health Program Realignment are now supported by a guaranteed revenue source within the 2011
Realignment structure. 2011 Realignment funds are transferred in equal monthly payments,
relieving the burden of variability in timing of tax receipts that often created cash flow concerns
under the previous 1991 Realignment disbursement model. The department’s share of 2011
Realignment funding will be $22.6 million in FY 2016-17.
State realignment also brought a new funding source to Mental Health in 2011 via Assembly Bill
109 (AB 109), also known as the Public Safety Realignment Act of 2011. This act shifted a
large portion of the offender population responsibilities from the State to local governments.
Mental Health's AB 109 allocation is $2.6 million for FY 2016-17 and will be used to provide
staffing and increased contractor funding for both in-custody and outpatient mental health
programs and services for the AB 109 population.
Beginning in FY 2012-13, two additional programs were added to the State's 2011 Realignment
budget plan; Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment (EPSDT) and Mental
Health Managed Care. EPSDT is a federally mandated program that requires the County, as the
State's contractor, to provide Medi-Cal beneficiaries under the age of 21 with all medically
necessary specialty mental health services. The Mental Health Managed Care program provides
Medi-Cal beneficiaries with specialty mental health services. The services provided under this
plan include psychiatric inpatient hospital services and outpatient specialty mental health services. The department's EPSDT and Mental Health Managed Care allocations in FY 2016-17
will be $10.5 million and $7.2 million, respectively.
MHSA funding is set at $32.2 million in FY 2016-17 and will be used to provide community and
support services as well as prevention and early intervention services to County residents.
Overall, the FY 2016-17 recommended budget provides the department with the desired
flexibility to continue to meet the demands and challenges of providing quality mental health
services to County residents. The department will use $12.2 million in available fund balance
carry forward from FY 2015-16 to offset the department’s remaining operating fund costs.
The coming fiscal year will continue to bring service delivery growth for the department as
newly enrolled Medi-Cal recipients under the ACA engage the system for services. The
department anticipates a continued and ongoing increase in Medi-Cal funding in the coming
fiscal year as current and new authorized positions are filled.
Finally, the department set an appropriation for contingencies in the amount of $5 million for the
expected repayment to the State for cost report settlements. This payback is a result of the
department claiming certain ineligible costs in prior years. Funds will be repaid once the State
completes its settlement processes. The department has improved its cost reporting and
allocation practices to mitigate future paybacks. Additional appropriations for contingencies
include $3 million for the anticipated cost of implementing the mandated Children’s Continuum
of Care for foster children; $2.7 million for anticipated cost to renovate Mary K. Shell building;
$500,000 for technology projects; $1.1 million for the construction of the Ridgecrest crisis
stabilization unit that is being funded with a grant from the California Health Facilities
Financing Authority and an additional $2.5 million for the anticipated cost of the new Drug
Medi-Cal Organized Delivery System program.
The department added 44 full time positions at the end of FY 2014-15 to meet the increased
demand on services resulting from implementation of expanded Medi-Cal services under the
ACA. The department is requesting the addition of 34 full time positions and the deletion of two
positions to continue to meet the increased demand for services including services to the AB109
population. The estimated net annual cost of the new positions is $3,923,000 and it is funded
with an increase of Mental Health Services Act allocation, additional AB109 allocations and an
anticipated increase in Federal Financial Participation through Medi-Cal billings for direct
services.
The division receives a significant portion of revenue for permitting, inspecting and enforcement
services provided. The division performs these services for food, hazardous waste, water, solid
waste, housing, and medical waste facilities. A smaller portion of revenue is derived from grants
and educational programs. The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with
staffing costs for positions required to perform the functions assigned.
In May 2016 the Environmental Health Services Division was transferred from the General Fund
to a separate special revenue fund. In recent fiscal years the division has worked to fully evaluate
and adjust the fee schedule. These fee adjustments are intended to support the operations and
mission of the division, and are conducive to the division being outside of the General Fund. The
division will still be responsible for routinely reviewing all fees charged for appropriateness.
Revenue collected for permitting and services is anticipated to increase due to changes in the fee
schedule used by the division. Salaries and benefits are anticipated to increase primarily due to
the planned filling of currently vacant positions. Other charges is a new expenditure for the
division in FY 2016-17 that is comprised of Countywide Cost Allocation Plan charges that the
division incurs as a non-General Fund budget.
The fund balance as of June 30, 2016 was $388,662. The ending fund balance, plus the budgeted
operational surplus for FY 2016-17, will be placed in a general designation. The estimated
general designation balance as of June 30, 2017 is $642,972. This funding will be available for
the division to use in the event of unplanned future expenditures or revenue fluctuations.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of one (1) Fiscal Support Technician position,
one (1) Senior Health Educator position, one (1) Programmer I/II-Systems Analyst I/II position,
and the addition of one (1) Chief Environmental Health Specialist and one (1) Senior Systems
Analyst position, at an annual net savings of approximately $14,500.
The department’s largest expense items in FY 2016-17 will be salaries and benefits ($8.3
million) and funds disbursed via service delivery contracts for substance abuse counseling and
treatment ($11.5 million). Overall, the department’s revenue is anticipated to increase as a result
of the reallocation of 2011 Realignment funds from Budget Unit 4120-Mental Health Services
and an anticipated increase in the Federal Financial Participation through Medi-Cal billings for
direct services to new individuals eligible under the Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery System
Program.
Funds for the programs operated within this budget unit are provided by sources outside the
General Fund. In order to qualify for some of the funding, a County General Fund contribution in the amount of $111,363 is required and is appropriated in the Mental Health – County
Contribution budget unit 4127. The County contributes an additional $98,163 to this budget unit
for assistance with gang suppression activities. Funding for this program was reduced by 50%
from $196,326 to mitigate fiscal constraints on the County General Fund.

The Criminal Justice Realignment Act, also known as AB 109, provides a funding source to the
department. AB 109 Realignment funds are split between Mental Health and Substance Use
Disorder services, with the majority of funding applied to direct services delivered by the
department and contracted providers, housing, and medications. Substance Use Disorders’
programmatic allocation of AB 109 funding in FY 2016-17 is $2.6 million, which will be used to
provide evidence-based treatment to inmates in the Lerdo Jail Facility and community-based
treatment for the released AB 109 population. The Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment
block grant will provide approximately $3.9 million in funding to the department in FY 2016-17.
With the rollout of 2011 Realignment, the State shifted program responsibilities and
corresponding revenue to local government. This plan realigned several substance abuse
treatment programs that were previously funded through the State Department of Alcohol and
Drug Programs. The realigned programs include Regular and Perinatal Drug Medi-Cal, Regular
and Perinatal Non Drug Medi-Cal, and Drug Courts. Funding levels remain relatively consistent
with pre-realignment levels, and no service impacts have been experienced with this change.
2011 Realignment funding amounts to $6.2 million in the recommended budget. This amount
includes $2,773,876 of 2011 Realignment funds that were previously allocated to Budget Unit
4120-Mental Health Services in order to provide services under the Drug Medi-Cal Organized
Delivery System Program.
The coming fiscal year will bring continued service delivery growth for the Department as newly
enrolled Medi-Cal recipients under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) engage the system for
services. The department will continue to provide the existing Medi-Cal substance use disorder
treatment services including: Outpatient drug free treatment, intensive outpatient treatment,
naltrexone treatment, narcotic treatment, perinatal residential substance use disorder services and
detoxification in a hospital. In addition, under the Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery System
Program approved by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) under the Section
1115 Waiver, the department will be required to provide a significant number of additional
services that include: early intervention, additional outpatient services, residential treatment not
limited to perinatal, withdrawal management, recovery services, case management, and
behavioral and physical integration. The department is in the process of finalizing the required
implementation plan and expects approval by CMS in the fall. The department’s recommended
budget includes the addition of forty new positions to address the services under the Drug Medi-
Cal Organized Delivery System Program.
The recommended budget includes the addition of forty new positions to address the services
under the Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery System Program. The program was approved by
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services under the Section 1115 Waiver. The estimated
annual cost of the new positions is $4,645,000 and it is funded by reallocating $2,773,876 of
2011 Realignment funds from Budget Unit 4120-Mental Health Services and an anticipated
increase in Federal Financial Participation through Medi-Cal billings for direct services.
The State requires the County to appropriate funding through a Maintenance of Effort (MOE) for
mental health and substance use disorders services in the amounts of $771,124 and $111,362
respectively. The County contribution includes an additional $98,163 to Substance Use
Disorders budget unit 4123 for assistance with gang suppression activities. Funding for this
program was reduced by 50% from $196,326 to mitigate fiscal constraints on the County
General Fund.
In addition to the MOE and General Fund contribution, the Mental Health Services operating
budget unit 4120 will receive $402,624 in 1991 Realignment Vehicle License Fees (VLF)
revenue and $225,795 in one-time prior year 1991 Realignment growth funds.

The recommended budget represents the mandated funding in accordance with MOE
requirements. Gang suppression funding has been reduced; however the department has
indicated there will be no significant service level impacts as other funding sources will be
utilized to backfill the reduction.
The recommended budget includes a contribution of $209,174, which is offset by $97,771 of
Health program realignment revenue budgeted to meet the County's responsibility of providing
environmental health services. Also included is $111,403 of prior year revenue for
Environmental Health Services.
The division receives revenue for issuing ambulance permits, issuing certifications and recertifications,
performing oversight of trauma systems at Kern Medical Center and for medical assessment fees collected from court fines and penalties. The largest expenditure category for the
division is staffing costs which are anticipated to increase from the filling of a currently vacant
position.

Intergovernmental revenue is anticipated to increase primarily due to a new Ebola regional
planning grant in the amount of $270,000. The increase in charges for services revenue is
primarily due to a revision of the ambulance rates process that required service providers to
reimburse the division for contracted rate reviews, if needed. This would have no net impact on
the division as services and supplies would incur an identical expenditure.
This budget unit accounts for $30.5 million in payments to the Kern County Hospital Authority
(Hospital Authority) for providing medical care to indigent residents, and inmates housed in the
County’s adult and juvenile detention facilities. In total, the County has budgeted $23.7 million
for medical services to adults and juveniles ($19.8 million for adult inmate care and $3.9 million
for juvenile inmate care). The cost of providing medical services for the adult inmates is offset
by $600,000 received for care of Federal inmates. The remaining County contribution is
comprised of $4.6 million to cover the cost of medically indigent residents, to reimburse the
Hospital Authority for the Cost of performing forensic examinations and approximately $2
million in a capital contribution that was previously allocated but not distributed during FY
2015-16. The funds will be used for the purchase of equipment that has exhausted its useful life
or is critical to provide patient care.
As in prior years, some of the County’s costs for providing care to the medically indigent are
offset by an allocation of 1991 Health Realignment derived from sales taxes and vehicle license
fees. Due to the State’s new Realignment methodology approved under Assembly Bill 85 (AB
85), the County anticipates only $662,022 in funding from 1991 Health Realignment in FY
2016-17 as a result of the hospital’s enhanced Medi-Cal reimbursement for the previously uninsured. An additional $446,941 in 1991 Health Realignment is included from carry-forward
growth funds received in FY 2015-16.

The contributions appropriated in this budget unit were formerly provided to Kern Medical
Center Enterprise Fund, a county department. On September 26, 2014, Governor Brown
approved Assembly Bill 2546-Salas which gave the County Board the authority to establish by
ordinance, the Hospital Authority to manage, administer, and control Kern Medical Center, the
County-owned and operated hospital. Through Health and Safety Code Section 101852 the
California Legislature authorized the County to establish the Hospital Authority and to transfer
the ownership, control, management, and operations of Kern Medical Center to the Hospital
Authority. On October 6, 2015, The County Board of Supervisors enacted Ordinance No. A356,
as amended, that added Chapter 2.170 to Title 2 of the Ordinance Code of the County of Kern
(the “Ordinance”) concerning the creation of the Hospital Authority. The Ordinance was
effective on November 6, 2015. Effective July 1, 2016, the Hospital Authority owns and
operates Kern Medical Center, which continues as a designated public hospital and safety net
provider. The medical facilities transferred to the Hospital Authority and governed, maintained,
operated and administered by the Hospital Authority consist of substantially all of the facilities,
equipment, supplies, personnel, and operations comprising Kern Medical Center and other
facilities, clinics, and programs which delivered medical services. The County will continue to
retain ultimate responsibility for indigent medical care pursuant to Section 17000 of the Welfare
and Institution Code. The Hospital Authority will provide or arrange for the provision of health
care services to indigent residents of the County to satisfy some or all of the County’s obligation.
The Board of Supervisors adopted a personnel transition plan for the transition of employees
from the County to the Hospital Authority. Employees of Kern Medical Center or the County on
the date of transfer of July 1, 2016, who became Hospital Authority employees retained their
existing or equivalent classifications and job descriptions upon transfer to the Hospital Authority,
receive comparable pension benefits (if permissible pursuant to relevant pension plan terms) and
their existing salaries and other benefits that include but are not limited to vacation, sick leave,
personal leave, health care, retiree health benefits, and deferred compensation plans. The
Hospital Authority will provide same level of employee benefits for a period of 24 months after
the effective date of the transfer of Kern Medical Center to the Hospital Authority, to the extent
required by applicable memoranda of understanding, other agreements, or laws. The Hospital
Authority is governed by a seven (7) member governing board, which is known as the Hospital
Authority Board of Governors. The Board of Governors is appointed by the Board of
Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors adopted the initial governing bylaws for the Hospital
Authority, which may be amended from time to time, for implementation by the Board of
Governors. The Board of Supervisors retains the right to approve certain actions and activities of
the Hospital Authority, to ensure the transfer of Kern Medical Center constitutes an ongoing
material benefit to the County and its residents. The Board of Supervisors, in its discretion, may
dissolve the Hospital Authority at any time, for any reason or for no reason.
The County and the Hospital Authority have entered into multiple agreements with respect to
certain health care, administrative, and financial services. These agreements contemplate certain
financial relationships between the County and the Hospital Authority including the County’s financial support in the form of loans and/or grants, the Hospital Authority assumption of certain
liabilities of the County incurred in connection with prior operations of Kern Medical Center, the
continued provision of certain health care services to residents of the County and inmates and the
County’s consent for the Hospital Authority to participate in and receive, and otherwise access,
certain County general purpose (General Fund) funds and local revenue funds (1991
Realignment) identified or earmarked for health care services to the indigent, including Medi-Cal
beneficiaries and uninsured patients.
Since Kern Medical Center is a Hospital Authority owned and operated facility in FY 2016-17,
the recommended budget provides for $30.5 million in payments to the Kern County Hospital
Authority under services and supplies, instead of providing for a transfer of the funds to the Kern
Medical Center Enterprise Fund.
The administrative and case management costs incurred by CCS are reimbursed by the State and
federal government, at varying ratios, depending on the health benefits a child is eligible to
receive. Medi-Cal eligibility results in a 100% reimbursement by the State; Targeted Low
Income Children’s Program (formerly Healthy Families) eligibility results in an 82.5%
reimbursement. Ineligibility for either program results in a 50% State reimbursement to CCS.
Revenue from the State is budgeted using actual CCS caseload eligibility statistics from the
previous year. Medical therapy services are reimbursed 50% by the State. Services and supplies
expenditures include costs related to diagnostic and treatment services provided.
Salaries and benefits are anticipated to increase primarily due to the planned filling of currently
vacant positions. Services and supplies is budgeted to increase primarily due to the full
appropriation of the County’s maintenance of effort costs.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget.
The recommended budget includes holding vacant and unfunded one (1) Program Support
Supervisor position, one (1) Occupational/Physical Therapist position, one (1) Assistant Program
Director position, and one (1) Fiscal Support Specialist position, at an annual savings of
approximately $560,000.
Salaries and benefits are the largest expenditure of this budget unit totaling $148.5 million which
covers employee costs for the administration and operation of various programs such as
CalWORKs, CalFresh, Child Protective Services, Adoptions, and Foster Care. Services and
supplies are budgeted at $39.6 million which includes the cost associated with community
providers for services required under several programs. Other charges are budgeted at $17.9
million and include reimbursements to other County departments for professional services for
programs as well as administrative costs through the county-wide cost allocation plan.
The largest revenue source for the department is federal and State reimbursements in the amount
of $160.5 million. The majority of funding for the department's various programs is funded by
federal and State funds, however many programs have a County share of cost which is the
portion the County is responsible for funding. The County's responsibility is funded by $25.3
million in 2011 Realignment revenues, $1.5 million in 1991 Realignment revenues, and $16.7
million in General Fund contribution. Realignment revenues are derived from sales taxes and
vehicle license fee collections of the State and as such are contingent upon the stability of the
economy.

The recommended budget includes an increase in appropriation of approximately $6.2 million
due primarily to an increase in CalWORKs Child Care Contracts and an increased utilization of
the CalWORKs Mental Health/Substance Abuse Allocation. The budget continues to include a
General Fund contribution for expanded Phase 1 Differential Response services provided by the
Kern County Network for Children, however, the contribution has been reduced by 10% which makes it $504,000 for FY 2016-17. Also included is a 50% decrease to Gang Contracts, which
equates to $734,693.
Intergovernmental revenue is increasing $2.3 million primarily due to increases in federal and
State reimbursements of public assistance administration costs. Other financing sources are
decreasing by $8.2 million overall. The decrease is the net effect of an increase in 2011
Realignment for Child Welfare Services of $2.1 million, an increase in Wraparound revenue of
$2 million, and a decrease of $12.1 million in General Fund contribution primarily the result of a
$10.6 million one-time increase in the FY 2015-16 County Contribution. There are no impacts
directly related to the one-time increase as it covered a fund balance shortfall experienced at June
30, 2015, and was not used for department operations in FY 2015-16. At June 30, 2016, the fund
balance in the Human Services Administration fund was $1,054,532 all of which, as prescribed
by County policy, will be placed in a general designation until such time a reconciliation of
accrued revenue and the final County Expense Claim has occurred.
The department is absorbing the 5% reduction in General Fund contribution of $918,848 by
holding 24 positions vacant in Child Protective Services, 19 of which are Social Services Worker
positions, and four (4) positions in the CalFresh program. Impacts of holding these positions
vacant are as follows:
- Social Workers will be challenged to meet State regulations which require monthly face
to face contact with children in their placements and parents as well as required monthly
contact with caregivers.
- Reasonable services will most likely be impaired due to workload increases which will
impacts parent's ability to reunify with their children timely, create court continuances
and possible court fines which would result in increases in the required County share of
cost.
- If Social Workers are unable to provide services in an effort to stabilize placement of
children, or reunite them with their families, the court could make a "no reasonable
services finding" which would shift the placement cost of a child to 100% County
responsibility for up to 6 months.
- Social Workers will experience difficulty in updating the Child Welfare Services/Case
Management System to document face to face contacts which could lead to less than
thorough assessments regarding safety and risk / strength and needs of a family resulting
in direct services being prolonged.
- An increase in foster care entry rates and the associated costs are very likely as Social
Workers could find it difficult to provide a thorough assessment and remove children
from their homes as a precautionary measure.
The recommended budget includes the addition of two (2) Office Services Assistant positions,
one (1) Fiscal Support Specialist position, and one (1) Human Services Resource Family
Specialist position along with the deletion of two (2) Office Services Technician positions, one
(1) Group Counselor I/II/III position, and one (1) Human Services Technician I/II/III position.
The net savings of these additions and deletions is $1,689. The department funds all of its
authorized permanent positions and 180 extra help positions; however, an adjustment of $8.9
million is included in total salaries to account for both the savings related to staff turnover as
well as the savings from holding vacant nineteen (19) Social Service Worker I/II/III/IV/V
positions, three (3) Office Services Technician positions, and (2) Social Service Supervisor I/II
positions in the Child Protective Services Bureau as well as four (4) Human Services Technician
I/II/III positions in the CalFresh program in order to meet the FY 2016-17 County Contribution
guideline.
The recommended budget provides $18.1 million to budget unit 5120, Human Services
Administration. This contribution is funded by Social Services Program Realignment revenues
of $1.5 million and a General Fund contribution of $16.7 million. In prior fiscal years, the
contribution for budget unit 5220, Human Services Direct Aid was also included in this budget
unit. Beginning in FY 2016-17, the contribution to budget unit 5220 will be made out of budget
unit 5125, County Contribution - Human Services Direct Financial Aid.

The recommended budget includes an overall reduction of appropriation of $96.9 million, the
majority of which is the result of the General Fund contribution for Human Services Direct Aid
being moved to budget unit 5125, but also includes a 5% net general fund cost reduction from
the prior year contribution in the amount of $918,848, a 50% reduction to funding for Gang
Prevention contracts in the amount of $734,693, and a 10%, or $56,000, reduction to funding for
the expansion of Phase 1 Differential Response services provided by Kern County Network for
Children, all of which affect the General Fund contribution to Human Services Administration.
See Human Services Administration budget unit 5120 for discussion on service level impacts
resulting from the FY 2016-17 reduction in county contribution.
The recommended budget provides $74.2 million to budget unit 5220, Human Services Direct
Financial Aid. In prior fiscal years, this contribution was included in budget unit 5121.
This contribution is funded by Social Services Program Realignment revenue of $23.4 million,
redirected 1991 Health Services Program Realignment for Child Poverty and Family Support
revenue of $30.4 million, $14 million of CalWORKs Maintenance of Effort Vehicle License
Fees, and a General Fund contribution of $6.5 million.

The recommended budget includes an overall decrease from FY 2015-16 actual of approximately
$7.4 million in appropriations budgeted to be transferred to Human Services Direct Financial Aid
due to FY 2014-15 growth funds being included in FY 2015-16 actual and a decrease in General
Fund contribution. The FY 2016-17 recommended General Fund contribution reflects a decrease
of $3.2 million as a result of a one-time contribution in FY 2015-16 that was necessary to backfill a shortfall in fund balance at June 30, 2015. See Human Services - Direct Financial Aid
budget unit 5220 for further discussion.
 The Human Services – Direct Financial Aid budget unit provides direct financial assistance to
qualifying persons throughout the County. CalWORKs is the greatest expenditure out of this
budget unit at approximately $121 million. Adoptions Assistance and Foster Care Assistance are
budgeted at $38.2 million and $53.4 million, respectively. In addition, $1.6 million is included
for General Assistance.
Major revenue sources of the department include $72.7 million in federal funds and $132.8
million in 1991 Realignment and 2011 Realignment funding.

The recommended budget includes a $9.1 million increase in expenditures over FY 2015-16 as a
result of anticipated increases in Adoptions and Foster Care payments due to an increase in
caseloads, aid payments, and impacts of the federal discount rate.
Realignment revenue is budgeted at a $11.9 million decrease from FY 2015-16 primarily due to
a $7.6 million carry forward included in FY 2015-16 and $3.7 million in growth funds being
included in FY 2015-16. Intergovernmental revenue is anticipated to increase $13.5 million over
FY 2015-16 actual primarily as a result of higher reimbursements to cover increases in
Adoptions and Foster Care costs. The recommended budget also includes a $6.5 million
contribution from the General Fund. At June 30, 2016, the fund balance was a deficit of
$73,689. Revenue associated with client repayments has been identified to cover the deficit.
The recommended budget is anticipated to be sufficient to cover the County's financial
responsibility of providing financial assistance to eligible recipients in the community.
The majority of expenditures in this budget unit are associated with staffing costs to perform the
services provided by the Veterans’ Service Department. The department is primarily funded by
an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. Additional sources of revenue include state funding and
grants and donations.
The recommended budget includes an increase in salaries and benefits due to health insurance
costs and an increase in filled positions. Other Financing Uses of $403,365 account for grant
funds to be transferred into the newly created grants and donations fund; the department
anticipates using $129,431 of grant funds to cover staffing and supply costs related to the Kern
Patriot Partnership. The department is expecting a slight increase in intergovernmental revenues
as a result of an increase in claimed workload units. The department does not anticipate service
level impacts as a result of the 5% reduction in NGFC.
The recommended budget includes funding one (1) Office Services Assistant position previously
left vacant and unfunded. The budget includes a reduction of extra help staff as two positions
transitioned into contracted positions.
Staffing expenses of $11.7 million fund 187 budgeted positions, of which 131 are permanent
positions and 42 are extra-help/temporary positions. Services and supplies expenditures of $3.4
million consist of cost for contracted services for adult protective services, supportive services,
senior nutrition programs and California Department of Aging programs. The department is
primarily funded through federal and State sources of $10.4 million that include revenue for
senior nutrition, protective services, and supportive services. Additionally, the department
receives approximately $1.5 million in 2011 Realignment revenue, $745,372 in 1991 Social
Services Realignment, and $759,098 in General Fund contribution.
The recommended budget includes an increase in salaries and benefits in FY 2016-17 as a result
of an increase in minimum wage effective January 1, 2017 and providing nutrition services
previously contracted to vendors. A portion of increased salaries and benefits is offset by
increased revenue from federal and State sources.
Revenue is expected to increase in FY 2016-17 due to an anticipated increase in reimbursable
activities for the IHSS program. The Aging and Adult Services fund balance at June 30, 2016
was $854,297, all of which has been budgeted in FY 2016-17. In addition, the use $15,553 of
general designation is included in the recommended budget. The remaining $1,045,640 will
remain in the general designation in order to mitigate future downturns in realignment revenue
and to help minimize service level impacts resulting from the increases in minimum wage.
The recommended budget includes funding for 131 permanent authorized positions and 42 extrahelp/
temporary positions.
The department has requested to add four (4) Office Services Technician positions, one (1)
Senior Information Systems Specialist position, and three (3) Senior Home Delivery Driver
positions. The department has also requested to delete four (4) Food Service Worker II
positions, one (1) Human Services Aide position, one (1) Mental Health Unit Supervisor
position, and one (1) Office Services Assistant position. The net cost of these changes is
approximately $227,000, which will primarily be funded with Department of Social Services and
California Department on Aging funds. Nearly $132,000 of the increase is attributable to the
temporary addition of a Senior Information Systems Specialist position to allow for a new
employee to train several months with the incumbent who is retiring in late FY 2016-17. The
department intends to delete the additional Senior Information System Specialist position next
fiscal year. In addition, the department will hold six positions vacant and unfunded: one (1) Program Specialist II position, one (1) Human Services Aide position, one (1) Senior Nutrition
Site Coordinator position, and three (3) Cook I/II/III positions.
The recommended budget includes an allocation to Aging and Adult Services Department,
budget unit 5610, in the amount of approximately $1.5 million to meet County match
requirements in specific programs as required by State and federal regulations. Social services
program realignment revenue provides funding in the amount of $745,373, with the remainder
being funded by a General Fund contribution.

The recommended budget includes a 5% decrease in Net General Fund Cost from FY 2015-16.
The department is able to absorb any service level impacts of the reduction through use of fund
balance carry forward from the previous year in the Aging and Adult Services fund.
The recommended budget includes a contribution of $8.3 million to cover the IHSS Maintenance
of Effort (MOE) with the State as well as the County’s administrative costs of the IHSS Public
Authority. Social services program realignment revenue in the amount of $8.3 million offsets the
County’s local match requirement.
Major expenditures for FY 2016-17 include salaries and benefits of $10.7 million to fund 97
budgeted permanent positions. The costs in this budget unit are funded primarily by operating
transfers in from budget unit 8907, Employers' Training Resource – WIOA.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding to allow the department to maintain its
current level of service to the community. The WIOA funds received by the department cover
two fiscal years at a time while many of their smaller grants cross fiscal years. The department
budgets the full amount of each grant available, regardless of which fiscal year they will be
spent.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1) Media Services Coordinator position
and one (1) Contracts Administration Assistant position, and the deletion of two (2) Program
Support Supervisor positions, at an estimated net savings of $8,500. The following positions will
be held vacant and unfunded: one (1) Fiscal Support Specialist, one (1) Senior Office Services
Specialist, one (1) Systems Analyst I/II-Programmer I/II, two (2) Office Services Assistant, and
one (1) Program Support Supervisor.
The major expenditures for the division include the staff and related expenditures related to the
administration of the grant programs. The expenditures are funded with an allocation of the
grants. There is no General Fund contribution to this budget unit.
Staffing expenses are the largest portion of the department’s expenditures for FY 2016-17, which
includes staffing for all the library facilities and the mobile units at the FY 2015-16 levels.
Services and supplies expenditures of $1.9 million include operating expenses for branch
locations, memberships, and library books and materials. Funding for books is established in the
recommended budget at $389,205. Included in services and supplies is funding for participation
in the San Joaquin Valley Library System (SJVLS). SJVLS is an organization composed of nine
public libraries in six counties. As a member of SJVLS, Kern County residents are able to
search the shared catalog and request that items be sent to their preferred branch.
The department is primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. The transfer from
the County Library donation fund is used to cover the contract for Ebooks. Throughout the fiscal
year, funds are transferred to purchase materials and enhancements of services. During FY 2015-
16, $108,224 was transferred from the Library Donation Fund and used for library materials and
reading programs.

The recommended budget allows the department to maintain current levels of service and
continue to meet its mission with no change in hours of operation. The recommended budget
provides funding that will support 37,856 combined hours of opening at all 27 library facilities,
which is the same as the estimated hours of opening in FY 2015-16. The decrease in
intergovernmental revenue is associated with one-time grant funding received in FY 2015-16 to
help the growing Spanish-speaking population in Kern County and, in particular, the rural
communities, to become more aware of and to utilize the many services the Library provides. In
order to meet the 5% reduction in NGFC in FY 2016-17, the department will need to hold six
positions vacant and unfunded and use approximately $161,858 of its accumulated Budget
Savings Incentive (BSI) credits.
The recommended budget includes funding for 116 authorized permanent positions and 38 extra
help positions. The department will hold six positions vacant and unfunded: four (4) Librarian II
positions, one (1) Fiscal Support Assistant position and one (1) Assistant Director position.
A majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs to perform
the office functions of the Farm and Home Advisor. Revenue for the department is minimal due
to the suspended sale of printed materials and lack of mileage reimbursement following the
transfer of vehicles to UC ownership. The department is funded by an allocation of Net General
Fund Cost to cover the requirements stated in the Memorandum of Understanding.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for staff and services and
supplies as required by the Memorandum of Understanding. Beginning in FY 2016-17, the
department will receive an allocation of the Net General Fund Cost that meets the requirements
stated in the MOU and is no longer eligible to accrue Budget Saving Incentive (BSI) Credits.
The slight reduction in service and supplies is the result of a decrease in the vehicle contribution
to the UC, which is based upon County garage rates and fuel costs.
Staffing costs of $7.5 million fund 78 positions for the administration, operations and
maintenance of the County’s numerous parks and County buildings. Services and supplies
appropriations of $4.6 million include utilities, maintenance, insurance, and fleet costs. The
department is primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. Revenue sources of
$2.1 million represents fees from camping, fishing, park entrance, facility use, permits, and
concession agreements.

Salaries and benefits will be higher than in FY 2015-16 due to the department's desire to fill
previously vacant positions to meet operational demands. The department continued with the
evaluation of the maintenance needs in remote locations, as well as the restructuring of the
department organizational structure, specifically the Park Rangers. These operational reviews
lead to the department not filling funded Parks Rangers and Groundkeeper positions, resulting in
lower salaries and benefit costs in FY 2015-16.
The recommended budget provides funding that will allow the department to fund 78 of the 85
authorized positions. In order to meet the 5% reduction in NGFC in FY 2016-17, the department
will need to hold seven positions vacant and unfunded. Park maintenance will remain at similar
levels as FY 2015-16 through the use of extra-help positions.
Services and supplies are recommended at an increased level in FY 2016-17, primarily as a result
of implementing a full year of privatization services in Phase III areas (Frazier Park, Ford City,
Valley Acres, Derby Acres, and Fellows) and to cover anticipated utility expenses. The
department continued to monitor drought related restrictions in FY 2015-16 and implemented
water conservation programs to reduce water usage at parks and recreational facilities, resulting
in lower services and supplies cost in FY 2015-16.
The department currently has 94 authorized positions and will delete eight (8) vacant
Groundskeeper I/II positions, one (1) Fiscal Support Technician position, one (1) Supervising
Park Ranger position and will add one (1) Fiscal Support Supervisor position to better meet
operational needs. In addition, the department will hold vacant and unfunded one (1)
Groundskeeper III position, three (3) Building Services Worker positions, and three (3) Park
Ranger positions. Since the eight (8) Groundskeeper I/II positions were vacant and unfunded in
FY 2015-16, the deletions should have negligible impact on department operations. The
recommended budget includes the use of 24 extra-help positions.
The recommended budget includes sufficient appropriations to cover debt service payments for
the 2009 Certificates of Participation, the 2011 Refunding Certificates of Participation, the 2007
California Infrastructure and Economic Development Bank Loan, in addition to the anticipated
interest cost of the FY 2016-17 Tax and Revenue Anticipation Notes. Appropriations are
included for the estimated costs for vacant space in the Southeast Bakersfield Community
Services Center that have increased with the relocation of some of the Employers’ Training
Resource employees and the Sheriff Civil Unit to other facilities. The major source of funding
for this budget unit is an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

The recommended budget includes a decrease in other charges as a result of lower anticipated
total interest cost associated with the FY 2016-17 Tax and Revenue Anticipation Notes. The
decrease in Use of Money/Property revenue is due to a lower anticipated premium on the FY
2016-17 Tax and Revenue Anticipation Notes.
Expenditures are not incurred in this budget unit but rather appropriations are transferred to other
General Fund budget units under limited circumstances if approved by the Board of Supervisors.
The recommended budget includes the appropriation of 1% of General Fund general purpose
revenue in the amount of $4 million to accommodate unanticipated operational changes,
legislative impacts, or other economic events affecting the County’s operations that could not
have been reasonably anticipated. In addition, $500,000 is appropriated for other uncertainties
departments may encounter such as emergency maintenance projects and other unforeseen
circumstances. The budget unit is funded through an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

In addition to the standard general purpose contingencies identified above, the recommended
budget includes set asides for the following:
 $200,000 for Animal Services spay/neuter activities.
 $4,000,000 for coverage of potential uninsured litigation costs. These appropriations will
only be used if actual uninsured litigation costs exceed the $1.14 million budgeted in the
County Counsel budget.
 $675,607 for coverage of potential operational costs related to Fire Station 13.
The recommended budget includes $11.3 million, or 47% of total funds, to provide contracts to
service providers, individual training accounts, on the job training contracts and other services
and assistance to clients. Another $12.9 million has been budgeted to be transferred to Budget
Unit 5923, Employers' Training Resource, to fund employee salaries and benefits, as well as
other operational costs to provide employment and client services. Revenues of $23.6 million,
primarily U.S. Department of Labor WIOA funding, support federal programs administered by
ETR. The fund balance as of June 30, 2016 was $2.4 million, which is sufficient to cover the
budgeted net fund cost of $695,647. The remaining fund balance has been designated, for an
estimated designation balance of $1.7 million as of June 30, 2017.

Budgeted resources are sufficient to maintain service levels and the department continuously
seeks out additional revenue sources in order to expand or augment services provided. The
WIOA funds received by the department cover two fiscal years at a time while many of their
smaller grants cross fiscal years. The department budgets the full amount of each grant available,
regardless of which fiscal year they will be spent.
Services and supplies of $190,000 and other charges of $50,000 are estimated to be adequate to
cover expenditures that may arise through the normal course of business during FY 2016-17 that
will not qualify for reimbursement under special grants or federal funding provided by the U.S.
Department of Labor.

The recommended budget provides sufficient funding to administer and operate the non-WIOA
programs in the County. Operating transfers in the amount of $30,000 reimburse expenditures
incurred in the department's operating budget units 5923 Administration and 8907 Employers'
Training Resource – WIOA, for which federal funding is not available. Increases to charges for
services revenue and services and supplies expenditures in the amount of $120,000 are from a
new food service training agreement that is anticipated to generate revenue from cafeteria sales.
The recommended budget is a reflection of available federal allocation to the County. The
majority of expenditures are associated with projects. Other financing uses include
reimbursement to Community Development for the administration of the program. There is no
cost to the General Fund. Projects proposed for approval by both the Board of Supervisors and
HUD for FY 2016-17 are:
 Heritage Park Improvements: Design and construction of improvements to Countyowned
land to serve the East Bakersfield community.
 California Infrastructure Bank Loan Payment: Loan payment for the construction of
street and drainage improvements in unincorporated East Bakersfield and Lamont.
 Oswell Frontage Road Pedestrian Improvements: Design and construction of
improvements in the public right-of-way for pedestrians crossing Oswell Street.
 Virginia Avenue Pedestrian and Sidewalk Improvements: Design, construction and
removal of barriers to access within the public right-of-way.
 City of California City Balsitis Park Improvements: Design and construction of
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) compliant park improvements including
improvements to the restroom, pathways, playground area and parking lot stalls.
 City of Shafter Street Median Improvements: Design and installation of drought tolerant
plants and drip irrigation within the median of Lerdo Highway between Mannel Avenue
and Beech Avenue.
 South Taft Community Pedestrian Improvements: Design and construction in the public
right-of-way to benefit the residents of South Taft.
 Mojave Community Pedestrian Improvements: Design and construction of pedestrian
and related street improvements providing a safe route east of the State Route 14 to the
community shopping center.
 District 1 Housing Rehabilitation Program: Provides funds and grants for
improvements to dwellings occupied by qualifying low income and moderate income
and senior households located in Kern County Supervisorial District 1.
Budget Changes and Operational Impacts
The recommended budget provides adequate funding to support the Community Development
Block Grant Program pursuant to the Housing and Community Development Act. Revenue and
expenditures fluctuate annually based on identified eligible projects. The net fund cost of
$17,419 represents the fund balance available at June 30, 2016 to be used toward operations in
FY 2016-17.
All budgeted appropriations are established to ensure funding is available for qualifying
applicants. The fund balance available at June 30, 2016 was $422,348 which will be utilized to
establish spending authority in order to provide funding to eligible businesses. This program has
no cost to the General Fund.

Although there has been no activity in prior years, the recommended budget continues to
establish spending authority in order to fund projects should an eligible business apply to the
program for funding.
All budgeted appropriations are established to ensure funding is available for qualifying
applicants. The fund balance available at June 30, 2016 was $422,348 which will be utilized to
establish spending authority in order to provide funding to eligible businesses. This program has
no cost to the General Fund.

Although there has been no activity in prior years, the recommended budget continues to
establish spending authority in order to fund projects should an eligible business apply to the
program for funding.
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) notified Community
Development that a new funding period has begun and funding will be available under this grant
program in FY 2016-17. Revenue will be budgeted in FY 2016-17 when final allocations are
approved under the new funding period. This program will utilize the fund balance at June 30,
2016 in the amount of $62,461 for operations in FY 2016-17.

Revenue collected in FY 2015-16 intended for operational expenditures will be carried forward
for use in FY 2016-17 in the amount of $8,735. The fund balance available at June 30, 2016 was $62,461 and will be used toward the budget in FY 2016-17 to be used to stabilize communities
that have suffered from foreclosure and abandonment.
The department has multiple projects that crossover fiscal years. The recommended budget
provides an increase of approximately $2.9 million in funding over FY 2015-16 actual costs in
anticipation of the completion of multiple projects. The fund balance as of June 30, 2016 was
$85,849 which will be used toward expenditures budgeted in FY 2016-17. A listing of proposed
projects is included within the Community Development Program budget unit 8920.
Major expenses for the department include new vehicle purchases for customer departments and
the supplies needed to service the vehicles. Remaining expenses cover the staffing needed to
service customer vehicles and respond to service requests. Revenue for the department is
primarily derived from charges to departments for vehicle purchases and services provided.

The recommended budget includes the purchase of 66 vehicles at a cost of $1.5 million. In FY
2015-16 the department budgeted 26 vehicle purchases, which accounts for the variance in
capital assets expenses. The decrease in the services and supplies object is primarily due to a
decrease in the number of vehicles that will be serviced, resulting in fewer parts being needed.
Salaries and benefits have been decreased to reflect the lower staffing levels needed for the
reduced fleet size.
While the Garage Internal Service Fund has sufficient short-term unrestricted cash that can be
used to support the operations of the division, the retained earnings at June 30, 2016 was a deficit
of $3.1 million due to the inclusion of approximately $4.9 million of long-term liabilities
primarily associated with pension obligations. The entirety of these liabilities do not come due
within the near future and represent future costs that will be funded with future revenue. After
adjusting for long-term debt, the budgetary retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2016 was
$1.8 million. A retained earnings balance of $1.6 million is anticipated for June 30, 2017. The
estimated balance in the vehicle replacement designation as of June 30, 2017 is $3.6 million.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. The division intends
to hold vacant and unfunded two (2) Automotive Mechanic I/II/Sr. positions, one (1) Heavy Equipment Mechanic position, and one (1) Garage Shift Supervisor positon, at an estimated
annual savings of approximately $480,000.
A majority of appropriations in this fund will be used for salaries and benefits that will be
reimbursed from the appropriate budget units. The department operates a maintenance facility
for department vehicles and heavy equipment, the labor and materials for this function are
budgeted within of the Internal Service Fund in the amount of $4.7 million and reimbursed from
the user budget units similar to salaries and benefits.
The recommended budget includes the contribution that was previously allocated to the Roads
Department. The nearly $5 million contribution is budgeted as revenue within this fund, $4
million will be passed through to the Road Fund for countywide road maintenance with the
remaining contribution used for general public works projects. The department has budgeted to
receive $52.5 million in labor reimbursements and $4.7 million in reimbursements for fuel and
equipment maintenance from the various Public Works budget units, these amounts include
departmental indirect costs and overhead.
The department retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2016 was $2.8 million, the balance is
related to the remaining General Fund contribution to Public Works used for roads and general
public works projects. It is anticipated that the retained earnings balance will be used to fund
projects in the future.
The recommended budget includes all authorized positions that were transferred from the Roads,
Kern Regional Transit, Waste Management, Engineering, Surveying and Permitting Services,
Code Compliance and Building Inspection budget units effective July 2015. The recommended
budget includes 455 authorized positions after the deletion of one (1) Senior Traffic Signal
Technician position and the additions of one (1) Sr. Fiscal and Administrative Services Officer
position, two (2) Disposal Site Gate Attendants positions, one (1) Traffic Signal Technician
position, one (1) Waste Management Technician I/II position, one (1) Real Property Agent
I/II/III position and one (1) Waste Management Aide position, at an annual estimated cost of
$300,000
This budget unit funds all expenses related to active employee health care benefits with
utilization and actual claims being the primary drivers of costs. Expenses also include $1 million
allocated for Patient-Centered Outcome (PCORI) fees and reinsurance fees now payable to the
federal government under the Affordable Care Act. The Human Resources Division is exploring
changes to health plan cost-sharing and employee wellness and education in an effort to reduce
overall claims expenses for self-funded plan options. Revenue consists of charges to County
departments and participating special districts, employee contributions, and premium charges to
COBRA participants and retirees. Revenue is anticipated to increase slightly, primarily due to an
increase in the employer contribution, in order to ensure adequate reserves are maintained.
Reserves have been significantly depleted after reduced charges to departments and unexpected
claims fluctuation. The retained earnings balance at June 30, 2016 was $4.9 million. An increase of $3.9 million is included to stabilize rates in future years, resulting in an estimated retained
earnings balance of $8.8 million for June 30, 2017.

Charges for services revenue is budgeted to increase, primarily due to an increase in the
employer contribution. Expenses are budgeted to remain relatively flat in the next fiscal year, but
there is always a potential for increased expenses due to general medical inflation and
unexpected claims.
This budget unit incurs costs for the retiree health benefits programs and receives monthly
reimbursement from the Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) irrevocable trust fund for
actual expenses. Both the Stipend and RHPSP assist in paying monthly health benefits costs for
qualified County or special district retirees and their dependents or beneficiaries. Based on
current beneficiaries receiving benefits, total annual expenses are estimated at $10 million.
Administration of these programs is funded through a small fee charged to retirees as part of
their monthly health benefits costs. Most retirees contribute directly to pay at least a portion of
their retiree health care costs, limiting the County’s total liability.
Earlier this year eligible employees were given the option to opt-out of the RHPSP and Stipend
programs. This will alter the revenue stream to the OPEB trust, and is not anticipated to have a
material negative impact on the stability of the fund or programs. This budget unit still maintains
minimum reserves adequate to ensure payment of benefits on a monthly basis and is reimbursed
from the OPEB trust for actual expenses for both the Stipend and RHPSP programs for current
retirees.
Additional reserves may be transferred to the OPEB trust fund as appropriate. The retained
earnings as of June 30, 2016 was $3.2 million. A retained earnings balance of $2.6 million is
anticipated for June 30, 2017.
The primary expenses of this budget unit are insurance expenses, legal costs and anticipated
settlements. This budget unit is financed primarily through charges to County departments for
coverage and services provided.

The recommended budget provides funding for the County’s General Liability Program at a level
sufficient to cover the anticipated cost and a 50% reserve of estimated expenses. In FY 2015-16,
an additional $3,087,715 in proceeds from a legal settlement was received from the County’s
excess insurance policy. Other charges are budgeted at $14.1 million, an increase of $8.8 million
from FY 2015-16. Several settlements budgeted in FY 2015-16 did not settle and are continued
in FY 2016-17. The retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2016 was $18 million. The
department anticipates decreasing retained earnings by $8.4 million to offset expenses. A
retained earnings balance of $10.3 million is anticipated for June 30, 2017.
The majority of expenses in this budget unit are payment of actual unemployment benefit claims.
Future unemployment costs are not easily estimated, as unemployment costs are based upon
wages earned in a base period that is up to 18 months prior to the date of the claim. The
availability of other employment in the community also has an effect on the County’s claims.
The maximum unemployment claim is $11,700, based on the claimant drawing the maximum
weekly benefit of $450 for the first 26 weeks of unemployment. Revenue in this budget unit is
primarily comprised of charges to County departments based on each individual department’s
actual unemployment experience and claims.

Based on trends in recent years, it is expected that the unemployment claims for eligible former
employees will increase, resulting in increased expenses. Charges to departments have been
increased slightly to help maintain adequate reserves. The retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2016 was $665,454. A retained earnings balance of $674,875 is anticipated for June 30,
2017.
The Workers’ Compensation Self-Insurance Program is financed through direct charges to
County departments largely based on each department’s claims history. The primary expense for
the program is claims costs of injured workers.

The recommended budget includes increased appropriations compared to FY 2015-16 actual
costs to reflect a projected increase in claims costs, and changes in administrative costs from the
Risk Management Division as a result of Kern Medical Center transitioning to the Kern County
Hospital Authority. Charges for services have decreased slightly for FY 2016-17. However,
expenses will exceed revenue as retained earnings will be used to control premiums charged to
departments.
The retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2016 was $11.5 million. The department anticipates
decreasing retained earnings by $4 million to offset expenses. A retained earnings balance of
$8.7 million is anticipated for June 30, 2017, that will be used for future fiscal years.
The Department of Airports recommended budget includes staffing expenses of $2.4 million to
fund 22 positions that provide support for seven County-operated airports. Expenses for services
and supplies of $2.1 million include property insurance, utilities, other professional services, and
general maintenance. In addition, expenses of $3.6 million are budgeted to cover county-wide
cost allocation charges and depreciation. The department has also included debt service
payments totaling $934,944 and capital expenses of $15 million for Phase II of the Runway 30R Rehabilitation project at Meadows Field Airport, which will be primarily funded with federal
reimbursements.
The County's airports produce revenue to operate and maintain the airport system. The
recommended budget includes $3.5 million in revenue associated to space rentals, concessions
and user fees. Additionally, the Meadows Field Airport receives a County contribution from the
General Fund from property taxes collected in the Airport Economic Opportunity Area. State
and federal grants are significant sources of revenue to construct, improve and maintain airport
infrastructure.

The recommended budget provides the department with funding for 22 permanent authorized
positions and two extra help positions. Appropriations of $16.2 million are included in capital
assets, of which $15 million is estimated for the Meadows Field Runway 30R rehabilitation
project. This project is the second phase in a series of improvements to enhance the runway and
improve the competitiveness, efficiency and bring the surface to Federal Aviation Administration
pavement standards. The estimated project costs are offset by a similar increase in revenue from
State and federal reimbursements. The increase in intergovernmental revenue is reimbursement
for costs associated with Phase I and Phase II of the Runway 30R rehabilitation project.
Approximately $11 million will cover prior year encumbrances for Phase I of the rehabilitation
project. Other revenue sources are increasing slightly as a result of landing fees, two new airline
operating agreements and the new flight training facility tenant.
While the Airports Enterprise fund has approximately $2.1 million in short-term unrestricted
cash that can be used to support the operations of the division, the retained earnings at June 30,
2016 was a deficit of $16.9 million. The deficit is due to the inclusion of approximately $10.5
million of long-term liabilities associated with pension obligations and certificates of
participation. The long-term liabilities do not come due within the current budget and represent
future costs that will be funded with future revenue. In addition, construction contracts for the
Phase I of the Runway 30R rehabilitation project in the amount of $12.4 million were
encumbered during FY 2015-16 and reduced retained earnings at June 30, 2016. Reimbursement
from Federal Aviation Administration is included in the FY 2016-17 recommended budget.
After adjusting for long-term debt and the project encumbrances, the estimated budgetary
retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2016, is approximately $3 million. The department is
anticipating utilizing $2.8 million in FY 2016-17 to cover the 10% local match of the project
costs.
Revenue is primarily generated from land lease agreements and is deposited into the Golf Course
Enterprise Fund where it is used for necessary capital and infrastructure maintenance projects at
the golf courses and to reimburse the Parks and Recreation Department for administrative
support.

The recommended budget includes an appropriation of $75,000 per golf course for ongoing
maintenance. Increases in services and supplies and other charges are due to an increase in
anticipated maintenance related to HVAC equipment, irrigation software system and water pump
repair for courses. The retained earnings at June 30, 2016 is $1.2 million of which the
department anticipates using $8,749 in FY 2016-17.
The majority of expenses and revenue in this budget unit are for contracts with local waste
haulers for services, and the collection of waste assessment fees collected through property tax
bills.

The recommended budget includes appropriations and revenue similar to FY 2015-16, increasing
slightly due to general inflation. The retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2016 was $2.4
million. The department is budgeting to utilize approximately $169,000 of retained earnings
toward expenses in FY 2016-17.
The activities of Kern Regional Transit are funded primarily from Sales and Use Tax for local
transportation, State Public Transportation Modernization, Improvement, and Service
Enhancement Account Program and funding from the State Department of Transportation
Section 5311 that provides funding for public transit in non-urbanized areas. The primary
expenditures for the division include purchase of buses and other capital assets and contracts for
transportation services.
As part of the consolidation of the Public Works budget units into an internal service fund (ISF),
appropriations for salaries and benefits have been shifted to services and supplies to reimburse
the ISF for labor for which the division has budgeted $860,000. The division plans to purchase
four 40 foot diesel buses required to replace aging buses and three 16 passenger buses to enhance
services due to increased ridership. The buses will be funded with an allocation from the federal
Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Grant.
The Board of Supervisors approved a fare increase on June 7, 2016 to be effective July 7, 2016
countywide, increasing fare box revenue to $1.4 million. The fare schedule is consistent across
the County and a new 30 day pass is now offered to riders.
While the Kern Regional Transit Enterprise Fund has approximately $2.1 million in unrestricted
cash that can be used to support operations of the division, the retained earnings at June 30, 2016
was a deficit of $3.6 million due to the inclusion of approximately $842,000 in long-term
liabilities associated with pension obligation bonds representing future costs that will be funded
with future revenue and the deferral of $4 million in revenue received in FY 2015-16 that is
included in the FY 2016-17 budget. After adjusting for these obligations, the budgetary retained
earnings balance at June 30, 2016 was approximately $1.2 million. The division has not
budgeted to use any retained earnings for operations in FY 2016-17.
The recommended budget does not include any authorized positions, all budgeted positions have
been transferred to the Public Works Internal Service Fund.
A major expense for the division’s recommended budget is labor reimbursement to the Public
Works Department within services and supplies of nearly $17 million. Additional appropriations
within services and supplies includes landfill operating contracts and other professional services
needed to maintain the County’s disposal sites, payment to the Board of Equalization based on a
per ton of landfill waste, and costs associated with educational and recycling programs. Division
revenue is generated from special land use assessments collected through property tax bills,
landfill gate fees and waste bin fees.
The recommended budget includes funding for $1.3 million in large capital asset purchases, and
$7.4 million in capital projects and improvements for solid waste facilities throughout the
County.
The Board of Supervisors adopted an organics strategy in March 2015 in order to enhance the
green waste recycling program to assist the Cities and the County in meeting State waste
diversion mandates; the division will continue to improve this program in the coming year. The
division and local haulers will begin a pilot food waste diversion program in the fall of 2016.
The division is budgeting to receive $23.1 million in land use fee revenue from collections on the
tax roll in addition to $11.5 million from gate fee revenue collected at the waste sites.
While the Waste Management Department has approximately $48.9 million in short term
unrestricted cash that can be used to support the operations of the division, the retained earnings
as of June 30, 2016 was $4.2 million due to the inclusion of approximately $44.6 million in long
term liabilities associated with pollution remediation obligations, future closure and post-closure
maintenance and pension obligation bonds. These liabilities do not come due within the current
year budget and represent future costs that will be funded with future revenue or existing
reserves. After adjusting for long-term debt, the budgetary retained earnings balance as of June
30, 2016 is approximately $48.8 million. The division is anticipating utilizing approximately $8
million in FY 2016-17.
The largest expense for the district is staffing costs required to operate and maintain the system
and wastewater treatment plant. Services and supplies include costs associated with the
equipment and materials needed to service and maintain the sanitation resources of the district as
well as maintenance projects needed throughout the fiscal year. The primary revenue sources for
this budget unit are sewer service charges collected through property tax bills on properties
within the district boundaries and one-time sewer connection fees.
The recommended budget for the district includes sufficient appropriations to cover budgeted
staffing changes. Capital asset purchases for the year include one (1) hydro-vac truck, one (1) one-ton flatbed truck and one (1) sludge pump. Sewer service charges for the district will not
include a consumer price index rate increase during FY 2016-17 and will be evaluated for future
years.
While the Kern Sanitation District has approximately $6.6 million in short term unrestricted cash
that can be used to support the operations of the division, the retained earnings as of June 30,
2016 was a deficit of $2.1 million due to the inclusion of approximately $4.6 million in long
term liabilities associated pension obligation bonds. These liabilities do not come due within the
current year budget and represent future costs that will be funded with future revenue or existing
reserves. After adjusting for long-term debt, the budgetary retained earnings balance as of June
30, 2016 is approximately $2.5 million.
The recommended budget includes funding for the addition of one (1) Sewer Collection Systems
Supervisor position and one (1) Administrative Coordinator position. The district will also
modify two (2) Sewer Maintenance Workers from part-time to full-time. To aid in offsetting the
cost of these changes, the district will be deleting one (1) Fiscal Support Technician and holding
one (1) Wastewater Treatment Plant Operator Trainee vacant. These changes will cost the district
an additional $143,000 in FY 2016-17.
The major expense for the district is the County’s share of cost paid to the City of Taft for the
operation of the treatment plant as stipulated by the agreement between the City of Taft and the
district as well as reimbursements to the Kern Sanitation Authority and Public Works
Department for administration and maintenance. The operational, administrative and
maintenance costs are paid with sewer service charges collected through property tax bills.
Charges for services and miscellaneous revenues are collected for connection fees and other
district cost reimbursements.
The recommended budget includes sufficient appropriations to pay the City of Taft the
operational cost of the plant and to reimburse the Kern Sanitation Authority and the Public
Works department for administrative and maintenance costs. Beginning in FY 2014-15, the
district began paying to the City of Taft its portion of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural
Development loan secured for a major plant upgrade. The loan amount of $3,619,000 will be
repaid over 20 years at a reduced interest rate of 2.5%. The district is responsible for 48% of the
debt service payment. On May 10, 2016, the Ford City-Taft Heights Sanitation District Board
approved a $30.27 per equivalent single-family dwelling fee increase for FY 2016-17 for the
third year of a consecutive four year increase to fund increased annual costs resulting from the
improvements at the plant.
The district’s retained earnings as of June 30, 2016 was $1.7 million, of which $121,800 will be
used for the 2016-17 budget with the remaining $1.6 million increasing the designation for future
capital improvements.
With the exception of a $8.4 million mandated County Maintenance of Effort (MOE), federal
and State revenue offset all of the financial responsibility for the cost of IHSS Services. The
MOE is supported by social services realignment funds of approximately $8.3 million.

The recommended budget includes a slight increase in other charges that is offset by a similar
increase in revenue. The increase in other charges for FY 2016-17 is primarily due to a mandated
3% annual increase to the MOE amount. The Public Authority contracts with the Aging and
Adult Services Department for staffing. Thus, personnel costs for the Public Authority are found
in budget unit 5610. The fund balance as of June 30, 2016 is a deficit of $64,540. The department has a general
designation of $1,032,530 and anticipates using $163,303 to cover operations and the deficit in
fund balance. The remaining $869,227 will remain in the designation for use to mitigate future
year fluctuations in realignment revenue.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding for the IHSS Public Authority to perform
its required functions.
Projects approved in prior years but not yet completed total $169.3 million. The major multiyear
carryover projects include construction of a new jail facility and the final phase of the
Seventh Standard Widening Project. The recommended budget includes additional
appropriations for the following projects:
 $400,000 to transfer to the General Fund. Interest earnings from the Tobacco
Securitization Tobacco Endowment fund are available for discretionary purposes.
 $5,708,152 transfer to the Kern County Hospital Authority. Chapter 2.170 to Title 2 of
the Ordinance Code created the Kern County Hospital Authority (Hospital Authority) to
own and operate Kern Medical Center. Kern Medical Center was transferred to the
Hospital Authority July 1, 2016. On May 10, 2012, Kern Health Systems’ Board of
Directors approved the distribution of $24 million excess reserves to the three Safety Net
health care providers, Clinica Sierra Vista, National Services and Kern Medical Center.
Kern Medical Center received $13 million. The funds and any interest earnings must be
used to improve the facilities to enhance access to primary and other medical services. In
order to maintain the restriction imposed by Kern Health System, the remaining funds
that are being used to finalize the improvements at Kern Medical Center are being
transferred to the Hospital Authority.
 $4,190,908 transfer to the General Fund to fund several major maintenance projects
including the reroof of the Juvenile Detention Facility, the Mojave Library, the Kern
County Museum Maintenance Shop, Juvenile Justice Center and the Kern River Valley
Library and Administration Center as well as the paving of Ridgecrest County
Administrative Complex parking lot and other projects designed for water and energy
conservation.
