The Board meets each Tuesday, taking action on public
and departmental requests and other matters presented on
the agenda. The Board meets one Monday a month at
Kern Medical Center to specifically address the issues
impacting the County hospital. The Board also sits as the
Board of Directors of the County sanitation districts on
the first Tuesday of each month. Other Board member
activities include committee and commission meetings,
and participation in organizations at the local, regional,
State, and federal levels.
The recommended budget provides adequate resources to
assist the Supervisor in performing the various duties and
functions required of the governing body. Two
authorized positions are part-time employees, thus one
equivalent position is unfunded.
The recommended budget for the County Administrative
Office funds all authorized positions with the use of
earned Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits.
The increase in the recommended budget from FY 2012-
13 in the salaries and benefits object is primarily due to
the full year cost of additional positions added in FY
2012-13 and funding all positions. These increased costs
are offset with a reduction in unemployment costs and the
use of BSI credits. The services and supplies object is
increased primarily for costs associated with economic
development activities and for special studies that may be
performed during the fiscal year.
The department’s General Fund cost is offset with
reimbursements for staff costs related to administering the
employees’ health benefits programs, debt program,
indigent defense program, and Trial Court Funding
program. As mentioned above, the department will also
use a portion of its BSI credits, approximately $240,000,
to offset increased costs.
The department will continue its efforts to ensure
responsible and efficient government by providing proper
fiscal planning that meets the needs of the public and
County departments. The department will strive to meet
its established performance measures and to provide
quality, responsive services.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
No position additions or deletions are included in the
recommended budget. All authorized positions are
funded with the use of BSI credits.
The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors prepares the Board
of Supervisors’ agendas, attends Board meetings, records
official Board actions, and prepares the Board meeting
minutes. The department maintains historical records and
indexes, and the Clerk of the Board is the filing officer for
conflict of interest codes and statements of economic
interests. The department also records the actions of the
Assessment Appeals Board and other entities as required.
A high number of property owners are continuing to
appeal the assessed value of their properties. This
assessment appeals process is managed by the
department. The increase in appeals continues to require
the dedication of staff resources in excess of prior years.
Although staffing levels were decreased in prior years, the
department strives to meet the mandated timeframes for
assessment appeal hearings.
Services and supplies expenditures are estimated to
remain relatively flat. Total revenues and reimbursements
are also estimated to remain flat compared to the prior
year.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
There are no position additions or deletions included in
the recommended budget. All authorized positions are
funded.
This budget unit contains appropriations for a variety of
services and programs, including Assessment Appeals
Board expenses, the contribution for the employee group
life insurance premium, expenses for special studies and
projects, consulting and professional services expenses,
and Board of Supervisors’ general and discretionary
expenses not allocated to individual supervisorial
districts. The County’s contributions to private non-profit
agencies, the Local Agency Formation Commission
(LAFCo), and the Kern Council of Governments
(KernCOG) are also included in this budget unit. The
County Administrative Office administers this budget
unit.
Assessment Appeals Board
Funding to support the activities of the Assessment
Appeals Board (AAB) is included in the Special Services
budget. Anticipated costs associated with AAB activities
include professional and specialized services agreements
to assist in the preparation and defense of major
assessment appeal cases related to the valuation of oil and
gas properties, per diem payments for meeting attendance
and travel expenses for AAB members, reimbursement of
County Counsel’s staff costs related to handling AAB
matters, office expenses, and postage. Supplemental roll
assessment fees and property tax administration charges
offset a portion of these expenses. Based on the number
of appeals being filed, costs for assessment appeals are
anticipated to remain at the approximate level as FY
2012-13.
Contributions to Other Agencies
The Special Services budget contains recommended
contributions to various private non-profit agencies for
performance of cultural or humanitarian services
benefiting the public. The following contributions are
included in the recommended budget.
 Arts Council of Kern: $65,000
 Bakersfield Museum of Art: $30,000
 Bakersfield Symphony: $100,000
 Community Action Partnership of Kern County
(CAP): $100,000
 Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA):
$100,000
 Edwards Community Alliance: $10,000
 Greater Antelope Valley Economic Alliance
$15,000
 Kern Adult Literacy Council: $20,747
 Kern County Museum Foundation: $150,000
 San Joaquin Valley Quality Cotton Growers
Association (Shafter Research Center):
$200,000
 Small Business Development Center: $60,000
 Southwest Defense Alliance: $50,000
 Valley Fever Vaccine Project: $50,000
 Volunteer Center of Kern County: $10,000
Travel and Tourism Promotion
In FY 2000-01, a program was initiated to nurture the
promotion of travel and tourism by local groups. The
Board of Trade was designated to administer this
program, with the funding appropriated in Special
Services. The funds are distributed to local chambers of
commerce and promotional organizations on a
competitive basis for the purpose of promoting their
particular unincorporated locale. It is recommended that
$100,000 be allocated for this discretionary program.
Board of Supervisors Expenses
The Special Services budget includes general expenses
for the Board of Supervisors. The costs anticipated for
FY 2012-13 include the County’s memberships in the
National Association of Counties (NACo), California
State Association of Counties (CSAC), and Southern
California Water Association, phone line costs for the
Board Chambers and ancillary areas, district specific
projects, and travel costs associated with countywide
issues. The recommended budget contains the
accumulated carry forward of the Board members’
discretionary funds for district specific projects and an
additional allocation of $50,000 for each district for FY
2013-14.
Roads-related Projects
The Special Services budget contains funding to offset
expenses incurred by the Roads Department for projects
that do not specifically qualify for the use of Road funds.
These types of projects include cattle guard maintenance,
County facilities minor parking lot maintenance, and the
installation of special signage. For FY 2013-14, $50,000
is recommended for this purpose.
The recommended funding level will enable the
department to accomplish its assigned functions of
department audits, property tax accounting, accounts
payable, cash receipts, payroll, preparing State required
reports such as Countywide Cost Allocation Plan, and
preparing financial reports for the County and all special
districts under the control of the Board of Supervisors.
The recommended budget provides sufficient funding to
maintain all key functions but requires the department to
exhaust the majority of its Budget Savings Incentive
(BSI) credits. The department will also continue its focus
on development and integration of new software solutions
into the AuditorNet platform to benefit all County
departments.
Expenditures have increased by 4% in the recommended
budget due to greater costs associated with position
changes that the department indicates will better represent
the responsibilities of the fiscal support staff and allow for
enhanced fiscal capabilities of frontline staff. The
department intends to use $555,636 in BSI credits
towards salary cost increases.
Charges for services are estimated to decrease 11%
primarily due to the discontinuance of audits associated
with redevelopment agencies and the annual fluctuation in
revenue derived from other fees.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
During FY 2012-13, a new Assistant Auditor-Controller-
County Clerk - Operations position was created. This
allows for the deletion of the Division Chief - Systems
position during the FY 2013-14 budget cycle. Three (3)
Fiscal Support Technician positions will be deleted and
three (3) Fiscal Support Specialist positions will be added
to better represent current job responsibilities. Deletion of
one (1) Office Services Technician position will be offset
by the addition of one (1) Fiscal Support Assistant
position to better assist with fiscal matters. Finally, one
(1) Systems Analyst II position will be deleted, and
replaced by one (1) Senior Systems Analyst position to
provide leadership to the programming staff. With
consideration for the prior addition of the Assistant
Auditor-Controller-County Clerk - Operations, as well as
all position changes above, salaries and benefits will
increase by $87,000 in FY 2013-14.
The elective office of the Treasurer-Tax Collector
receives, safeguards, invests, and disburses funds for the
County, school districts, special districts, special trust
funds, and the County deferred compensation plan. The
department also collects real and personal property taxes
and other local taxes for all local government agencies
and conducts tax-defaulted land sales.
The recommended budget includes a request for
additional funding to defray the costs for the Deferred
Compensation Plan II, since the Plan's administrative fees
have exceeded returns, at a cost of $169,855. The
recommended funding level ensures the billing and
collection of County-wide property taxes in excess of $1
billion, investment services for all funds within the
Treasury in excess of $2.3 billion, and administration of
the employee Deferred Compensation Program in excess
of $370 million.
An increase in expenditures is partially offset by an
increase in revenue from various cost centers including
banking and investment, current and prior collections,
Deferred Compensation Plan I, and special services. All
activities related to banking and investment, Deferred
Compensation Plan I, and prior collections have no
General Fund cost. Costs covered by a General Fund
contribution are those associated with printing, mailing,
customer assistance, collection of current year tax bills,
and the administration of the Deferred Compensation Plan
II.
The revised recommended budget includes a change to
the mechanism by which redemption activities are
reimbursed by transfer from the Redemption Systems
special revenue fund to the operating budget at the end of
the fiscal year. Anticipated revenue from the Redemption
Systems special revenue fund has been increased by an
amount equal to the reduction in charges for service. This
change has no impact on the department’s budget and
serves to ensure redemption activities continue to have no
cost to the General Fund.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes funding for all 30
authorized permanent positions. The recommended
funding level is approximately the same as FY 2012-13
and enables the department to maintain the same service
levels.
The department is responsible for appraising the majority
of land and improvements within the County, including
valuation of all land and mineral content values, water
rights, wind energy facilities, and business personal
property. The department is also responsible for the
creation of new parcels from deeds, tract maps, parcel
maps, records of survey, and parcel map waivers.
In addition to ensuring that the values placed on all
taxable property are computed accurately, fairly, and in
accordance with State appraisal guidelines, the
department is responsible for tracking property ownership
changes and responding to requests for title information.
The recommended budget will allow the department to
meet all mandated functions and increase current levels of
service. Increases in expenditures are primarily due to the addition of five new positions. The addition of these
positions is funded by increased program revenues.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget for the Assessor includes the
addition of four Appraiser I/II/III positions, at an annual
cost of $540,000, and the addition of one Engineering
Technician I/II/III-C position at an annual cost of
$145,000.
Information Technology Services (ITS) will continue its
support of the major automation systems for its customer
departments and ensure that the County’s technology
infrastructure needs are met. Major enterprise systems
supported by the department include the Kern Integrated
Property System (KIPS), Criminal Justice Information
System (CJIS), County’s payroll system, Financial
Management System (FMS), Job Applicant Tracking
System, Trust Fund System, and Database
Administration.
Other major systems supported by ITS that facilitate
interactive communications strategies and the use of
available technologies include the Wide Area Network,
email, Internet connectivity, CountyNet, the County web
site, County storage area network (SAN), centralized
virtual server farm, and anti-virus applications. ITS will
continue to provide desktop support and assistance to
departments upon request, and maintain the County’s
telephone system and upgrade the phone and data communications systems as customer departments’ needs
and budgets dictate.
The increase in the recommended net General Fund cost
is primarily due to the transfer of a Systems Analyst I/II
position from General Services to ITS. The transfer
became effective at the end of Fiscal Year 2012-13.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget has three (3) positions held
vacant and unfunded, one less than was adopted for FY
2012-13. Approximately $110,000 of Budget Savings
Incentive (BSI) credits have been committed to fund one
time costs for salaries.
County Counsel is the civil attorney for the County and
represents the County in all civil court actions. County
Counsel is also the legal advisor to the Board of
Supervisors, County departments, elected and appointed
County employees, and all boards and commissions that
do not separately contract for legal services. County
Counsel also advises and represents Kern Health
Systems, and represents the Kern County Employees’
Retirement Association on litigated disability retirement
appeals.
The recommended budget includes sufficient resources to
provide the legal support required to implement Board
policy, protect the interests of the County, and
represent County departments concerning legal issues
related to the operation and management of the County.
In FY 2012-13, accounting of costs for uninsured
litigation, or legal matters requiring litigation not covered
under the County’s General Liability or Workers’
Compensation self-insurance programs, was reassigned
from Risk Management budget unit 1910 to County
Counsel budget unit 1210. The net effect on the County
Counsel budget for FY 2012-13 was an increased General
Fund contribution of $1.8 million to help consolidate
expenses related to uninsured litigation and provide
sufficient resources to appropriately represent and defend
the County in these legal matters.
FY 2013-14 continues to account for uninsured litigation
costs within the County Counsel budget unit 1210. After
reviewing the full-year impacts of this change, the FY
2013-14 recommended budget includes an additional
$164,000 for salaries and benefits in order for the
department to have sufficient appropriations to cover the
costs.
Salaries and benefits costs have increased by $283,000 for
FY 2013-14 primarily due to reducing the amount of
Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits needed by the
department to offset salaries and benefits costs. Budgeted
services and supplies have remained relatively flat
compared to the prior year. Revenues are budgeted to
increase $167,000 due to an increase in the hourly rate
charged for legal services provided to other departments
and agencies.
In FY 2012-13, the department had planned to use
$631,000 of its accumulated BSI credits to maintain
service levels. However, due to the combined effect of
under-spending of services and supplies appropriations,
and budgeted positions being held vacant, only $185,000
of BSI was needed in FY 2012-13. In FY 2013-14, the
department plans to use approximately $464,000 of
accumulated BSI credits to fill currently vacant positions.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget continues to provide only
partial-year funding for one (1) Assistant County Counsel
position that will be held vacant for half of the year to
achieve additional savings of approximately $130,000 in
FY 2013-14.
The recommended budget includes no position additions
or deletions.
The recommended budget provides funding for the
Personnel Department to meet statutory mandates to
provide services to County departments and individuals
seeking employment within the County. The department
has continued to experience workload levels similar to FY
2005-06 and 2006-07 when the department had seven
additional full-time employees.
Fewer staff members coupled with an increased workload
has impacted the service response times for hiring,
reclassification studies, and creation of eligible lists. The
department continues to become more efficient in order to
minimize the impacts to internal and external clients. To
increase its level of service, the department will be
implementing a new Applicant Tracking System which is
budgeted as a fixed asset in FY 2013-14.
In FY 2012-13, the department budgeted, but was unable
to complete, charges for employee service awards. A
pending Request for Proposals delayed the expense and
revenue of the FY 2012-13 awards and will result in a
one-time increase to revenues of $28,995 in FY 2013-14,
as the actual costs associated with service awards are
charged to the department conveying the award.
Salaries and benefits will rise by 9.5% over FY 2012-13
with two expected retirement payouts and the funding
necessary for additional positions.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
An additional $212,802 has been added to the net General
Fund cost to include funding for one (1) Personnel
Analyst I position added by the Board in January 2013 but
held vacant due to budgetary constraints, one (1)
Personnel Assistant position, and one (1) Office Services
Technician position. The recommended budget includes
funding for one extra-help position through August 2013.
The Auditor-Controller-County Clerk Elections Division
conducts general and special elections for all levels of
government. The Auditor-Controller-County Clerk is the
Registrar of Voters and maintains election-related
documents such as the voter index, affidavits of
registration, and precinct records. State and federal
election laws mandate the services performed by this
division.
The recommended budget provides adequate resources to
fully comply with all current legal requirements for
conducting elections. Revenues for the Auditor-
Controller-County Clerk Elections Division will decline
by 80% in FY 2013-14 compared to FY 2012-13. FY
2012-13 had four elections, including a Presidential
General Election, and it is anticipated that FY 2013-14
will only have two, one special election and a June
Primary Election. FY 2013-14 expenditures will remain
close to FY 2012-13, a decline in services and supplies is
offset by an increase in salaries and benefits for existing
employees.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
Due to the increasingly technical nature of election
systems, the recommended budget provides for the
deletion of one (1) Fiscal Support Technician position
and the addition of one (1) Information Systems Specialist
position. The added Information Systems Specialist
position will be shared with the Auditor-Controller's
Office that will contribute $36,000 in FY 2013-14 for this
position.
The County Administrative Office General Services
Division manages the Construction Services, Major
Maintenance Projects, Capital Projects, Garage, and
Utility Payments budget units. The division provides
operational support to County departments, including
routine and preventive maintenance for all County-owned
buildings; custodial services in more than 70 Countyowned
and leased buildings; KGOV television
broadcasting and audio-visual production services;
property management services, including land purchases,
leases, franchises, rights of entry and easements; energy
and utility coordination; Countywide radio and
microwave communications; mail services; graffiti
abatement; purchasing; and payment and allocation of
utility costs.
The recommended budget includes sufficient resources to
staff the division at levels higher than the average for the
last three fiscal years. However, even with the planned
filling of vacant positions, the division expects that there
could be delays in addressing maintenance and other
requests due to lack of adequate staffing.
The recommended budget includes $90,000 in various
pieces of equipment that are necessary to maintain the
countywide communications system. Revenues from
parking fines are anticipated to be higher than prior year
actual due to a recently approved increase in parking
violation fines.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget is funded at a level that
requires holding seven (7) positions vacant and unfunded.
These positions include: three (3) Communication
Technician, one (1) Maintenance Carpenter, one (1)
Graphic Artist, one (1) Real Property Agent and one (1)
Security Attendant positions. The recommended budget
includes no position additions or deletions. The budget
includes the use of $936,990 of the divisions $1,149,523
Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits.
The reduction in authorized positions and salaries costs is
from the transfer of a Systems Analyst I/II position to the
Information Technology Services division at the end of
FY 2012-13.
This budget unit is used to pay utility costs for most County
facilities. Utilities include electricity, gas, water, sewer,
garbage, postage, elevator services, pest control, security
and fire alarm systems, and fire extinguishers/sprinkler
systems. The General Services Division administers this
budget unit. Some utility costs for Sheriff, Fire, Roads, and
Kern Medical Center are not included in this budget unit.
The General Services Division continues to review and
evaluate the acquisition of utility services and commodities
to attain the best rates possible. Increases in expenditures
are primarily due to expected changes in water and
electricity rates. The increase in expenditures due to rate
changes is offset by increased revenues collected from
service recipients.
Energy conservation measures implemented a number of
years ago continue to assist in lessening overall energy
requirements and reducing the County’s utility costs. These
measures aim to eliminate wasteful use of energy in County
facilities and include reducing lighting levels and burn
hours, retrofitting for lower-wattage lighting and purchase
of more energy-efficient equipment, turning off equipment
whenever it is not needed, and raising air conditioning
thermostat levels during the warmer months. This
heightened awareness and responsiveness to energy issues is
critical in reducing costs to the County.
The Construction Services section within the General
Services Division provides design, engineering
preliminary cost estimation, bids and awards, inspection
and project management for capital and major
maintenance projects related to the County’s real property
infrastructure. The majority of expenses within this
section are offset by revenue received for services
provided, primarily from the funding provided in the
Capital Projects and Major Maintenance budget units.
The recommended budget includes sufficient resources
for project management and inspection services for
projects at various parks, and other capital and major
maintenance projects. Administration will also be
provided for Job Order Contract (JOC) projects
throughout the County. The division staff continues to be
involved in Community Development Block Grant
projects and court-related projects.
The demand for design support and project management
is expected to continue as Construction Services
endeavors to accomplish a large number of ongoing
projects, as well as those projects that have been approved
for debt financing. County design staff efforts will be
augmented through the use of architectural and
engineering consultant contracts, when appropriate.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget holds vacant and unfunded one
(1) Engineer I/II/III position. The recommended budget
includes no position additions or deletions.
The County Administrative Office annually develops a
master list of all major maintenance requested by
departments. The projects are prioritized using the
following criteria: legally mandated, health and safety
concern, preventive maintenance concern, cost reduction
impact, and extent of direct use or benefit to the public.
Offsetting revenue and special funding is also considered
when prioritizing the projects requested for funding
consideration.
The table below contains a list of the recommended
projects for FY 2013-14. For each project, the project
cost, any offsetting revenue or special purpose funding,
and the net General Fund cost are presented. Typical
major maintenance projects include replacing and
repairing roofs, replacing flooring, demolition projects,
and replacing and repairing heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning units. The projects listed in the table below
include 36 new projects at a net cost of $9,277,000.
Additionally, six prior year projects are being re-budgeted
at a net cost of $588,728. Court-related projects are
reimbursable from the State for a portion of those shared
facilities.
The recommended projects are in accordance with the
County’s objective of evaluating and meeting the
County’s infrastructure needs. These recommended
projects were identified by both the General Services
Division and other operating departments as urgent unmet
maintenance and facility needs.
The Board of Trade Department promotes tourism and
commercial filming within Kern County and provides
local stakeholders with general promotional, legislative,
and educational assistance in regard to tourism-related
matters. The department is progressing towards a
comprehensive marketing and brand-management agency
for the County in order to enhance the County’s overall
image and provide County residents with better
information about the services provided by County
departments. In order to facilitate this expanded role, the
department is offering technical and creative assistance to
other County departments and partnering agencies.
In FY 2012-13, the department assumed responsibility for
the design and implementation of enhanced content for
Kern Government Television (KGOV). The department is
developing and producing video segments for use on
KGOV and department websites to highlight and
showcase the services and programs offered by County
departments.
The department functions as the County’s Film
Commission and is the designated film-permitting
authority for Kern County. As the Film Commission, the
department is responsible for advertising, publicizing, and
promoting film production resources and locations within
Kern County. The department also provides location
information and production-service referrals.
In FY 2013-14, the department will continue to
administer the Tourism Promotion Grant Program
(Program). The Program provides competitive funding to
nonprofit organizations in order to assist with activities
designed to attract out-of-county visitors, thereby
increasing the economic benefits of tourism to Kern
County. Funding for this program totals $100,000 and is
included in the Special Services budget unit 1040.
Salaries and benefits are recommended at an increased
level over the FY 2012-13 actuals. This increase is due to
the addition of one Marketing and Promotions Associate
position. The acting Director's salary and benefits
continues to be provided by the County Administrative
Office.
The department’s anticipated revenue is primarily
obtained from ticket sales for the State of the County
Address and advertisements purchased for the Kern
County Visitors Guide, which is designed by the
department.
The recommended budget will allow the department to
maintain current levels of service.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes the addition of one
Marketing and Promotions Associate position. The
Director position is vacant and unfunded. The Acting
Director resides in the County Administrative Office.
The Engineering, Surveying and Permit Services
Department reviews and processes tract and parcel maps,
and oversees drainage, floodplain, and geologic activities
related to land-development permits. The department
reviews construction and grading plans for code and
regulation compliance. Other functions include operating
drainage facilities, performing surveys required by the
Board of Supervisors or other County departments,
reviewing legal descriptions, and other maps, and
developing the County’s geographic information system
(GIS) capabilities.
The recommended budget increases salaries and benefits
by approximately $200,000 over the FY 2012-13 adopted
budget. The salaries and benefits object includes
appropriations for the addition of a Housing
Rehabilitation Program Supervisor position, which was
approved by the Board of Supervisors in FY 2012-13.
Services and supplies object is recommended at a slight
increase over the FY 2012-13 actuals, primarily due to a
$41,000 cost increase in general liability insurance and
$50,000 in computer purchases. The department expects
overall revenues to remain constant for FY 2013-14.
The department will continue to maintain and coordinate
the countywide geographic information system and the
computer systems that support it. The department will
also maintain the base layers upon which all of the other
layers can be geo-referenced. The update for the County’s
aerial photography has been put on hold and previous
plans to expand services have been suspended until
additional resources can be allocated.
Overall, the recommended budget provides funding at a
level that is slightly more than the FY 2012-13 actuals. In
order to maintain service levels, the department plans to
use $160,000 of its Budget Savings Incentive (BSI)
credits to offset expenditures planned for FY 2013-14.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes the necessary funding
for 34 authorized positions including the Housing
Rehabilitation Program Supervisor position.
The County Counsel Risk Management Division
administers the County’s General Liability and Workers’
Compensation self-insurance programs, processes
employee and liability claims, and provides loss
prevention and safety programs. The division also
negotiates the purchase of specialty insurance coverages
for County departments. While there is no net General
Fund cost associated with this department, any increases
in expenditures in this department directly increases the
costs charged to other County departments.
The recommended budget includes an increase in salary
and benefit costs of $84,000, primarily due to approved
employee salary increases. Services and supplies
appropriations increased $162,000 due to increased costs
related to specialty insurance premiums and insurance
tracking software. The recommended budget also
includes appropriations for the department to issue a
request for proposals to evaluate the viability of
outsourcing the Workers’ Compensation program to a
third party administrator.
Prior to FY 2012-13, uninsured litigation, or the cost of
defending the County in civil and administrative matters
that are not covered under the County’s self-insurance
programs, had been the only direct General Fund expense
in this budget unit. Uninsured litigation expenses have
traditionally included payments for contracted services
such as expert witnesses and outside legal counsel,
settlement payments such as opposing attorneys’ fees, as
well as the billing of time and expenses by County
Counsel attorneys working on uninsured matters. For FY
2013-14, the recommended budget continues to
consolidate these costs in County Counsel budget unit
1210, and any direct General Fund contribution to budget
unit 1910 has been removed.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
There are no position additions or deletions included in
the recommended budget. All authorized positions are
funded.
The Capital Projects budget provides funds for land and
facility purchases, new construction projects, and major
building alterations for most County departments. This
budget unit is administered by the General Services
Division.
No new capital projects were initially identified for
funding in the FY 2013-14 Preliminary Recommended
Budget presented to the Board. However, due to
available carry forward balances from the close of FY
2012-13, a portion of these one-time resources are now
recommended to be used to address priority capital needs.
The recommended budget includes $8,065,852 in
appropriations for new projects that are detailed below
and $17,767,630 in appropriations for rebudgeted projects
that were started in prior fiscal years.
The following projects are recommended for funding:
 $1,600,000 to complete the second phase of the
expansion of LeRoy Jackson Park in Ridgecrest. This
will improve the remaining portion of the site not
improved during phase one. Improvements will
include native plantings, low water landscaping,
trees, shrubs, benches and lighting.
 $300,000 for the feasibility study phase of the Golden
Hills sanitation project. The purpose of the project is
to conduct a planning study to evaluate options
available for resolving the wastewater treatment and
disposal issues of the community.
 $650,000 for the acquisition of land in Lake Isabella
in order to prepare for the replacement of the existing
fire station. This property will allow for the colocation
of Rio Bravo Hot Shots fire staff and the
heavy equipment necessary to meet area wild land
fire needs.
 $228,000 to install an elevator at the new Recorder
Annex. The current basement storage in the building
is inaccessible per the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA). The elevator will improve the
accessibility and ADA compliance of the building.
 $100,000 for the acquisition of land in the Golden
Hills area for a new fire station. This fire station is
necessary to provide services to a currently
underserved area.
 $675,000 for water projects in the Krista and Weldon
areas. The Weldon area project will create a regional
clean water system to serve hundreds of households.
The Krista area project is needed to supply a
sufficient amount of clean water to area residents.
 $530,000 for the design of the replacement fire
station in Lake Isabella. This project will cover
design costs only with construction costs to be
budgeted in a subsequent year.
 $3,982,852 for the County contribution towards the
construction of the Sheriff’s new correctional facility.
This budget unit is used to pay the State-mandated
funding requirements for the County’s courts, including
the County’s maintenance of effort (MOE) payments to
the State for court operations and funding for courtrelated
costs that are not recognized by the State under the
Trial Court Funding Act definition of court operational
costs. The County Administrative Office administers this
budget unit.
The County and the courts reached an agreement to
finalize transition of court operations to the State on April
1, 2009. This process was initiated with the passage of the
Trial Court Funding Act of 1997.
The State Task Force on Trial Court Facilities required a
set maintenance of effort (MOE) payment obligation be
paid by counties to the State for facility maintenance costs
after transfer of a facility. This MOE obligation is per
Government Code section 77201.3. Counties retain
responsibility for any existing facility debt.
The County is required to submit $9.2 million to the State
for statutory MOE obligations, which were determined
from actual court costs from FY 2006-07. In addition,
$5.2 million is included in the MOE for baseline revenues
collected for a total MOE of $14.4 million. Additional
costs associated with this budget unit include payments
for facility charges, for operations and maintenance
agreements, auto allowances for judges, and earthquake
insurance.
Revenues are expected to remain relatively flat compared
to the prior year. Revenues in this budget unit are fines
and forfeitures collected by the County and the Metro,
East, North and South court districts.
The recommended level of funding in this budget will
meet the County’s statutory fiscal responsibilities to the
State and the courts.
The County Clerk is a division of the Auditor-Controller-
County Clerk’s Office and is responsible for issuing
marriage licenses and fictitious business names, and
accepting filings of notary public bonds, environmental
impact reports, County loyalty oaths, and other
miscellaneous filings.
The recommended budget provides a level of funding to
permit the County Clerk to continue serving the public
without any impacts to service levels. The department
continues to receive supervisory, administrative, and
technical support from Elections and Auditor-Controller
staff as needed. This section falls under the direct
supervision of the Election Division Chief.
Salaries and benefits will increase over 16% in FY 2013-
14 due to filling two (2) vacant permanent Office Services
Technician positions that were hired mid-year FY 2012-
13, in lieu of extra-help, resulting in greater retirement
and health benefits costs. Revenues from licenses,
permits, fictitious business name filings, and California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) filings help offset
expenditures to produce a net General Fund cost of
$1,609.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
There are no position additions or deletions included in
the recommended budget. All authorized positions are
funded.
The Grand Jury conducts civil and criminal
investigations. The Grand Jury may examine the
accounts and records of local government agencies and
schools, and may inquire into possible criminal offenses,
determining whether to return indictment charges in
felony cases. Legal support is provided to the Grand Jury
by the County Counsel’s Office in civil matters and by the
District Attorney’s Office in criminal matters.
This budget unit is entirely funded by the County General
Fund. Funding appropriated to this budget unit is used to
pay for staffing, office supplies, training, expert witness
expenses, travel expenses, and other costs incurred by the
Grand Jury members.
The recommended budget includes additional funding to
allow the department to do indictments as requested by
the District Attorney. The recommended budget also
contains additional funding to cover mileage expenses
anticipated in FY 2013-14 as the jury has several
members who reside in outlying areas.
POSITION DISCUSSION
The recommended budget provides sufficient funds for
the Grand Jury to increase its part-time clerical support
position to full-time.
Defense attorney services are required when the Public
Defender declares a conflict of interest or is otherwise
unable to represent an indigent adult or juvenile
defendant. This budget unit is used to process payments
for these services. The revenue source for this budget
unit is State aid for trial court funding, and State
reimbursements for costs of representing incarcerated
defendants. The County Administrative Office
administers this budget unit.
The County contracts with the Kern County Bar
Association (KCBA) for the administration of the
Indigent Defense Program that serves the metro
Bakersfield area. The KCBA submitted a budget that
includes increased costs primarily due to administrative
expenses. Costs for attorney fees and court processing are
paid from this budget unit. The KCBA is paid a fee for
administering the program. In the outlying regions, the
County pays attorneys directly for qualified services
provided to assigned indigent clients.
The recommended level of funding is $990,000 higher
than FY 2012-13 actual to cover the anticipated costs of
conflict of interest cases projected for FY 2013-14. The
anticipated increase in costs is due to increases in case
duration and frequency, as well as two additional KCBA
claims compared to FY 2012-13.
The recommended budget provides for the operation of
the District Attorney Criminal Division. The
recommended budget includes sufficient funding to
conduct prosecutorial activities, including gang related
activities, as well as administer the Victim Witness
Assistance Program which transferred to the District
Attorney from the Probation Department in this budget
cycle. There was no additional General Fund cost
associated with the transfer of this program.
Salaries and benefits costs increased $2.3 million. This
increase is the result of funding positions previously held
vacant and unfunded, and adding four new positions.
These positions are needed in response to the increase of
felony complaints and filings the department has been
experiencing. The department is also now responsible for
administering the Victim Witness Assistance Program,
which transferred funding from the Probation Department
and added nine new positions to the department at the end
of FY 2012-13. The recommended budget includes the
department’s accumulated Budget Savings Incentive
(BSI) credits to help offset the increase to salaries and
benefits. The services and supplies object increased
nearly $700,000 mainly due to increased costs related to
AB 109, general liability insurance charges, and costs
associated with the Victim Witness Assistance Program.
The recommended budget also includes the replacement
of eight passenger vehicles.
Revenue for the department increased by $1.4 million. A
large portion of this increase can be attributed to a
$750,000 increase in 2011 Criminal Justice Realignment
funding, and a $300,000 increase in Prop 172, Local
Public Safety Fund allocation.
The recommended budget also includes an allocation of
AB 109, Criminal Justice Realignment Act funds as
recommended by the Community Corrections Partnership
committee. The $1,120,000 allocation will fund nine total
positions to address the substantial increase in felony
complaint requests and felony filings in the past year.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes General Fund
appropriations for three (3) positions that were vacant and
unfunded the previous fiscal year: two (2) District
Attorney Investigator I/II/III positions at an annual cost of
$270,000; and one (1) Office Services Technician
position at an annual cost of $70,000. The AB 109
allocation provides funding for four (4) District Attorney
I/II/III/IV/V positions at an annual cost of $480,000; one
(1) Office Services Technician position at an annual cost
of $70,000; one (1) Investigative Aide position at an
annual cost of $85,000; and one (1) Legal Secretary
position at an annual cost of $90,000. Additional State
revenue also provided funding for one (1) Senior Legal
Secretary position at an annual cost of $95,000, and one
(1) additional District Attorney Investigator I/II/III
position at an annual cost of $203,000.
The Child Support Services Department initiates court
actions necessary to establish responsibility for the
financial support of minors. The department establishes
legal paternity, enforces support orders, and collects child
support payments from non-custodial parents under the
Social Security Act. The department is committed to
ensuring that all children have the resources available to
achieve long-term self-sufficiency and independence, and
continues to educate and advocate on behalf of children to
ensure appropriate services are received.
The recommended budget provides for the operation of
the Child Support Services Department with no net
General Fund cost. This budget is financed entirely from
State and federal subvention revenues and other
departmental operating revenues.
Expenditures and revenues have increased slightly from
FY 2012-13. The State budget includes the restoration of
$333,857 of funding that was reduced in FY 2012-13. The
department’s share of the State Revenue Stabilization
Augmentation will again be $551,506.
The economy has had a significant impact on this
department, as the number of unemployed non-custodial
parents has increased, making it difficult to collect
outstanding child support.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes the deletion of one (1)
Child Support Officer IV position and one (1) Graphic
Artist position, with no additions, for a net savings of
$166,000. The increase in the number of unfunded
vacancies is due to a higher anticipated usage of extrahelp
staff. The department will be able to provide the
same level service and meet the State program goals and
objectives.
The recommended budget provides an adequate level of
funding to provide legal representation for defendants
accused of criminal offenses when appointed by the
Superior Court.
In FY 2012-13, the department experienced a significant
increase in workload, including a 21% increase in adult
felony and misdemeanor appointments, and an overall
16.9% increase in total caseload appointments. These
increases have resulted in more cases being assigned per
attorney.
Salaries and benefits increased $1.1 million due to
negotiated salary increases and adding three positions that
are funded by AB 109, Criminal Justice Realignment (AB
109). Services and supplies continue to be funded at a
minimal level, with only a $40,000 increase attributed to
increased general liability charges.
The recommended budget includes $928,000 of funding
from AB 109, as allocated by the State and local
Community Corrections Partnership Committee (CCP),
which is an increase of $700,000 over the prior fiscal
year. This is due to the department being allocated nearly
$600,000 by the CCP in order to help address the increase
in cases handled by the department.
The recommended budget does not require the department
to use any of its accumulated Budget Savings Incentive
(BSI) credits in the amount of $678,912.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1)
Office Services Technician position at an annual cost of
$72,000, and two (2) Deputy Public Defender positions at
an annual cost of $245,000. The department will continue
to hold one Chief Public Defender Investigator position
vacant and unfunded at an annual cost savings of
$174,000.
The recommended budget provides for the operation of
the District Attorney’s Forensic Sciences Division.
Functions performed by the forensic laboratory (lab)
include activities such as comparison of hair, blood
pattern analysis, impression evidence analysis, and
ballistics comparisons. The lab is currently accredited by
the American Society of Crime Laboratory Directors
Laboratory Accreditation Board-Legacy Program through
April 2016. However, new accreditation requirements
based on ISO/IEC 17025:2005 standards now dictate an
enhanced level of service and separation of duties in order
to achieve accreditation. The department has indicated
that in order to maintain its accreditation beyond 2016,
additional resources are likely to be required. At the
request of the County Administrative Office, the
department is in the process of drafting a plan outlining
what resources will be needed over the next three years in
order to comply with the new accreditation standards.
The recommended budget includes an increase for
salaries and benefits of $626,000 due to providing
funding for two additional positions and reducing the
amount of expected salary savings by $184,000. Budget
Savings Incentive (BSI) credits in the amount of $189,166
were used to offset increases in salary costs. Services and
supplies have remained relatively stable, but revenue
decreased $765,000 due to the loss of one-time grants and
the elimination of testing done for Proposition 36, the
Substance Abuse and Crime Prevention Act. The
recommended budget provides funding for various
laboratory equipment in the amount of $290,000.
The recommended budget also includes an allocation of
AB 109, Criminal Justice Realignment Act funds as
recommended by the Community Corrections Partnership.
The $130,000 allocation will fund a Criminalist position
to help with the increased demand for drug testing
services from police agencies.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget provides funding for one (1)
Supervising Investigative Aide that was unfunded in the
previous fiscal year at an annual cost of $81,000, and the
addition of one (1) Criminalist I/II/III position at an
annual cost of $130,000 funded through AB 109. The
recommended budget requires the department to continue
to hold three (3) Laboratory Assistant positions vacant
and unfunded at an annual savings of $166,000.
The Kern County Sheriff-Coroner’s Office is responsible
for providing law enforcement services and support to the
unincorporated areas of Kern County and operating the
County detentions facilities.
As part of the State’s FY 2011-12 budget plan, the
Legislature enacted the realignment of adult offenders and
parolees, court security and various safety grants. This
plan provided ongoing funding for those programs
through a diversion of $0.01625 of the State’s existing
sales tax rate and a portion of Vehicle License Fees for
local law enforcement programs. As part of this plan,
Assembly Bill 109, Criminal Justice Realignment Act of
2011 (AB 109), was approved. AB 109 provides for a
local Community Corrections Partnership Committee
(CCP) that approves funding among local law
enforcement agencies and community based organizations
to provide services to the realigned adult offenders and
parolees.
The recommended budget includes $24.3 million of 2011
Realignment funds, decreasing $1.4 million from FY
2012-13 due to a large carry-forward balance and start-up
funds that were available last fiscal year. The total FY
2013-14 allocation to the department from the CCP is
$10.9 million, which is a $1 million increase over FY
2012-13. The department also has a carry forward of AB
109 funding of $500,000, which is being used to fund a
paid Detentions Deputy Academy beginning August
2013. Other increases to revenue include a $2.5 million
increase in Local Public Safety funding (Prop 172), and
an additional $3.7 million from various Special Revenue
Funds. Overall, revenues have increased $3.3 million
over FY 2012-13.
The detention of federal prisoners in the jail system
continues to be an important source of revenue to the
department. The department continues to house inmates
for the U.S. Marshals Service, resulting in an estimated
$6.8 million in revenue for FY 2013-14.
The recommended budget contains an increase in services
and supplies of $4.9 million from FY 2012-13,
attributable to a $7.3 million increase in general liability
insurance charges. Excluding the insurance increase, the
recommended budget decreases total services and
supplies appropriations by $2.5 million in order to more
closely reflect actual expenditures over recent fiscal years.
An additional $4.7 million is included in the department’s
salaries and benefits. This increase is primarily related to
negotiated salary increases and filling new or previously
vacant positions needed to address the growing
population of long-term inmates and virtual jail program.
The department now has over 1,100 inmates participating
in some type of alternative incarceration program, and
expects the number of participants to grow to 1,700.
The department has budgeted to use all remaining Budget
Savings Incentive (BSI) credits due to the expiration of
the Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) grant,
which requires the department to retain the 27 Deputy
Sheriff positions for a minimum of 12 months after the
grant’s expiration in FY 2013-14. The total BSI only
covers a portion of this expense, and the retention of these
positions is estimated to be a $2.3 million additional cost
to the General Fund in FY 2014-15.
Expenditures for leased equipment include a new lease
payment for FY 2013-14 of $580,000 as a result of $2.7
million in planned vehicle replacements.
The recommended budget also includes approximately
$27.5 million of major maintenance and capital projects
for the department, including $11 million to upgrade the
waste water treatment plant at the Lerdo detentions
facility. These projects are budgeted in the Major
Maintenance and Capital Projects budget units.
The budget includes the addition of five (5) Deputy
Sheriff positions at a cost of $689,000, two funded by AB
109 and assigned to the Sheriff’s virtual jail program, and
three assigned to the Rural Crime unit.
In FY 2012-13, the adopted budget included 74 positions
identified to be held vacant in order to achieve $7.1
million in salary savings. The FY 2013-14 recommended
budget includes holding vacant and unfunded a total of 63
positions for an annual savings of $6.1 million.
The recommended budget provides funding for mandated
services in public protection, prevention of crime, and
redirection of offenders.
The recommended budget includes an allocation for AB
109, Criminal Justice Realignment Act, as recommended
by the Community Corrections Partnership committee
(CCP). The total FY 2013-14 allocation to the
department is $9.9 million, which is an approximate $1
million increase over the previous fiscal year. The
department also has a carry forward of AB 109 funding of
$2.3 million, which the department will use to purchase
seven new vehicles, a new case management system, and
other one-time expenses related to AB 109.
Other changes to revenue include an increase of $693,000
in Local Public Safety funding (Prop 172), and a $1.9
million decrease in intergovernmental revenues primarily
due to decreasing reimbursements for the Title IV-E
program, and transfer of the Victim Witness program
grant to the District Attorney’s Office.
The recommended budget contains an increase in services
and supplies of $600,000 from FY 2012-13, largely due
additional expenses related to AB 109. An additional
$2.8 million was added to the department’s salaries and
benefits. This large increase is primarily related to
negotiated salary increases and additional AB 109 funded
staff approved by the CCP. The recommended budget
also includes funding the third pod of the Kern
Crossroads Facility for the full fiscal year, an increase of
$565,000.
Beginning July 1, 2013, the Probation Department agreed
to transfer the Victim Witness Assistance Program to the
District Attorney’s Office. The department is working
closely with the District Attorney to ensure a smooth
transition and will continue to assist with the program as
needed during the transition. This transition has no net
impact to the General Fund, as all associated expenses
and revenues have been transferred from the Probation
department to the District Attorney’s Office.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes the addition of the
following positions: five (5) Deputy Probation Officer I/II
positions at an annual cost of $695,000; one (1) Deputy
Probation Officer III position at an annual cost of
$151,000; and one Special Projects Manager position at
an annual cost of $145,000. The recommended budget
also includes the deletion of one (1) Legal Secretary
position at an annual savings of $75,000; and one (1)
Office Services Technician position at an annual savings
of $66,000.
The Kern County Fire Department provides fire
protection services throughout Kern County, including
areas of metro Bakersfield and other incorporated cities,
and has 14 Mutual Aid Agreements with neighboring fire
suppression organizations. The Fire Department also
contracts with the State to protect 1.6 million acres of
State Responsibility Area lands within the County.
The recommended budget includes a General Fund
contribution of $19.4 million. Property tax revenues are
expected to generate $83.7 million in discretionary
revenues for the Fire Fund, a decrease of $733,000, or
approximately 1%. This is largely due to a correction to
the tax assessment roll that requires payment of a $3.9
million refund from the Fire Fund.
In FY 2012-13, the department was awarded a Staffing
for Adequate Fire and Emergency Response (SAFER)
grant. This $7 million federal grant allows the department
to be reimbursed for up to 30 firefighter positions. The
department must use the funds to increase existing
staffing levels for the next two years. Unlike past awards
though, this grant does not require a commitment by the
County to retain the positions when the grant period ends.
The department used this grant to restore staffing at the
stations that were reduced to two-man stations because of
fiscal constraints FY 2009-10. FY 2013-14 is the second
and final year of the grant.
Reimbursement revenue from other agencies for fire
suppression costs is budgeted at $3 million. Historically,
reimbursements fluctuate dramatically depending on the
severity and number of fires during any given year, and
the department may receive additional reimbursement
revenues throughout the fiscal year. Additional funds
would be recognized and appropriated mid-year to cover
overtime and other costs associated with fire response on
behalf of other agencies.
The department currently has agreements with several
cities and neighboring counties to facilitate
reimbursement of costs of services provided. Estimated
revenue of $5.6 million is included in the recommended
budget for these agreements, which is $330,000 more than
the previous year. Agreements with these agencies
involve calculations based on actual costs and may
fluctuate.
Local Public Safety funds (Prop 172), continue to provide
a significant amount of revenue for the Fire Fund. The
2013-14 recommended budget includes $7 million of
funding from Prop 172, an increase of $400,000 over the
previous fiscal year.
The department will continue to use four seasonal fire
crews to support helicopter operations, manage brush
control, and control wild land fires.
The department has identified numerous fire stations
throughout the County in need of replacement. Currently,
the department is in various stages of construction, land
acquisition, and station design on three fire stations in the
outlying mountain communities. The recommended
budget includes $1.4 million for construction costs related
to the Pine Mountain station replacement, and an
additional $1.8 million in designation to assist in funding
future station replacements.
The recommended budget includes nearly $1.4 million in
appropriations for the purchase and implementation of a
new Computer Aided Dispatch system, miscellaneous
computer related purchases, a dozer tender and a vehicle
lift system necessary to perform repairs on the
departments large rescue trucks. In addition, the
department has $483,000 designated for the purchase of
future equipment needs.
The recommended budget includes appropriations for
contingencies of $250,000 in budget unit 2414.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes the addition of one
Fiscal Support Specialist position, at an annual cost of
$88,000. All authorized positions are funded.
This budget unit has been established to facilitate the
appropriation of the General Fund contribution to the Fire
Department. The General Fund contribution supplements
the Fire Fund and is used for general operating expenses.
Appropriations within this budget unit will be transferred
to the Fire Department’s operating budget unit 2415 and
is included in that budget unit under the revenues
category of Other Financing Sources.
In FY 2012-13, the adopted budget provided General
Fund contribution to fund the $2 million set aside
designation specifically for the purchase of fire
equipment. The FY 2013-14 recommended budget does
not include any additional contribution for equipment,
resulting in a reduction of $2 million from the previous
fiscal year.
In FY 2013-14, a refund due to a correction made to the
assessment roll will impact the Fire Fund by
approximately $3.9 million. However, due to overall
property tax increases and additional revenue from
Proposition 172, Local Public Safety Fund, the Fire Fund
will have sufficient resources to issue this refund without
impacting operations or requiring additional County
contribution.
The Agriculture and Measurement Standards Department
promotes and protects the County’s agricultural industry
and provides agricultural research and information
services. The department enforces laws and regulations
established by the State Department of Food and
Agriculture and the State Department of Pesticide
Regulations, and enforces consumer protection laws and
regulations.
The department enforces laws and regulations related to
commercial transactions involving weight, measure, or
count. The department inspects packaged goods and bulk
commodities to ensure that their weights and measures are
as advertised and that they conform to the Federal Fair
Packaging and Labeling Act. The department also
inspects petroleum products for proper labeling and
quality conformance to established standards.
The recommended budget allows the department to
operate at current service levels. Although in some
instances, clients may experience an increased wait time
for certain services.
The recommended budget reflects an increase in salaries
and benefits of $370,000 that is primarily the result of
negotiated salary increases and increases in extra-help
required to perform duties related to State contracts. The
recommended budget includes using all available Budget
Savings Incentive (BSI) credits to offset expenses.
The recommended budget includes a $340,000 increase in
revenues mainly due to an increase in the Unclaimed Gas
Tax and increased State contracts. The department
receives Unclaimed Gas Tax revenue based on the
amount of County contribution to agricultural program
expenses. The previous year’s expenses are used to
calculate the percentage of the tax revenue each county is
to receive.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
There are no position additions or deletions included in
the recommended budget. All authorized positions are
funded.
Code Compliance is a division of the Engineering,
Surveying and Permit Services Department. The
recommended budget provides sufficient funding to
support the division’s core functions to enforce and
correct violations that threaten public safety in County
areas, such as public nuisances, weeds, building and
housing, solid waste, and abandoned wrecked,
inoperative, or dismantled vehicles. An additional
function of the division is to provide for enforcement to
combat littering and illegal dumping.
The recommended budget provides funding at a level that
is slightly more than FY 2012-13. Salaries and benefits is
recommended at an increase due to the addition of several
positions. Over the past fiscal year, the division has
experienced an increased workload from assisting the
Sheriff’s Department with marijuana cases and residential
foreclosures. The increased workload resulted in a need
for additional staff.
The recommended budget provides $90,000 for cleanup
and abatement. The abatement fund, budget unit 2623, is
used to fund cleanup and abatement. The fund generates
revenue from the reimbursement of substandard
structures, fines and forfeitures, and interest from other
sources.
To fund the blight reduction program and to streamline
the abatement of abandoned properties, the department
requested an additional $1,200,000 in funding. The
funding is included in the recommended budget as a
designation. The department will request Board approval
for funding on a per project basis.
Overall, the recommended budget provides funding at a
level that is approximately $433,000 more than the FY
2012-13 actuals. The funding allows the department to
maintain existing service levels and add three (3)
positions.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
In FY 2010-11, department staffing was reduced from ten
Code Compliance Officer positions to five Code
Compliance Officer positions. One additional Code
Compliance Officer position was added in FY 2011-12
and in FY 2012-13 for a total of seven Code Compliance
Officer positions. The FY 2013-14 recommended budget
includes the addition of one Code Compliance Officer
position, one Administrative Coordinator position, and
one Office Services Technician position. The approximate
annual cost for these positions is $257,000.
Building Inspection, a division of the Engineering,
Surveying and Permit Services Department, enforces
building regulations, and parcel map and zoning
requirements for land use by issuing building permits and
inspecting all new construction in the County
unincorporated area.
The recommended budget provides the necessary funding
to support the division's functions and accommodate the
increasing workload created by solar, wind, and
commercial projects. In FY 2010-11 through FY 2012-13,
the division reversed a five-year trend of using
accumulated reserves to balance the budget, and actually
added to reserves, as a result of several multi-year
construction projects. The recommended budget includes
the use of reserves, as the division does not anticipate the
same level of revenue received in FY 2012-13 to continue
in FY 2013-14.
The recommended budget significantly increases salaries
and benefits. The primary reason behind the increase is
the division anticipates filling vacant positions and adding
three (3) full-time permanent positions, which were
requested based upon a projected increase in solar,
commercial, and single-family residential projects. The
anticipated increase in projects will require additional
staff in order to provide the level of service necessary to
ensure proper inspection.
Services and supplies are also recommended at an
increase, primarily due to an increase in general liability
insurance and the purchase of furniture, computers, and
California Building Standards code books. The division's
requested revenue is less than the FY 2012-13 actuals due
to the addition or deletion of a single-large project can
significantly affect the division's revenue and the division
cannot guarantee that the FY 2012-13 revenues will
continue in FY 2013-14.
There is no General Fund contribution to this budget unit.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The department is currently authorized 40 positions. The
recommended budget includes the addition of one (1)
Building Plans Technician position and two (2) Office
Services Technician positions to handle additional plan
checking and clerical work from wind and solar projects,
and an increase in commercial and residentialconstruction
projects anticipated. The approximate annual
cost for these positions is $211,000. In addition, the
recommended budget includes funding for 15 positions
that were previously held vacant.
The Recorder is a division of the Assessor-Recorder’s
Office. The Recorder, formerly budget unit 2705 in the
General Fund, is now in a separate fund as budget unit
2700. This change was made in FY 2011-12 to accurately
reflect the operational status of the department based on
legal opinions.
The recommended budget includes a $550,000
contribution from the General Fund budget unit 2705.
This anticipated revenue is from a $1 fee charged on
subsequent pages of certain document transactions. This
$1 fee is passed through the General Fund in order to
achieve compliance with Government Code section
27361(b).
The recommended budget includes $500,000 for the
remodel of the Hall of Records and $100,000 for
miscellaneous improvements to the recently purchased
building adjacent to the Hall of Records. All of these
expenses will be reimbursed from the Recorder’s
Modernization Fund.
The division will continue to examine all documents,
primarily related to real estate and estate transactions,
presented for recording or filing, as to names, signature,
proper and complete notarization, legibility requirements,
and the completion of any required Documentary Transfer
Tax statements.
The division will also be able to fulfill its responsibility
for examining, accepting, and recording marriage
licenses, birth and death certificates, and assisting
members of the public requesting copies of any
documents on record.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1)
Senior Office Services Specialist position and one (1)
Office Services Technician position, and the deletion of
one (1) Office Services Specialist position effective
January 1, 2014. The net annual cost increase of the
position changes is $81,000.
This budget unit was established in to facilitate the
appropriation of a General Fund contribution to the
Recorder. The contribution will come from revenue
generated from a $1 fee charged on subsequent pages of
certain document transactions. This $1 fee is passed
through the General Fund to the Recorder operating fund
in order to achieve compliance with Government Code
section 27361(b). The money collected from this fee can
only be used for the Recorder function.
The Development Services Agency (Agency) is under the
direction of the Planning and Community Development
Department. The agency provides information
technology, payroll, personnel, and fiscal functions to
support the operations of the departments in the public
services building. The agency partners in technology
development and ongoing technology support for the East
Kern Air Pollution Control District, Engineering,
Surveying, and Permit Services (ESPS), Planning, Roads,
Environmental Health, Animal Control, Kern Sanitation
Authority and Waste Management - approximately 450
users. The agency processes payroll, new employee
paperwork, medical and industrial leaves, and employee
performance reports and OSHA injury reporting for
ESPS, Roads, and Planning.
The recommended budget increases salaries and benefits
over the FY 2012-13 actuals. The increase is primarily
due to a $40,000 retirement payout and regular salary
increments. Services and supplies are recommended at a
slight decrease, due to a reduction in professional services
and data processing expenses. The agency expects an
increase in revenues for FY 2013-14 as a result of
increased services to governmental agencies and interfund
revenue from Building Inspection for implementing a new
permit system.
There is an anticipated retirement in FY 2013-14 that will
result in a one-time payout that has been included in the
recommended budget. The agency intends to replace the
senior-level position with a lower-level position due to the
workload aligning more closely with a lower-level
position. This replacement will allow the agency to
achieve salary savings.
The agency has available $132,000 in Budget Savings
Incentive (BSI) credits.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding to
support the Development Services Agency without
significant service-level impacts.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes the addition of a
Planning Division Chief position and the deletion of a
Special Projects Manager position.
The Planning and Community Development Department
is responsible for administering land-use programs in a
manner that fosters economic vitality, resource
conservation, and responsiveness to public needs. The
department strives to promote customer service and
delivery of programs in a responsive and cost-effective
manner.
Major projects and programs that the department will
continue to pursue in FY 2013-14 are:
 Streamlined and expedited processing of
renewable-energy projects, commercial,
industrial and residential development.
 Home Rule Program coordination providing
monitoring, reviews, and comments on various
State and federal activities, involving, but not
limited to, endangered species, wetlands, water,
air quality, and land use. The Program’s review
emphasizes the impacts on private property
owners and industries.
 Continued work on the Metropolitan
Bakersfield General Plan update, extension of
the Metropolitan Bakersfield Habitat
Conservation Plan, the Valley Floor Habitat
Conservation Plan and preparation for update
of the Kern County General Plan.
 Public workshops, hearings and staffing for the
Boron Business District – Visioning Workshop,
Indian Wells Valley Resources Opportunity
Plan, Olde Town Visioning Workshop, Buena
Vista Recreational Area Visioning Plan,
proposed ordinance and program
environmental impact report (EIR) for the
Dairy Animals Facilities program,
implementation of the Joint Land Use Study,
and Project Level Zoning Amendment and EIR
for Oil and Gas Permitting.
 Resolution and monitoring of regional growth
issues.
 Implementation of the Renewable Energy
Neighborhood Enhancement Wind Business
Zone (RENEWBIZ) Grant Program.
In FY 2012-13, the department was allocated $240,400 in
funds from the Troubled Assets Relief Program to
counties under the Payment-in-Lieu of Taxes (PILT)
program to facilitate the completion of programs that
promote economic growth throughout the County. The
department was able to supplement that funding with
General Plan Administration Surcharge revenues and
grants to undertake the projects, allowing $230,050 to
remain available in PILT funds. This amount is included
in the recommended budget for the Joint Land Use Plan
Implementation, the Indian Wells Valley Community
Plan, and the Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan.
The recommended budget allows for an increase in
salaries and benefits. This increase is required in order to
fund seven (7) Planner positions, which includes filling
four (4) vacancies created through resignations and
retirements that occurred last fiscal year and three (3)
Planner positions that were approved last fiscal year.
Applicant revenues are expected to substantially cover the
salary and benefit costs. One of the department’s Planner
positions will be dedicated to the implementation and
administration of the RENEWBIZ program as well as
applicant projects. Applicant fees in addition to
incremental property taxes from wind energy will fund
this position. Services and supplies are recommended at
an increase due to expenditures for consultant agreements.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding to
support the department’s functions.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes the necessary funding
for 38 authorized positions. The recommended budget
includes an equity adjustment for the Planning and
Community Development Director position. The Planning
and Community Development Director salary range will
be adjusted from 74.1 to 74.9. The recommended budget
also includes the deletion of one (1) vacant and unfunded
Economic Development Specialist position at an annual
savings of $108,000.
The Animal Control Department provides for the care and
protection of unwanted and abandoned animals within our
community. The County operates shelters in Bakersfield
and Mojave, and contracts for shelter services within
Lake Isabella and Ridgecrest. The County provides
enforcement and shelter activities for the City of
Tehachapi and shelter services to the cities of Arvin and
Bakersfield through contracts.
The department also provides local rabies control in
accordance with California Health and Safety Code. The
rabies control program includes animal licensing, rabies
vaccinations, bite reporting, quarantine, and stray animal
control. In addition, the department provides low-cost
rabies vaccination clinics, investigates animal cruelty and
abuse complaints, conducts public education programs,
and promotes spaying and neutering.
Animal Control underwent many changes throughout FY
2012-13. On November 8, 2011, the Board of Supervisors
approved the organizational restructure of Animal Control
from a division within the Public Health Services
Department to a stand-alone department reporting directly
to the Board of Supervisors, allowing for an 18-month
transition period through FY 2012-13. The recommended
budget includes funding to complete the transition of
operations for all functions with the exception of the call
center. The department will work with the Public Health
Services Department to transition that function during FY
2013-14. Additionally, the Director of Animal Control
was hired, which for the first time was appointed by and
reports directly to the Board of Supervisors.
In August of 2012, the County and the City of Bakersfield
formed the Metro Bakersfield Animal Control Committee
to develop a mutually acceptable vision for the
Metropolitan Bakersfield animal care needs. The County
and City continue to discuss the long term plans of
operating and maintaining an animal control facility.
Additional budget considerations may be necessary as the
fiscal year progresses.
The FY 2013-14 recommended budget includes an
increase of approximately $520,000 in salaries and
benefits. This is mainly due to the addition of the
Business Manager and the Volunteer Coordinator
positions during the latter half of FY 2012-13, and an
increase in workers’ compensation insurance. Services
and supplies are recommended at an 18.7% increase or
$363,000 over the FY 2012-13 adopted budget, primarily
due to the increased use of supplies for rabies vaccination
and licensing clinics and to cover other increases in
general liability insurance. In addition, $250,000 has been
added for the anticipated cost of a countywide spay/neuter
program proposed by the department.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
This recommended budget funds all 67 authorized
positions. There are no position additions or deletions
included in the recommended budget.
The Roads Department plans, designs, constructs, and
maintains public roads, bridges, streets, and traffic-control
devices in the County unincorporated area, except for
State-maintained highways and bridges. The department
provides engineering design for all transportation projects
(and related requests from other departments), including
preparation of preliminary studies to determine the project
scope and constraints, preparation of detailed construction
plans and specifications, and the administration of
construction contracts. The recommended budget is
largely a reflection of State and federal allocated funding.
Construction projects are anticipated to continue at the
same pace for at least the next couple of years as the
department completes previously allocated long-term
projects. Major projects and programs that the department
will continue to work on in FY 2013-14 are:
 Completing construction of an auxiliary lane and
other improvements at Olive Drive and Highway
99. Formerly rated at Level of Service D, the
intersection is now functioning at the A Level.
 Designing an alternate access route for residents
living in the Standard Street area near the San
Joaquin Railroad tracks. Construction is
expected to begin in Spring 2014.
The recommended budget includes a General Fund
contribution of $5.7 million, which is $5.1 million less
than the FY 2012-13 adopted budget. The General Fund
contribution in FY 2012-13 was greater than the previous
years in order to restore the department’s funding for road
maintenance that was reduced at the beginning of the
recent economic downturn, to fund an emergency-access
project on Standard Street near a refinery on Rosedale
Highway, and to repair Cache Creek Bridge in the Sand
Canyon area.
Salaries and benefits are recommended at $21.5 million in
anticipation of the department filling all vacant positions.
The department expects revenues for FY 2013-14 to be
slightly less than the FY 2012-13 actuals. Gasoline sales
tax and gasoline excise tax revenues are expected to be
lower due to changes in demand as a result of higher
prices and more fuel-efficient vehicles. Federal aid for
construction is expected to decrease due to timing issues
caused by delays in a few major projects. The
reimbursement for these major projects is expected to be
realized in FY 2014-15.
The recommended budget provides sufficient funding to
support the Roads Department without significant service
level impacts.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget provides funding for all
authorized positions.
This budget unit provides supplemental funding from the
General Fund to the Road Fund to support Roads
Department operations. Appropriations within this budget
unit will be transferred to the Roads Department’s
operating budget unit 3000 and will be reflected in the
revenue category Other Financing Sources.
The adopted contribution for FY 2012-13 provided
additional funding to restore funding for road
maintenance that was reduced at the beginning of the
recent economic downturn, to provide funding for an
emergency access project on Standard Street, and to
repair Cache Creek Bridge in the Sand Canyon area. The
recommended budget for FY 2013-14 restores the
General Fund contribution to its normal level and does
not contain additional funding for specific projects.
This budget unit provides supplemental funding from the
General Fund to the Airports Enterprise Fund. The
contribution from the General Fund is associated with the
Airport Economic Opportunity Area (AEOA) that was
approved by the Board of Supervisors on September 15,
2009. The AEOA allocates the incremental increase of
property taxes collected on a defined area of land in and
around Meadows Field Airport, to be applied directly
toward the department’s public capital facilities.
In FY 2011-12, this budget unit included an additional
General Fund contribution of $150,000 for the Customs
and Border Patrol Officer necessary to maintain the
County’s Foreign Trade Zone (FTZ) status. For FY 2012-
13, the Airports Enterprise Fund absorbed this cost with
increases in operating revenues and will continue to
absorb this cost in FY 2013-14.
The Public Health Services Department provides a wide
range of services to assist in the prevention of disease and
the improvement of the health, safety, and quality of life
for County residents and visitors. The department
participates in improving the health of the community
through education, encouraging healthy lifestyles, and
studying disease and injury prevention.
The California Department of Corrections has, over the
past several years, contracted with the Public Health
Services Department to provide transitional case
management services to inmates, who have been
diagnosed with HIV/AIDS, as they are released from the
prison system. Under this agreement, County employed
Social Service Workers are stationed in prisons
throughout the State of California and provide guidance,
counseling, and parole planning services with these
inmates and assist in the application process for Social
Security, Medi-Cal, and Veterans Affairs benefits.
Due to significant decreases in available funding from the
California Department of Corrections in FY 2013-14, case
management provided to inmates transitioning out of the
prison system will be reduced by approximately $927,000
and eight Social Service Worker positions. This
reduction of both funding and positions is reflected in the
department's FY 2013-14 recommended budget. The
recommended budget provides adequate funding for the
remaining programmatic areas to continue to deliver
services at current levels.
The State has also indicated that it will redirect $300
million in Health Realignment funding as part of its
efforts to fully implement the Affordable Care Act (ACA)
on January 1, 2014. Although the full impacts of the
State’s policy are unknown, early indications suggest
Kern County’s Public Health Department will be held
harmless by the State and will avoid redirecting as much
as $1.5 million in Realignment revenue in FY 2013-14.
Similarly, with the upcoming health industry
transformation due to ACA implementation, the
department has thoroughly evaluated its staffing and
organizational structure, clinic services, and third party
reimbursements from patient insurance. In an effort to
increase clinic revenues and utilize staffing most
efficiently, the department has implemented a team-based
structure, which is similar to private sector clinics and
doctor’s offices. This structure allows the department to
increase the number of patients seen in the clinic on a
daily basis. In addition to an increase in volume of
patients seen each day, the department has been able to
secure multiple contracts with insurance companies as a
preferred provider, resulting in additional revenue for
services not previously reimbursed. The department is
currently in negotiations with intrauterine contraceptive
companies in an attempt to further enhance family
planning services and corresponding revenue.
The department continues to attempt to locate alternative
revenue sources to fund the services currently provided
and to add new services not currently available to the
community through the department.
Finally, to further enhance laboratory services, the
department is requesting to purchase a vacuum centrifuge
for $18,000. The lab equipment was requested in the FY
2012-13 budget, however the purchase was deferred to
FY 2013-14 due to a reduction in anticipated revenue
from the Public Health laboratory services.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The department is currently authorized 269 total
positions; 259 full time and 10 part time positions.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of seven
Social Service Worker positions, at an annual savings of
$894,831. The recommended budget also includes the
addition of one Accountant I/II/III position, at an annual
cost of $130,159, which will be partially offset by the
annual savings of $109,828 achieved from the requested
deletion of one Administrative Coordinator position.
The recommended budget funds 232 full time positions
and seven part time positions. The department is holding
vacant and unfunded 19 positions: one Health Care
Insurance Specialist position, at an annual savings of
$166,940; one Medical Billing Project Coordinator
position, at an annual savings of $115,426; three Public
Health Nurse I/II positions, at an annual savings of
$511,359; two Junior Public Health Nurse positions, at an
annual savings of $265,066; one Junior Staff Nurse
position, at an annual savings of $126,687; one
Vocational Nurse I/II position, at an annual savings of
$97,128; one Accountant I/II/III position, at an annual
savings of $130,159; one Fiscal Support Technician
position, at an annual savings of $78,425; one Office
Services Specialist position, at an annual savings of
$79,421; one Office Services Technician position, at an
annual savings of $71,561; four Medical Investigator
positions, at an annual savings of $364,076; one Public
Health Aide I/II position, at an annual savings of $66,752;
and two Social Service Worker positions, at an annual
savings of $255,666.
The Environmental Health Division provides Statemandated
regulatory oversight, compliance assistance,
and enforcement actions for community businesses and
activities. The division has over 8,000 business facilities
that it is responsible for reviewing and inspecting to
protect the public and the environment. Facilities
presenting an increased risk to public health or the
environment are inspected at a greater frequency and
charged at a rate that directly correlates to the service
provided. The division has a fully implemented risk-based
inspection program focused on inspection and audit
services and designed to direct resources to areas of
greatest risk.
The recommended budget does not include a General
Fund contribution, as the division is self-supporting,
relying on permit and service fees to cover operating
costs. The division anticipates further funding reductions
in the State’s Leaking Underground Storage Tank (LUST)
program as it is phased out in FY 2013-14. The division
will use a one-time designation realized from salary
savings in FY 2012-13 to offset its revenue shortfall and
maintain a status quo budget with no impact to the
General Fund.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding for
the division to continue its services at the current level.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
This division is currently authorized 58 positions. In an
effort to reduce costs associated with extra help and
overtime, the division will attempt to remain fully staffed
throughout the entire fiscal year. As a result, all 58
authorized positions are funded in the recommended
budget.
The Mental Health Services Department focuses its
efforts to ensure access to high quality mental health
services throughout the County. The department serves
as a community-based outpatient treatment system of care
with the purpose of the diversion of individuals served
from hospitalization to less costly treatment modes and,
ultimately, recovery from illness. Implementation of the
Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) has had a significant
positive impact on these efforts. MHSA funded programs
are augmenting the role of the department by providing
consumer-driven services to previously underserved
populations.
As part of the State's shift in the assignment of program
and fiscal responsibility to local governments, referred to
as 2011 Realignment, 1991 Mental Health Program
Realignment funding, one of the department's main
sources of revenue, was diverted to fund California Work
Opportunities and Responsibilities to Kids (CalWORKs)
program responsibilities. The services that were
previously funded with 1991 Mental Health Program
Realignment are instead supported by a guaranteed
revenue source within the 2011 Realignment structure.
These funds are now transferred in equal monthly
payments, relieving the burden of variability in timing of
tax receipts under 1991 Realignment. All of the policy
and account structure provisions related to 1991 Mental
Health Program Realignment are still in effect. The
department’s share of 2011 Realignment funding will be
$21,230,195 in FY 2013-14.
Additionally, realignment brought a new funding source
to the department through AB 109, the Public Safety
Realignment Act of 2011. This act shifted a large portion
of the offender population responsibilities from the State
to local governments. Mental Health's AB 109 allocation
is $1,794,261 for FY 2013-14, which will be used to
provide additional staffing and increased contractor
funding for both in-custody and outpatient mental health
programs and services for the AB 109 population.
Beginning in FY 2012-13, two additional programs were
added to the State's 2011 Realignment budget plan; Early
and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment
(EPSDT) and Mental Health Managed Care. EPSDT is a
federally mandated program that requires the County, as
the State's contractor, to provide Medi-Cal beneficiaries
under the age of 21 with all medically necessary specialty
mental health services. The Mental Health Managed Care
program provides Medi-Cal beneficiaries with specialty
mental health services. The services provided under this
plan include psychiatric inpatient hospital services and
outpatient specialty mental health services. The
department's EPSDT and Mental Health Managed Care
allocations in FY 2013-14 will be $11,438,535 and
$7,684,417, respectively.
The FY 2013-14 recommended budget provides the
department with the desired flexibility to continue to meet
the demands and challenges of providing quality mental
health services to Kern County residents. Filling a
majority of previously unfunded vacant positions will
allow the Mental Health Department to adapt to changes
and improve its clinical response to the Affordable Care
Act as well as continue to integrate planning, monitoring,
and accountability standards for the ongoing MHSA. In
addition, the department will contract for psychiatrist
positions to supplement existing staff and provide cost
effective services to the mentally ill. The change will
result in an increase of $2,145,645 in the Services and
Supplies expenditure object compared to the prior year
adopted budget. Earnings from operations are projected to
increase when the Affordable Care Act is fully
implemented in January 2014. Positions funded in FY
2013-14 will also generate an increase in Medi-Cal
revenue.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The Mental Health Services Department is authorized 453
total positions; 447 full time positions and 6 part time
positions. The recommended budget includes the addition
of 12 positions and the deletion of 13 positions and
provides funding for 447 positions.
The recommended budget includes the addition of the
following positions: one Vocational Nurse I/II position, at
an annual cost of $97,128; two Mental Health Recovery
Specialist I/II/III positions, at an annual cost of $235,842;
five Mental Health Therapist I/II positions, at an annual
cost of $706,105; one Office Services Assistant position,
at an annual cost of $33,965; one Mental Health Recovery
Specialist Aide position, at an annual cost of $66,752; one
Deputy Director of Mental Health Services, Department
for Clinical Services position, at an annual cost of
$219,194, and one Senior Office Services Specialist
position, at an annual cost of $86,084.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of the
following vacant positions: two Substance Abuse
Specialist I/II positions, at an annual savings of $192,568;
six Psychiatrist positions, at an annual savings of
$2,235,186; one Administrative Services Officer position,
at an annual savings of $165,877; one Program Specialist
I/II position, at an annual savings of $103,709, and three
Psychiatrist III positions, at an annual savings of
$1,054,452.
The net effect of the requested position additions and
deletions is an overall reduction of one position, changing
the department’s authorized total positions to 452; 446 full time positions and 6 part time positions, and an
overall decrease in annual costs of $2,306,722. This
reduction is mostly offset with the increase in Services
and Supplies due to the change in psychiatrist staffing.
The recommended budget holds vacant and unfunded 5
full time positions. These unfunded positions include: one
Nurse Practitioner position, at an annual savings of
$195,680; one Psychology Intern Contract position, at an
annual savings of $55,106; two Mental Health Nurse I/II
positions, at an annual savings of $340,906, and one
Office Service Technician position, at an annual savings
of $71,561.
The Mental Health Substance Abuse Program provides a
variety of treatment and prevention programs to meet the
needs of the community. Primary funding for the
programs operated within this budget unit is provided by
sources outside the General Fund. However, in order to
qualify for much of the funding, a County General Fund
contribution in the amount of $111,363 is required and is
appropriated in the Mental Health – County Contribution
budget unit 4127.
Since 2011 Realignment, State program responsibilities
and corresponding revenues have been shifted to local
government. This plan realigned several substance abuse
treatment programs that were previously funded through
the State Department of Alcohol and Drug Programs. The
realigned programs include Regular and Perinatal Drug
Medi-Cal, Regular and Perinatal Non Drug Medi-Cal, and
Drug Courts. Funding levels remain relatively consistent
with pre-realignment levels, and no service impacts have
been experienced with this change.
Additionally, the Criminal Justice Realignment Act, also
known as AB 109, provided a new funding source to the
department and shifted a large portion of the offender
population responsibilities from the State to local
government. The Substance Abuse program’s allocation
of AB 109 funding in FY 2013-14 is $1,803,345, which
will be used to provide evidence-based treatment to
inmates in the Lerdo Jail Facility and community-based
treatment for the released AB 109 population.
In an effort to mitigate against the impacts of anticipated
federal spending cuts, the Substance Abuse Program will
unfund several authorized positions and reduce overall
appropriations compared to the FY 2012-13 adopted
budget. Specifically, the Substance Abuse Prevention and
Treatment (SAPT) Block Grant is slated to be cut by 5%,
or $200,000 as a result of sequestration. The Federal
Office of Management and Budgets (OMB) has not
approved the Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration (SAMHSA) Sequester Plan to
date. The Substance Abuse Program has, therefore,
budgeted conservatively in FY 2013-14 in an effort to
maintain current treatment and prevention service levels
for the residents of Kern County.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The department is currently authorized 47 positions in the
Substance Abuse budget unit. The recommended budget
includes funding for 36 positions. The department's FY
2013-14 vacant and unfunded positions include: two
Substance Abuse Specialist I/II positions, at an annual
savings of $192,574; one Youth Prevention Specialist I
position, at an annual savings of $92,205; one Office
Services Assistant position, at an annual savings of
$65,414; three Mental Health Therapist Trainee/I/II
positions, at an annual savings of $423,663; two Mental
Health Recovery Specialist I positions, at an annual
savings of $235,842; one Supervising Mental Health
Clinician position, at an annual savings of $157,603 and
one Mental Health Nurse I/II position, at an annual
savings of $170,453.
This budget unit has been established to facilitate the
appropriation of the General Fund contribution to the
Mental Health Services Department. Appropriations
within this budget unit will be transferred to the Mental
Health Services operating budget unit 4120 and Mental
Health Services – Substance Abuse operating budget unit
4123.
A Maintenance of Effort (MOE) with the State requires
the County to appropriate funding for mental health and
substance abuse services in the amounts of $771,125 and
$111,363, respectively. The County contribution includes
an additional $206,659 to Substance Abuse for assistance
with gang suppression enhancement activities consistent
with previous years.
Historically, a significant portion of the County
contribution consisted of Mental Health 1991 Program
Realignment revenues. During FY 2011-12, the State
implemented 2011 Program Realignment, which shifted
the Mental Health portion of 1991 Program Realignment
to the CalWORKs MOE, and backfilled Mental Health's
Realignment with a new revenue source. The 2011
Program Realignment also mandated that Mental Health
Program Realignment be used solely for Mental Health
Program purposes, and offers no transferability. Given
that the County has no discretion as to how these funds
are allocated, this revenue is no longer able to be
considered a County Contribution and is transferred
directly into the Mental Health operating budget unit.
Performance measures for the Mental Health Services
Department are included in the budget discussions for
budget units 4120 and 4123.
The Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Division is
responsible for monitoring the delivery of emergency
medical services and coordinating system participation
throughout Kern County. EMS system participants
include fire departments, ambulance companies, other
emergency service providers, hospitals, the public, and
Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) training
programs. EMS continually monitors the performance
standards of community ambulance providers and ensures
compliance with contract requirements. The division
provides certification and accreditation of County prehospital
personnel, including certification and recertification
for EMTs, paramedics, specialized nurses,
and specialized dispatchers. The division administers the
Countywide trauma system and manages the Emergency
Medical Payments budget unit 4201 and Ambulance Service Payments budget unit 4203, assisting with partial
reimbursement to hospitals, physicians, and ambulance
providers for County indigent services.
The recommended budget provides sufficient funding to
support the division’s functions at existing service levels.
The recommended budget will also allow the division to
ensure that patients receive optimal, high quality, and
timely emergency medical care to improve survival of
sudden injury or illness.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The division is currently authorized eight positions, all of
which are funded in the recommended budget. The
recommended budget includes no position addition or
deletion requests.
State law mandates that the County provide medical care
for indigent residents and inmates of correctional
facilities. This budget unit appropriates funds to
reimburse the Kern Medical Center Enterprise Fund for
providing medical services to indigent patients, jail
inmates, and juveniles in County detention facilities.
The hospital is partially funded by an allocation from
Health Program Realignment revenues for services
provided to adult indigent patients. The Governor’s FY
2013-14 May Budget Revision includes the State’s plan to
implement the optional Medi-Cal expansion to those
individuals with incomes up to 138% of the federal
poverty level under the federal Affordable Care Act
(ACA). Inevitably, some of the individuals previously
covered by the County as indigent residents will gain
health care coverage under Medi-Cal expansion, resulting
in some savings for the County. In order to cover
increased administrative costs triggered by growing
caseload, outreach, and enrollment efforts under Medi-Cal
expansion, the State will redirect Health Program
Realignment funding away from counties and into the
State coffers. The Brown Administration assumes that
counties will achieve enough savings, as a result of
expanding eligibility for patients who are currently served
by county indigent health programs, to offset losses in
realignment funding. The recommended allocation of
Health Program Realignment revenue is $10.5 million,
which is approximately $5.7 million less than budgeted in
FY 2012-13 as a result of the State’s plan to expand
Medi-Cal under the ACA, and a reduction in available
realignment carry forward fund.
The reimbursement and cost associated with providing
medical care for inmates and juveniles is recognized in
the Correctional Medicine budget unit 8988, established
in FY 2012-13. The County has issued a Request for
Proposals to medical care providers in order to evaluate
service delivery models.
To comply with the requirements of Governmental
Accounting Standards Board (GASB) No. 54, the
Auditor-Controller-County Clerk identified $9.5 million
of the outstanding loan balance as uncollectable. The
recommended budget includes appropriations in that
amount to recharacterize the write-off as a contribution.
In addition, $9.1 million of the outstanding loan balance
was identified as a long-term receivable. The overall
impact on the General Fund of the write-off and the longterm
designation is $18.6 million.
A full discussion of Kern Medical Center’s budget and
performance measures is provided in the discussion of the
KMC Enterprise Fund budget unit 8997. The Correctional
Medicine budget unit’s discussion is provided in budget
unit 8988.
The Ambulance Service Payments budget unit is used to
reimburse County contracted ambulance companies for
otherwise non-reimbursed services provided to indigent
residents. The Emergency Medical Services (EMS)
Division administers this budget unit.
Exclusive operating areas have been established in Kern
County for ambulance service providers. Operators must
enter into a performance contract with the County before
services may be provided. Ambulance payments from
this budget unit are intended to assist with satisfying the
County’s indigent responsibilities under Welfare and
Institutions Code section 17000. Within each ambulance
operator contract, a percentage of the appropriation
approved by the Board of Supervisors in this budget unit
is allocated for each fiscal year.
Funding for this program comes from the Emergency
Medical Payments budget unit 4201, which is derived
from a portion of fines and penalties assessed by the
Courts.
Due to an increase in operating costs and an attempt to
maintain a status quo budget, EMS was unable to allocate
discretionary revenue from the Emergency Medical
Payment budget unit 4201 to this budget unit. EMS is
working on a revision to the current ambulance service
provider rates, with a particular focus on payer mix, in an
effort to alleviate the need for payments from this budget
unit altogether.
The California Children’s Services (CCS) Program
provides diagnosis, treatment, and therapy services to
children with disabling conditions. The program is
designed to ensure that children with medically eligible
conditions realize their maximum physical and social
potential.
The CCS Program, mandated by the California Health
and Safety Code, currently provides diagnostic and
treatment services, medical case management and
physical and occupational therapy services to
approximately 6,000 children. The administrative and
case management costs incurred by CCS are reimbursed
by the State, at varying ratios, depending on the health
benefits a child is eligible to receive. Medi-Cal eligibility
results in a 100% reimbursement by the State; Healthy
Families eligibility results in an 82.5% reimbursement;
ineligibility for either Medi-Cal or Healthy Families
results in a 50% State reimbursement to CCS.
The recommended budget adds three new positions to
CCS resulting in an increase in the Salaries and Benefits
object. Conversely, revenue from the State is increased in
FY 2013-14 using actual CCS caseload eligibility
statistics for the third quarter of FY 2012-13. In an effort
to alleviate the cost and inefficiency of paper record
keeping, the Services and Supplies object is increased to
accommodate the one-time purchase of a software
platform that will provide protected electronic transmittal
of patient health data and allow for electronic document
storage, indexing and data mining.
The recommended budget includes an overall increase in
appropriations of approximately $859,068 from the FY
2012-13 adopted budget.
Performance measures related to this budget unit are
included in the discussion of the Public Health Services
Department budget unit 4110.
The California Department of Health Care Services
mandates staffing levels, but treats the mandate as a
guideline until staffing deficiencies disrupt services.
Deficient staffing levels could result in the State
withholding program reimbursement.
The division is currently authorized 65 positions; 59 fulltime
positions and six part-time positions. The
recommended budget provides funding for 64 of the
division’s authorized positions in support of efforts to
bring staffing levels up to the recommended State staffing
standards to meet the demands of the ever-increasing
caseloads and be compliant with State mandates.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of one
Program Specialist position at an annual savings of
$99,267 and three Program Technician positions at an
annual savings of $256,053. The division will add one
Programmer position at an annual cost of $111,295, one
Public Health Nurse position at an annual cost of
$170,453, and one Assistant Program Director position at
an annual cost of $153,324. The net effect of the
requested position additions and deletions is an overall
reduction of one authorized position.
The Human Services Department administers State and
federally mandated public assistance programs. Services
and programs to assist needy individuals and families
include welfare-to-work, County-funded general
assistance, CalFresh, child protective services, adoptions,
Jamison Children’s Center, information and referral
services, and foster family home licensing. The
department also administers the CalWORKs program,
which requires that certain able-bodied applicants and aid
recipients participate in work-related activities as a
condition of eligibility.
Most public assistance programs administered by the
department are controlled by federal or State laws, and are
regulated and supervised by the State Department of
Social Services (CDSS). The department continues to
direct its efforts to a family-focused service delivery
system. This includes initiatives such as Family-to-
Family, Linkages, Differential Response,
Disproportionality Project, Heart Gallery for adopted
children, and continued work on implementation of Child
Welfare League of America (CWLA) recommendations
through the resulting strategic plan for service
improvements.
CalWORKs, which provides cash assistance to eligible
and needy families, requires most welfare recipients to
participate in activities that will lead to employment and
self-sufficiency. The department also administers the
CalFresh Program (formally known as Food Stamps) for
eligible and certified low-income households, Medi-Cal,
which provides medical access to eligible children,
individuals, families and seniors, as well as the Countyfunded
General Assistance program. The department is
responsible for determining initial and continuing
eligibility for these programs’ applicants.
Because of the continually depressed economy and high
unemployment rates locally, the department has seen a
22% increase in CalWORKs cases since 2007. In the
same time period, CalFresh cases have increased by 110%
and Medi-Cal by 57%. As of February 2013, 25.7% of
Kern County’s population is now receiving some form of
assistance, with many individuals and families seeking
assistance for the first time. The department is currently
serving an average of more than 220,157 beneficiaries
through various public assistance programs.
In the Child Protective Services Bureau, the department
has in place a 24-hour response system designed to
receive, investigate, and evaluate reports of child abuse
and neglect. Focusing on the safety of the child, the
department works in conjunction with the juvenile court
system; should it be substantiated that abuse has taken
place, the child may be made a dependent of the court.
When that occurs, case plans may be ordered for family
reunification or family maintenance. Should families fail
reunification or maintenance services, children are then
referred to long-term placement, including foster care
homes, group homes, foster family agencies, or adoption.
When appropriate, children are also placed with relatives,
a first priority for the department. In conjunction with
this responsibility, the department operates the Jamison
Center, which temporarily shelters children who have
been removed from their home due to safety concerns
until a foster home can be arranged.
The recommended budget includes an increase in total
appropriations of $11 million over FY 2012-13, due
primarily to anticipated costs related to implementation of
the Affordable Care Act (ACA), also known as Health
Care Reform. The department is adding a total of 45 new
positions in FY 2013-14 in preparation for the
implementation of the (ACA). In April 2013, the
department added 50 new positions associated with the
ACA. The 50 positions added in FY 2012-13 as well as
the 45 positions included in the FY 2013-14
recommended budget are fully reimbursable and have no
General Fund cost associated with them. The
recommended budget also includes capital asset purchases
of $130,000 for information technology and network
equipment.
The recommended budget also includes $560,000 for
expanded Phase 1 Differential Response services to
metropolitan Bakersfield. These services, provided
through the Kern County Network for Children, seek to
intervene and provide preventative services when
incidents reported to Child Protective Services do not
fully meet legal standards requiring in-person response.
For FY 2013-14, the recommended General Fund
contribution for this budget unit is $19 million. On an
annual basis, the department uses $18 - $19 million in
County funds to draw down in excess of $150 million in
State and federal funds for the administration of
programs. Each year the department offsets the County
funds with its remaining fund balance then requests the
net amount as the current year County Contribution. The
FY 2012-13 County Contribution was low due to an
unexpectedly large fund balance as of June 30, 2012, that
resulted in part by available funds due to the
implementation of 2011 Realignment. With the
implementation of 2011 Realignment, certain funding
streams have changed substantially. The department is
working to adjust timing of these sources in order to
stabilize the County Contribution between fiscal years.
Although the State can impose changes, in the DHS
administered programs, the recently adopted State budget
did not include significant changes to the funding or
programs.
The recommended budget includes the addition of 45
positions for a total cost of $4 million: two (2) Assistant
Program Director positions, for a cost of $145,000 each,
one (1) Fiscal Support Technician position, for a cost of
$75,000, two (2) Human Services Supervisor positions,
for a cost of $95,000 each, 20 Human Services
Technician positions, for a cost of $79,000 each, seven (7)
Office Services Technician positions, for a cost of
$68,000 each, two (2) Program Specialist positions, for a
cost of $94,000 each, three (3) Social Services Supervisor
positions, for a cost of $133,000 each, and eight (8) Social
Service Worker I/II/III positions, for a cost of $105,000
each.
Although this budget includes all authorized positions
with the above mentioned changes, the department has
also requested a budgeted salary savings of $6 million, or
4% of total salaries and benefits expenditures, to offset
expected turnover and delays in hiring. This may
necessitate the department hold authorized positions
vacant in order to meet budgetary guidelines.
This budget unit appropriates supplemental funding from
the General Fund to the two other Human Services budget
units: Administration budget unit 5120 and Direct
Financial Aid budget unit 5220. These funds provide the
County’s share of cost for the department’s operations in
providing financial assistance and social services
programs to eligible recipients in the community.
The overall Human Services County contribution has
increased $3 million over the prior year in order to meet
the County's share of cost in the Human Services
Administration budget unit 5120. Each year the total
County Contribution is adjusted by fund balance available
in the Human Services Administration and Human
Services Direct Aid budget units. The available fund
balance for FY 2013-14 is less than the prior year.
Further discussion on the increased County contribution is
provided under Human Services Administration, budget
unit 5120.
A portion of the County contribution is made up of Social
Services Program Realignment revenues. This amount
increased slightly over the prior year to $20 million.
Included in the County contribution is approximately $1.1
million that is used to administer the Board-approved
Gang Prevention Program. The FY 2013-14
recommended budget also includes $1.9 million in
revenue from the Direct Financial Aid budget unit 5220,
which represents excess prior year County contribution
that is being returned to the General Fund and offsets the
General Fund contribution to the Administration budget
unit 5120.
This budget unit provides funds for direct financial
assistance payments to eligible recipients. The largest
component of this budget is the direct aid payments to
eligible needy families under the Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families (TANF)Program.
Expenditures from this budget unit and the County’s share
of costs are dictated exclusively by State and federal laws
and regulations, which virtually eliminate any local
control over expenditures. Cost estimates are based on
the department’s caseload projections and payment rates
prescribed by State regulations.
This budget unit primarily provides financial assistance
payments to families eligible for TANF such as
CalWORKs, CalFresh, and other programs. As required
by State law, this budget unit also provides for County
funding for general assistance payments to indigent
adults. Families who adopt children through the County
are also eligible for assistance payments. This budget unit
provides for this funding, as well as for the foster care
payments made on behalf of children placed in a County
foster family home, a foster family agency, or a group
home after becoming a dependent of the court. Funding
for implementation of AB 12, which extends foster care
services to transitional youth to age 21, will also be
provided in this budget unit.
The recommended budget reflects an overall decrease of
$7.3 million in budgeted expenditures over the prior year,
and includes a $1.9 million reimbursement to the General
Fund for prior year excess County contribution. The
recommended budget includes only those expenditures
and General Fund contribution as required by State
statute. There is no over-match in the Direct Financial Aid
budget as these are entitlement programs and must be
provided to all eligible applicants.
For FY 2013-14, the recommended allocation of County
contribution is $0, which is a $13.3 million decrease from
the prior year. This decrease is due to a higher than
anticipated fund balance available at June 30, 2013, which
was a result of higher than anticipated 2011 Realignment
revenue in FY 2012-13. The fund balance available has
provided sufficient funding to cover FY 2013-14 County
share of costs. To help mitigate the impact of yearly
fluctuations in County contribution, a $15.5 million
designation was established in the General Fund. In
addition, the department is working on stabilizing the
County Contribution between fiscal years.
The recommended budget includes funding for the
department to meet its current level of service. In order to
ensure that all veterans have the resources available to
achieve long-term self-sufficiency and independence, the
department coordinates housing, nutrition, health, job
training, and job recruiting services for veterans, and
assists their families in applying for any federal or State
entitlement they may be qualified to receive.
The department continues to experience an increase in
clients due to the Bakersfield Veteran Center located next
door to the department’s facility. As the center continues
its outreach services, the department experiences an
increase in referrals.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget does not include changes to
current staffing levels, and all positions are funded.
The Aging and Adult Services Department administers
federal, State, and local funds to provide services to
elderly and disabled adults. Programs and services
coordinated by the department include the In-Home
Supportive Services (IHSS) program, abuse prevention,
nutrition, homemaker, conservator, disease prevention
and health promotion, insurance counseling, financial and
aid assistance.
The Adult Protection Services (APS) program responds to
reports of elder abuse. The department will remain within
the State mandated requirement to investigate reports of
self neglect and/or abuse, physical and financial, against
elder or dependent adults.
The Senior Nutrition program provides daily noon meals
and social activities in a congregate setting for senior
citizens aged 60 and over. In addition, the program
coordinates the preparation and delivery of meals to
homebound seniors who may otherwise go without a
meal. This program has been significantly impacted by
the recent federal sequestration funding cuts as the cost of
running the program continues to increase due to
increased costs for food, fuel, and staff. In order to
maintain service levels in FY 2013-14, the department
will use available fund balance to offset the federal
sequestration cuts. The California Department of Aging
has instructed providers to work towards reducing their
Senior Nutrition program budgets for FY 2014-15.
On June 27, 2012, Senate Bill 1036 established the
California In-Home Supportive Services Authority, which
changed counties' share of cost for IHSS activities as well
as established the State authority as the employer of
record for IHSS providers. The bill requires counties, as
of July 1, 2012, to have a County IHSS Maintenance of
Effort (MOE).
Although the County's share of costs is fixed at the MOE
rate, which is paid directly to the State from the County's
IHSS Authority fund, State and federal reimbursements to
the Aging and Adult Services Department are based on
the actual costs of administering the program. Prior to
Senate Bill 1036, counties were responsible for paying the
nonfederal share of IHSS costs.
The department also administers the IHSS anti-fraud
program in an effort to maintain program integrity in the
IHSS program. The department continues to receive
federal matching funds for the program, which includes
funding of one District Attorney Investigator position.
The increase in expenditures is primarily due to adding
five positions. A significant portion of costs are
reimbursed by State and federal funds, which results in
revenues increasing as well. The General Fund
contribution remains at the FY 2012-13 funding level.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1)
Legal Secretary position, for a cost of $82,000, one (1)
Assistant Program Director position, for a cost of
$145,000, three (3) Social Service Worker I/II/III
positions, for a cost of $105,000 each, and one(1) Office
Services Technician position, for a cost of $68,000.
These positions are primarily funded with State or federal
reimbursements. The net County cost for these positions
is approximately $20,000.
The recommended budget also includes the deletion of
one (1) Office Services Assistant position, for a cost of
$62,000. In addition, three (3) positions will be held
vacant and unfunded during FY 2013-14.
This budget unit appropriates supplemental funding from
the General Fund to the Aging and Adult Services Fund to
provide for Aging and Adult Services Department
operations, namely funding abuse prevention, insurance
counseling, nutrition and other services to elderly and
disabled adults.
The recommended General Fund contribution includes an
allocation of $1.1 million in funding as required by State
and federal regulatory requirements for County match for
specific programs.
In addition, the County contribution includes Social
Services Program Realignment revenues. The
recommended allocation of Program Realignment funds is
$690,764.
State law mandates that the County provide services to
eligible aged and blind persons and persons with
disabilities so that they can remain in their homes and
avoid institutionalization. These services are offered
through the In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS)
program. The IHSS program is funded with federal,
State, and County contributions and is administered by
the Aging and Adult Services Department.
The recommended budget contains approximately $7.4
million to cover the IHSS Maintenance of Effort
implemented by the State during FY 2012-13 as well as
approximately $460,000 to cover the County's share of
providers benefits and administrative costs of the IHSS
Public Authority. The County’s local match requirement
is offset through the allocation of $7.7 million in Social
Services Program Realignment funds.
The Employers’ Training Resource (ETR) Department
coordinates and implements the County’s workforce
development system, and provides employment and
training services. ETR’s services are funded primarily
through the federal Workforce Investment Act (WIA).
ETR also receives some of its funding from the State
Employment Development Department, other counties or
collaboratives, the federal Department of Labor, and the
County Department of Human Services (DHS). In
addition, ETR administers the federal WIA funding for
Inyo and Mono counties, although each of these counties
operates its own employment and training programs and
services.
Reductions in available grant funding have resulted in a
4.4% decrease in appropriations for ETR. The department
will reduce office expenses; reduce extra help staffing
levels; and keep ten positions unfunded in order to meet
the lower funding level. The anticipated service impact to
the public will be a reduction in the number of client
orientations and longer wait times for appointments for
intake and eligibility determination.
ETR provides services directly to customers and also
contracts for training and services to provide a variety of
occupational training, computer literacy skills, and
supportive services. The recommended budget will allow
the department to continue its functions and fulfill its
mission.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget does not include changes to
current staffing levels.
The Community Development Program is a division of
the Planning and Community Development Department.
The recommended budget provides funding to support the
primary functions of the division, including improvement
of public facilities and provision of decent affordable
housing. The recommended budget includes the staff and
related expenditures that are often referred to as
administration. The operating budget is funded as a
percentage of the Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG), Home Investment Partnership (HOME), and
Emergency Shelter Grant (ESG) allocations.
Grant amounts have been declining over the past four
years. As the grants decline, the dollar amount allocated
to administration also declines. The division has kept
staffing levels low while efficiently expediting the
expenditure of CDBG, HOME, and ESG funded projects
to maintain compliance with HUD requirements for the
expenditure of CDBG funds.
While there are no major expenditure and revenue
changes, costs are anticipated to increase slightly due to
an increase in general liability insurance and
reimbursement costs of a Planner II performing work on
Community Development related projects. The projected
funding level is sufficient for the division to continue key
programs, such as assessing community development
needs, providing technical assistance to County
departments, cities, special districts, nonprofit
organizations, and other funding agencies in preparing
project proposals and applications for funding. The
division will also continue targeting new infrastructure
investments based on industry cluster needs. These
activities are vital in attracting and supporting commercial
and industrial businesses.
The Business Manager retired in FY 2012-13 and the
division has determined that many of the duties could be
performed by an Administrative Coordinator position and
yield cost savings. Two retirements, totaling $95,000, are
also included in the recommended budget. Both positions
remain funded as they are critical to the division’s
operations and will be filled in FY 2013-14.
There is no General Fund contribution to this budget unit.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding to
support the Community Development Program.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes the deletion of one (1)
vacant Business Manager position and the addition of one
(1) Administrative Coordinator position for an annual cost
savings of $18,000.
The Library Department operates 28 library facilities,
including three bookmobiles, to provide book lending,
interlibrary loan, reference, audiovisual, computer, and
other literacy and informational services to all County
residents. The recommended budget will allow the
department to maintain current levels of service and
continue to meet its mission with no change in hours of
operation.
The recommended budget provides funding that will
support 26,988 combined hours of opening at all 28
library facilities, which is the same as the estimated hours
of opening in FY 2012-13. Funding for books is
established in the recommended budget at $233,000, the
same as FY 2012-13.
The recommended budget holds salaries and benefits at a
similar level to the previous year. The California State
Budget did not make provisions for Public Library Fund
(PLF) in FY 2013-14, which, for the second year in a row,
eliminated one of the department's important revenue
sources. FY 2013-14 will be the first entire year the
department will be collecting fines at an enhanced rate,
which should help mitigate the loss of PLF funding. The
recommended budget includes a one-time increase of net
General Fund cost to cover $165,000 of retirement
payouts the department anticipates for FY 2013-14.
The department plans to finalize the purchase of, and
implement, 43 self-check systems in 18 Kern County
branches during FY 2013-14 that will allow patrons to
quickly and efficiently check-out books from the library
system using an automated kiosk. The department
anticipates this will allow employees, who typically spend
their time checking out books, to perform other necessary
library tasks. The department will be closely monitoring
the effectiveness of these new systems to determine more
widespread feasibility and financial benefits.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget maintains staffing levels of 56
full-time and 63 part-time employees, which is
approximately 87.5 full-time equivalents, and will hold
one (1) Fiscal Support Technician position vacant and
unfunded for FY 2013-14. Recommended staffing levels
will remain adequate to maintain the current level of
service to the public.
The Farm and Home Advisor's recommended budget will
facilitate the collaborative effort between the University
of California and the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The
County contributes to this collaboration by providing
funds for support and maintenance, including four County
employees, under a Memorandum of Understanding with
the University of California.
The Farm and Home Advisor will continue the
educational efforts of the traditional 4-H program,
Expanded Food and Nutrition Education Program, and
Master Gardener program. The recommended budget will
allow the County to retain the educational and economic
benefit of hosting the Cooperative Extension researchers
from the University of California.
The Farm and Home Advisor's budget will not experience
a significant change in revenue. FY 2013-14 expenditures
will rise due to an increase in general liability insurance
costs. The recommended budget increases the general
fund cost by $21,539 to mitigate this rise in general
liability insurance expense.
The Farm and Home Advisor's budget unit will continue
to support the administrative activities necessary for the
Cooperative Extension of the University of California and
the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The recommended
budget provides funding similar to FY 2012-13 that is
sufficient to sustain four County employees.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
There are no position additions or deletions included in
the recommended budget. All authorized positions are
funded.
The Parks and Recreation Department is responsible for
the maintenance and operation of eight regional parks, 38
neighborhood parks, three streetscapes, 71 landscape
areas, and six lakes in the County of Kern.
Security and public safety services are provided by boat
patrols on the lakes, and by roving patrols in some
regional park facilities. The department is responsible for
the operation of 24 veteran, senior, community, and
recreation buildings, although a number of the buildings
have been leased to other operators to help with managing
the costs of maintaining those buildings. Additionally,
the department provides administrative support for the
Golf Course Enterprise Fund budget unit 8991, Wildlife
Resources Commission budget unit 2740, Parks and
Recreation Commission, and Heritage Commission.
The recommended budget includes measures to maintain
current operations and to allow for an increase in the level
of service to the public through privatization of services
in Phase 2 areas (Mojave, California City, North
Edwards, and Boron) and Phase 3 areas (Frazier Park,
Ford City, Valley Acres, Derby Acres, and Fellows)
anticipated in FY 2013-14. The recommended budget
adds $235,590 in General Fund contribution to mitigate
an increase in utilities expense without sacrificing
services to the public. The increased utilities expense is
due to a contractual obligation to maintain an acceptable
water level at the Buena Vista Aquatic Recreation Area.
In years that water is scarce, often due to less
precipitation, the cost of water increases greatly.
Revenues, typically generated from fines and charges for
service, are expected to remain relatively flat.
Through the capital and major maintenance projects
budget units the department will be the beneficiary of four
capital and four major maintenance projects in FY 2013-
14, with estimated costs totaling $2,343,940. The
expenses include $1.6 million for phase II capital project
improvements at LeRoy Jackson Park in Ridgecrest.
These projects will not have a direct fiscal impact on the
operational budget of the department, but serve to
increase the department’s ability to provide high-quality
parks and recreational services to the citizens of Kern
County. To further increase its level of service to the
public, the department has a budget savings incentive
balance of $291,469 available for one-time departmental
needs.
Positions Discussion
The department has 94 authorized positions and the
recommended budget includes funding for 86. Unfunded
positions include two (2) vacant Building Services
Worker I positions and six (6) vacant Groundskeeper I
positions.
This budget unit is used to make annual debt service
payments for County projects and equipment financed on
a long-term basis, and to pay interest on the County’s
short-term cash flow borrowing. The County
Administrative Office administers this budget unit.
Short-Term Financing
Annually, the County issues tax and revenue anticipation
notes (TRAN) to meet the County’s cash flow needs. The
amount to be issued each year is based on the cash flow
analysis prepared by the County Administrative Office.
The interest cost and cost of issuance associated with this
financing are less than the interest earnings generated on
the additional cash.
In June 2013, the County issued the FY 2013-14 TRAN
for a par amount of $200 million, at an estimated 0.18%
net interest cost. The recommended budget includes
sufficient appropriations to fund the net interest cost of
$361,861.
Long-Term Financing
This budget funds the annual lease payments for the
Certificates of Participation (COPs) and other capital
leases that are paid from the General Fund to finance the
County’s major capital improvement, construction, and
acquisition projects. Three issuances paid from this
budget unit are still outstanding:
 2011 Refunding Certificates of Participation:
$14.9 million was issued at an interest rate of
4.57% to refund the outstanding balance of the
1997 and 1999 Certificates of Participation that
were issued to finance the acquisition of
equipment for the Fire Department, a countywide
microwave communications system and
construction of three hospital-related projects.
The portion of the debt service payment
associated with the communications system is
paid from this budget unit, while the balance of
the annual debt service is paid from the Kern
Medical Center Enterprise Fund and the Fire
Fund.
 2007 California Infrastructure and Economic
Development Bank Loan: $7.2 million was
issued to finance curb, gutter and drainage
improvements in the Fifth Supervisorial District.
Revenue from the Community Development
budget offsets the loan repayment costs. A
prepayment of the FY 2013-14 principal was
made in the prior fiscal year with available
Community Development funds; therefore, the
principal was not included.
2009 Capital Improvement Projects COP: $95.4
million was issued to finance various
transportation and facility projects, including the
Seventh Standard Road project, a new
Information Technology Services facility, a new
Fire Station 65 facility and a new Pine Mountain
fire station.
The County has two additional COP issuances related to
enterprise funds. The annual debt service related to these
issuances is budgeted within the respective operating fund
budget units.
The debt service related to the County Pension Obligation
Bonds is not paid out of this budget unit. Debt service is
payable from all of the County’s Operating funds,
including the General Fund. The annual debt service for
the capital leases and the qualified energy conservation
bonds is budgeted within the departmental budget unit
owning the equipment and the utilities budget unit,
respectively.
The recommended budget includes an increase of
$407,000 in services and supplies from prior year actual
for the estimated issuance costs associated to refunding
the 2008 Pension Obligation Bonds to convert the current
variable rate to a fixed rate. In addition, this budget unit
pays for the debt service costs for vacant space in the
Southeast Bakersfield Community Services Center.
The recommended contingencies amount of $10.4 million
represents a nearly $3.6 million increase from the level
budgeted in FY 2012-13. The following are included in
contingencies:
? $300,000 for potential Planning Department
reclamation costs associated with the Syndex
mine.
? $70,000 for software maintenance costs that may
be incurred by Personnel for an applicant
tracking system and professional services.
? $650,000 for an anticipated increase in Indigent
Defense Program costs due to a fee increase by
the courts.
? $2.5 million for potential facility costs associated
with the Animal Control Department.
? $1 million for an anticipated increase in the
general liability premium that would be charged
to departments.
? $1.8 million for the General Fund departments’
share of the loss of health realignment associated
with the Affordable Care Act (ACA)
implementation that Kern Medical Center may
not be able to absorb.
? $100,000 for potential operation costs, including
utilities for LeRoy Jackson Park to be assumed
by the County beginning October 1, 2013.
? $4 million for general purpose contingencies that
may arise during the fiscal year.
The summary shown above indicates no prior year
expenditures since funds from Appropriations for
Contingencies are transferred to other budget units as
required, and are shown as expenditures in the recipient
department's budget unit.
The recommended funding level for contingencies is
considered to be adequate to address possible emergency
needs that may arise during the fiscal year for all of Kern
County government.
The other capital projects encompass countywide capital
projects not accounted for in other budget units. Capital
projects are financed through a variety of funding sources
including Certificates of Participation, State and federal
grants, private contributions, and traffic mitigation fees
and are budgeted in the year authorized. Budgeted and
actual expenditures and revenues in the above table are
listed cumulative for the projects.
? The Accumulated Capital Outlay - General was
established to account for infrastructure
replacement within the General Fund. There are
no projects currently budgeted. Approximately
$10,836,000 has been designated for
infrastructure replacement in future years.
? The Accumulated Capital Outlay - Fire was
established to account for infrastructure
replacement within the Fire Fund. There are no
projects currently budgeted. Approximately $274,000 has been designated for infrastructure
replacement in future years.
? The Seventh Standard Road Project was
established at an estimated cost of $28,995,834
and is funded with federal and State grants.
Project closeout is underway.
? Wheeler Ridge Overpass Project was established
at an estimated cost of $9,700,000 and is funded
with federal and traffic mitigation fees. Project
closeout is underway.
? The County Assessment District 2006-01 was
formed to provide for the construction of the
Rexland Acres Sewer Improvement Project at an
estimated cost of $9,219,142. The project has
been completed and the capital project fund will
be closed during the fiscal year.
On March 24, 2009, the Board authorized the issuance of
Certificates of Participation (COPs) in the amount of
$95,410,000 for the following projects:
? Fire Station 65 Replacement, Pine Mountain Fire
Station Replacement and Information
Technology and Emergency Medical Services
Facility Replacement. The anticipated cost for
the Information Technology and Emergency
Medical Services Facility Replacement was
originally estimated at $11,686,480; the cost has
increased and an additional appropriation of $1.6
million was provided in FY 2012-13. Funding
for the increase is available from the Tobacco
Securitization Proceeds funds not used for
completed projects and interest earnings.
? An allocation of $17 million was set aside to
fund the Seventh Standard Widening Project
with the remaining cost of approximately $26
million funded with State and federal grants. The
Hageman Road Separation of Grade Project
included an allocation of $17 million from the
COPs with the remaining $22 million being
funded with State and private grants and traffic
mitigation fees.
? The remaining COP funds were allocated to 23
additional local transportation projects accounted
for in budget unit 3010.
The Tobacco Securitization Proceeds Fund was
established to account for capital projects funded with the
proceeds of the Tobacco Revenue securitization. Projects
in various stages of completion include the Countywide
Radio Communication System, the Lamont Drainfields
Improvement, the Meadows Field Terminal and Runaway
Extension, the Rosamond Fire Station/Sheriff Substation,
roads repairs and the Frazier Park Library grant match.
The Kern County Justice Facility Fund was established to
account for the construction of a new Jail facility funded
with a $100 million conditional award made by the Board
of State and Community Corrections under the Public
Safety and Offender Rehabilitation Services Act of 2007
(AB 900, Chapter 7, Statutes of 2007), and as further
amended in the 2011 Realignment Legislation addressing
Public Safety. The conditional award requires the County
to provide a minimum match of 10% or $10 million. The
anticipated project cost requires a minimum County
match of $22,544,898. The recommended budget includes
a $3,982,852 transfer from the General Fund and
$6,562,046 from the Local Public Safety Fund, for a total
of $10,544,898 to fully fund the anticipated match of
$22.5 million.
The General Services Garage administers and maintains
vehicles assigned to County departments. Services
provided include vehicle maintenance including
lubrication, steam cleaning, and vehicle washing. Vehicle
repairs include body and engine repair and overhaul,
special body fabrication, and brake service. Funding
requirements for purchasing replacement and additional
vehicles are included in this budget unit.
To provide flexibility in addressing departments’ needs,
the Garage offers vehicle maintenance services under
three different plans. In Plan 1, the Garage owns the
vehicle and provides full-service maintenance and
replacement. In Plan 2, full-service maintenance is
provided, but County departments own and replace the
vehicle. In Plan 3, maintenance is provided to
department-owned vehicles on a time-and-materials basis.
Also, due to the on-going fiscal constraints facing
departments, the Garage has a “Modified Plan 1” option
to better assist departments that have experienced budget
reductions. This option allows departments to defer purchase of replacement vehicles required under the
traditional Plan 1 option and extend service for existing
vehicles at a reduced cost.
The Garage maintains a rolling seven-year vehicle
replacement plan that forecasts future vehicle replacement
costs. A portion of Plan 1 revenue is set aside for vehicle
replacement costs and held in retained earnings (vehicle
replacement designation) within the Garage Internal
Service Fund to address long-term needs. For FY 2013-
14, the Garage will accumulate $793,945 in retained
earnings. The department will purchase 28 vehicles at a
total cost of $641,250.
Increases in budgeted revenue are partially due to the
increase in rates charged to customers that will take effect
this fiscal year. Beginning this fiscal year, the Garage will
add a surcharge to modified Plan 1 vehicles to cover
elevated replacement costs.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1)
Heavy Equipment Mechanic position and the deletion of
one (1) Supervising Heavy Equipment Mechanic position,
for a net savings of $21,000 annually. All positions are
funded and there are no planned vacancies for this budget
unit.
The Group Health Self-Insurance Program is used to fund
the County’s medical, dental, and vision benefit plan
programs. This budget unit is used to pay self-funded
medical and dental claims, dental plan premiums, County
administration costs, third-party administration costs, and
Employee Assistance Program administration costs. The
County Administrative Office administers this budget
unit.
The recommended budget provides sufficient funding for
the current health benefits plans and administration of the
plans. Revenues consist of charges to County
departments and participating special districts, employee
contributions, and premium charges to COBRA
participants and retirees.
Despite expected savings related to changes in plan
offerings and reductions in administrative costs for FY
2013-14, overall expenditures are expected to increase
from FY 2012-13, mainly due to general medical inflation
rates. Member utilization and actual claims are the
primary drivers of costs in this budget. Revenues are
expected to increase slightly over the prior year due to
new employee contribution amounts taking effect.
The full impact of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) is not
fully known at this time. Because of expanded eligibility
rules that were effective January 1, 2011, it is anticipated
that costs will continue at higher levels than in previous
years as a result of increased dependent enrollments. The
recommended budget also includes an additional $50,000
estimated for the new Patient-Centered Outcomes
Research Institute (PCORI) fee on employers. The fees
for 2012 and 2013 plan years will both be paid in FY
2013-14.
As of June 30, 2013, after adjusting for the Incurred But
Not Reported (IBNR) liability, the budgetary retained
earnings were $26.7 million. The recommended budget
includes use of budgetary retained earnings in the amount
of $9.9 million for FY 2013-14.
The Retiree Group Health Program budget unit is used to
pay the County’s contributions to the Retiree Health
Insurance Stipend and Retiree Health Premium
Supplement Programs, and for administration costs. The
Stipend Program provides a monthly stipend to all County
retirees, which helps to offset the premium cost of
medical benefits purchased by retirees through a County
administered retiree health plan. The Retiree Health
Premium Supplement Program (RHPSP) originated as a
negotiated item for all employee unions. It was designed
to further assist retirees under the age of 65 in paying for
their medical benefits purchased through a County
administered retiree health plan until they are Medicare
eligible. The County Administrative Office administers
this budget unit.
The recommended budget provides sufficient funding of
the Retiree Health Insurance Stipend Program at existing
levels for current participants. The Stipend Program is
funded by County contributions in the form of department
charges, as a fixed amount based on actual participation.
The recommended budget also provides sufficient funding
of the RHPSP. The RHPSP is funded by employee
contributions and County contributions in the form of
charges to departments, both of which are determined by
negotiations with employee unions.
The recommended budget also provides for
administration of retiree health insurance programs at
existing levels. This component is entirely funded
through charges to retirees, which may also include
offsets from the RHPSP and stipend programs.
In FY 2012-13, $41 million in Retiree Group Health
Program reserves were transferred to an irrevocable trust
fund for funding of future Other Post-Employment
Benefits (OPEB). After this transfer, the retained earnings
balance at June 30, 2013, was approximately $8.5 million.
Additional reserves will be transferred to the OPEB trust
fund as determined by actuarial study. The recommended
budget increases retained earnings by approximately $2.2
million. With no additional transfers to the OPEB trust
fund, retained earnings are estimated at $10.7 million for
June 30, 2014.
The General Liability Self-Insurance Program is
administered by the Risk Management Division of the
Office of County Counsel. This budget is used to meet
the County’s legal liability for damages to individuals
and/or property arising out of the County’s general and
automotive activities.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding for
the County’s general liability program. This budget unit
is financed primarily through charges to County
departments. The recommended budget includes an
increase of approximately $15.4 million related to charges
for services. The increase is due to unusually high
settlement and litigation activity in recent fiscal years, and
the anticipation that FY 2013-14 will maintain this
increased settlement activity. Reserves were used in FY
2012-13 due to actual expenses exceeding revenues. The
recommended budget includes the significant increase in
charges for services not only to pay for anticipated
settlement and litigation activity, but also to restore
reserves to an appropriate level.
In conjunction with the litigation and settlement increases,
the general liability premium cost experienced a
significant increase over FY 2012-13. The premium for
FY 2013-14 was estimated at $840,000, a $272,000
increase over last fiscal year. In addition, $1 million has
been set aside in contingencies to address potential cost
increases.
Services and supplies appropriations are budgeted at $4.1
million, a slight decrease from the prior year’s budgeted
amount primarily due to decreased Risk Management
personnel allocations and legal expenses. Actual
expenditures in FY 2012-13 were lower than the budgeted
allocation due to vacancies within the Risk Management
division resulting in less overhead charges, and less than
budgeted outside legal billings.
Retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2013 was $1.9
million. The department anticipates increasing retained
earnings by $4.8 million to an estimated $6.7 million
balance at June 30, 2014.
This budget unit is used to pay the cost of administering
and operating the County’s unemployment benefit
program for eligible former employees. The County
funds unemployment claims under the cost
reimbursement option, reimbursing the State Employment
Development Department quarterly for actual claims paid.
The County Administrative Office coordinates this
program and oversees the contract for cost review and
program oversight.
Future unemployment costs are not easily estimated.
Because unemployment costs are based upon wages
earned in a base period that is up to 18 months prior to the
date of the claim, claim costs against the County can lag
by up to 18 months. The availability of other
employment in the community has an effect on the
County’s claims. The maximum unemployment claim is
$11,700, based on the claimant drawing the maximum
weekly benefit of $450 for the first 26 weeks of
unemployment.
The total cost of an unemployment claim is not
predictable because it is affected by the amount of time it
takes for the claimant to become re-employed. All extra
help employees are entitled to file for unemployment
following completion of their limited term, until they find
new employment.
Revenues in this budget unit are primarily comprised of
charges to County departments based on each individual
department’s actual unemployment experience and
claims. The recommended budget is an estimate of the
cost of payment for the County’s unemployment claims
and administration.
As of June 30, 2013, after adjusting for the Incurred But
Not Reported (IBNR) liability, the budgetary retained
earnings were $3 million. The recommended budget
includes use of budgetary retained earnings in the amount
of $1.5 million for FY 2013-14.
The Workers’ Compensation Self-Insurance Program is
administered by the Risk Management Division of the
Office of County Counsel. The program meets the
County’s statutory obligation to compensate its
employees for work-related injuries.
The recommended budget will provide a level of funding
sufficient to cover projected workers’ compensation
claims and administrative costs. The County self-insures
and self-administers the Workers’ Compensation
program, financing the program through direct charges to
County departments. Each department’s operating
budget reflects the cost of the program based on the
department’s claims experience.
Charges to departments have decreased $5.1 million due
to increased efficiencies in the Workers’ Compensation
program resulting in reduced expenditures related to
claims payments and excess insurance charges. Due to
these improvements, the Workers’ Compensation
program realized a $3.5 million increase to its retained
earnings. Due to the availability of reserves to fund the
program, expenditures are budgeted to exceed revenues
for FY 2013-14.
Retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2013 was $10.6
million. The department anticipates decreasing retained
earnings by $4.4 million to offset expenses. A retained
earnings balance of $6.2 million is estimated for June 30,
2014.
The Golf Course Enterprise Fund is used for operating the
three County-owned golf courses. Private contractors
operate the golf courses under land lease agreements.
The fund facilitates the operation of the three Countyowned
courses, North Kern Golf Course, Kern River Golf
Course, and Buena Vista Golf Course. All revenues
generated from the land lease agreements are deposited
into the Golf Course Enterprise Fund where they are used
for completion of necessary capital and infrastructure
maintenance projects at the golf courses. The Parks
Department provides administrative support and charges
the fund for those costs.
In FY 2012-13 the actual amount spent on services and
supplies varied from the adopted appropriations by nearly
$34,000 with the completion of two major maintenance
projects, North Kern Golf Course kitchen remodel and
Kern River Golf Course reroofing. The Golf Course
Enterprise Fund FY 2012-13 budget was modified midyear
to accommodate a release of retained earnings
totaling nearly $313,000, which was used to pay off its
ACO-General loan two years early resulting in interest
savings. The year-end retained earnings balance was
$2.41 million.
Revenues are expected to remain on par with the previous
year. The Golf Course Enterprise Fund has budgeted
$75,000 per golf course for ongoing maintenance
expenditure and does not anticipate any major projects in
FY 2013-14.
The Universal Collection Enterprise Fund, administered
by the Waste Management Department, is used to account
for the revenues and expenses connected with refuse
collection in the Universal Collection Areas. These areas
cover the more-densely populated, unincorporated portion
of metropolitan Bakersfield and other portions of the
County. All improved properties within the Universal
Collection Areas are required to obtain services from a
franchise-garbage hauler. The Universal Collection
garbage haulers’ fees for services are collected via the
property tax bill and passed to the haulers for services
provided.
The Board of Supervisors approved universal-refuse
collection within the unincorporated metropolitan
Bakersfield area effective January 1, 2001. In subsequent
years, the program has been expanded to include other
areas of the County, such as unincorporated Taft, Lost
Hills, eastern Kern County, south Shafter, and
Buttonwillow in order to improve waste collection and
disposal methods. The Board also approved alternate
universal collection areas from the Keene and Randsburg
Transfer Station service areas to provide funding for
transfer station operations rather than for collection
services.
The Waste Management Department provides ongoing
support, and administers contracts for waste pick-up and
disposal services to businesses and residents in the
Universal Collection area. The department is responsible
for monitoring the waste haulers for compliance with
contractual service and quality requirements, and
adherence with all applicable health, safety, and labor
laws.
Projected revenues for FY 2013-14 are $12,741,610, an
increase of $2.8 million, or 22.4% greater than the FY
2012-13 actuals. In FY 2012-13, when Universal
Collection Services were initially implemented, some
property owners did not begin receiving services until
January. As a result, their property tax bills were reduced
to account for the six months in which they did not
receive service. The projected revenues for FY 2013-14
reflect an increase due to Universal Collection billing for
a full year of service to all applicable property owners.
Expenditures are projected to increase due to expanded
areas, hauler-rate increases, and general inflation. On June
30 2014, it is estimated that the retained earnings balance
for this budget unit will be $2.7 million.
The Airports Department is responsible for the
management of seven airports and airfields within Kern
County: Meadows Field, Elk Hills, Kern River Valley,
Lost Hills, Poso/Famoso, Taft, and Wasco.
The department will continue its development, analysis,
and management of its Capital Improvement Program;
maintenance and development of the structures and
improvements in the seven airports in the system;
promotion of aviation and non-aviation services;
communication with federal and State aviation agencies
and compliance with their programs; provide for the
safety and security of passengers and tenants; and review
of all proposed development for impact on any of the
airports with regard to compatibility with federal, State,
and local noise and obstruction standards.
The recommended budget includes a slight increase in
salaries and benefits due to filling additional positions.
This budget also includes an increase in the purchase of
capital assets due to critical needs for repairs and
replacement of necessary equipment.
The Airport Enterprise fund has an outstanding cash
advance from the ACO-General Fund in the amount of
$4.2 million. The recommended budget includes a
repayment in the amount of $74,350.
The Airport will receive a total of $98,945 in revenue
from the Airport Economic Opportunity Area (AEOA)
property tax increment in FY 2013-14. The AEOA was
established in 2009 to allow the department to realize a
portion of property tax increases from land values in and
around Meadows Field Airport. This new revenue is
applied directly toward the department’s public capital
facilities associated with the AEOA.
In FY 2013-14 the Airports Enterprise Fund is absorbing
the cost of the County’s Customs and Border Patrol
Officer. This allows the County to maintain Foreign
Trade Zone (FTZ) status. The FTZ is crucial to the
County’s economic development efforts as it provides an
additional means to attract large import/export-oriented
businesses to Kern County, such as IKEA, which then
provides additional tax revenue to the County through the
sales and property taxes collected from these businesses.
The department receives additional income from
participants for administering the FTZ, to help offset costs
directly related to marketing and maintaining the FTZ.
Revenues are expected to be relatively flat compared to
the previous year, with some slight improvements seen
from additional enplanements as the result of added
flights. Revenue generation has remained a challenge for
the department because discretionary travel spending has
yet to fully recover from the economic downturn.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes the deletion of one (1)
Maintenance Electrician position, at a cost savings of
$95,000, and one (1) Airport Police Officer II position, at
a cost savings of $102,000.
In addition, the recommended budget includes the
addition of one (1) Airport Operations and Security
Supervisor position, at a cost of $111,000, and a Security
Attendant position, at a cost of $57,000.
Kern Medical Center (KMC) provides comprehensive
inpatient, outpatient, and ancillary services. It is the only
hospital with physician residency programs in the County.
There are seven residency programs: Pharmacy,
Emergency Medicine, Family Practice, Internal Medicine,
Surgery, Obstetrics/Gynecology, and Psychiatry. All
residency programs are fully accredited by the
Accreditation Council on Graduate Medical Education.
KMC is designated by Kern County Emergency Medical
Services and the American College of Surgeons as the
County’s only trauma center.
KMC will continue to face significant financial
challenges in FY 2013-14. In early July, the hospital
provided a revised requested budget to the County
Administrative Office for review. The recommended
budget is based on the revised requested budget. KMC is
currently reviewing governmental receivables and the
hospital’s patient revenue. Results of the hospital’s review
may require changes to the recommended budget.
Adjustments were made to the revised requested budget to
account for costs associated with providing medical care
to inmates incarcerated by the County and for juvenile
detainees. In FY 2012-13 the program budget for
Correctional Medicine was carved out of the hospital’s
budget and placed into budget unit 8988. KMC will be
reimbursed for inpatient and specialty care provided at the
hospital. The KMC recommended budget includes
approximately $6 million as expenditure reimbursement
for those services.
State and federal programs designated to reimburse KMC
for the cost of treating low income and indigent patients
have changed over the years. On November 2, 2010, the
State entered into an agreement with the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) that is designed
to sustain and strengthen the Medi-Cal program. The
Section 1115 Medicaid Waiver provides continuing
funding for the Disproportionate Share Hospital (DSH)
and Safety Net Care Pool funding; however, it also shifted
DSH allocations to fund two new programs under the
waiver, the Low Income Health Program (LIHP) and the
Delivery System Reform Incentive Pool (DSRIP).
The LIHP program consists of two programs; Medicaid
Coverage Expansion (MCE) and Health Care Coverage
Initiative (HCCI). The objective of the program is to
transition patients seeking episodic care in the Emergency
Room to primary care at a significantly lower cost. There
is no cap on the federal share of the funding for this
program, but the County is responsible for 50% of the
health care cost. It is anticipated that current LIHP
enrollees will be transitioned to Medi-Cal under health
care reform.
The recommended budget includes an estimated $55
million in Intergovernmental Transfers (IGTs) to the State
to draw down the federal funding portion for programs
requiring IGTs. The IGTs are to be used as the nonfederal
share of the programs. As with the DSH transfers,
the IGT matching contributions to the State, as well as the
return of that initial investment is reported in the budget
under other charges and miscellaneous revenue.
The recommended budget includes an allocation of $10.5
million of Health Program Realignment revenue, which
was established to help defray the cost of providing care
to indigents. Newly eligible Californians will enroll in
Medi-Cal (California’s version of Medicaid) and will
receive benefits under the State’s plan to implement the
Affordable Care Act. In order to cover increased
administrative costs triggered by growing caseload,
outreach, and enrollment efforts under Medi-Cal
expansion, the State will redirect health realignment
funding away from counties under the assumption that
counties will achieve enough savings, as a result of
expanding eligibility for patients who are currently served
by county indigent health programs, to offset losses in
realignment funding.
The recommended budget includes $7 for the purchase of
several pieces of medical equipment, identified by
physicians and management at KMC as vital to providing
beneficial impacts in direct patient care. The increase in
fixed asset purchases was made possible by excess
reserve funding from Kern Health Systems.
Cash flow remains a challenge for KMC. Delays between
revenue receipts and operational expenses require the
hospital to rely on cash advances from the General Fund.
The outstanding balance of the advances fluctuates
throughout the fiscal year. The outstanding General Fund
loan to the hospital enterprise fund as of June 30, 2013
was $85.4 million, an increase of $27.2 million from the
prior year. To comply with the requirements of
Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) No.
54, the Auditor-Controller-County Clerk identified $9.1
million of the outstanding cash advance as long-term
receivable. KMC will continue to align with community
medical needs and provide quality services to its patient
populations.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget does not include any additions
or deletions to the hospital’s number of authorized
positions.
The Kern Medical Center-KHS Reserves budget unit
accounts for the Kern Medical Center (KMC) share of
excess reserve distributions approved by the Kern Health
Systems Board of Directors on March 14, 2013.
This budget unit facilitates the segregation of funds until a
plan is approved that targets the improvement of access to
primary care and other needed medical services for KHS
members. In FY 2012-13 KMC received $13 million in
revenue from the KHS excess reserve distribution. The
funds were not spent and subsequently carried over to FY
2013-14.
The recommended budget includes approximately $7
million in appropriations that will be transferred to the
Kern Medical Center Enterprise Fund budget unit 8997.
The hospital will use the funds to purchase several pieces
of medical equipment, identified by physicians and
management at KMC as vital to providing beneficial
impacts in direct patient care.
The remaining $5,990,000 and accrued interest will be
held in a designation until additional purchases are
identified by KMC.
State law mandates that the County provide medical care
for jail inmates and juveniles in County detention
facilities. This budget unit was established to account for
the cost of this mandate.
Since 1984, Kern Medical Center (KMC) has provided
medical care to adult inmates and juveniles at Countyowned
and operated detention facilities, when the Board
of Supervisors approved the reorganization of the
program and transferred the medical staff from the
Sheriff’s Department to KMC. Since that time, KMC has
accounted for the cost within its internal cost accounting
system. Beginning in FY 2012-13, the Correctional
Medicine budget unit, division of KMC, was established
to more accurately account for the cost of the program.
Ninety-two (92) authorized positions were transferred
from KMC budget unit 8997 to this budget unit, but
employees will continue to be employees of KMC. KMC
retains responsibility for managing the program.
In previous fiscal years, the County has met its obligation
to provide medical care to the correctional system
population by providing a fixed contribution to Kern
Medical Center. In FY 2013-14, the recommended net
General Fund cost for these services is $21.4 million.
Appropriations in the amount of $15.4 million will cover
the cost of staff and medical supplies to provide medical
care in seven locations within the adult and juvenile
correctional facilities and funds the 92 full-time positions.
Funding in the amount of $6 million has been allocated
for anticipated inpatient and specialty care services,
provided at the hospital and for payments to outside
vendors for services, such as ambulance transportation for
inmates and juveniles, and for payments to other hospitals
for services provided to this population. The
reimbursement and cost associated with providing
medical care for federal inmates is included in the Kern
Medical Center Enterprise Fund budget unit 8997.
The County has issued a Request for Proposals to explore
service delivery options for this program. Budgetary
changes may be necessary as the fiscal year progress
The Roads Department Transit Division develops and
operates the public transportation system, Kern Regional
Transit, within the County’s unincorporated areas. The
division studies and makes recommendations on public
transportation needs and administers contracts with public
and private transit service providers.
Overall, the recommended budget holds salaries and
benefits at a similar level to the FY 2012-13 budget. A
Supervising Planner was vacant throughout FY 2012-13
and is intended to be filled in FY 2013-14. Services and
supplies are recommended at an increase over FY 2012-
13 actuals primarily due to an anticipated increase in
transit contracted services. Three Proposition 1B grantfunded
projects are budgeted for FY 2013-14. These
projects include security cameras, bus passenger shelters,
and fencing, gates, and lighting. The division expects
sales tax revenues, the primary source of operational
funding for the transit system, to maintain historical levels
during FY 2013-14. Passenger-fare revenue is expected to
remain relatively flat.
On June 30, 2013, the fund’s retained earnings balance
was approximately $1.2 million. The retained earnings
fluctuate depending on timing of expenditures and
reimbursements. A delay in reimbursement from State
and federal agencies requires the division to rely on
retained earnings to meet its mission.
The division will continue to plan, coordinate, and
administer the public transit system, Kern Regional
Transit, within the County's unincorporated areas. The
division will also continue to provide a combination of
demand-response, fixed-route, and inter-city transit
service.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding to
support the Roads Department Transit Division without
significant service-level impacts.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget provides the necessary funding
for five (5) authorized positions. The division maintained
an average of three (3) authorized-filled positions in FY
2012-13, due to a vacant Supervising Planner position.
The FY 2013-14 recommended budget allows for the
addition of one (1) Administrative Coordinator position
and one (1) Office Services Technician position. The
division is requesting the deletion of one (1) Office
Services Assistant position.
The County’s solid waste disposal facilities and transfer
stations are operated and maintained through the Solid
Waste Enterprise Fund. Budget units 8999 and 8993 are
administered by the Waste Management Department.
These budget units finance the management and contract
operations of seven active landfills, seven
recycling/transfer stations, three special waste facilities,
and the department’s capital projects. Budget unit 8999
also provides for the continuing maintenance of eight
inactive or closed landfills and 43 closed burn dumps.
The complexity of solid waste management from both
environmental and financial standpoints continues to
increase. The department will exceed the diversion
requirements of the Integrated Waste Management Act of
1989, which mandates a reduction of waste being
disposed, and to use new technology in methods of waste
management. The department continues to comply with
increasingly complex air-monitoring requirements and
utilize cross-functional teams to solve complex problems
and manage projects.
In recent years, increased emphasis has been placed on
the proper disposal of hazardous waste. The Special
Waste Facilities in Bakersfield, Ridgecrest, and Mojave
provide for safe disposal of household-hazardous waste
and hazardous waste generated by small businesses. The
recommended budget continues to support this program.
The problem of illegal dumping continues throughout the
County. This challenge continues to be addressed by a
team consisting of staff from several County departments
working together to better educate the public and to
provide some relief in the way of cleanup. The
recommended budget again allocates funds for Code
Compliance to be used towards these efforts.
The recommended budget allows for the department to
bring back or increase programs that were cut in FY
2009-10 such as household-hazardous waste one-day
collection events as well as hold fees constant despite
modest inflation. The department is proposing to increase
the number of household-hazardous waste one-day
collection events from five to eleven, to increase
community education and public awareness of various
programs, and to increase the department's recycling
program efforts.
The recommended budget increases salaries and benefits
over the FY 2012-13 actuals. The increase is attributed to
salary increments, promotions, and the addition of three
(3) permanent full-time positions. Services and supplies,
although less than the FY 2012-13 adopted budget, will
fund additional services for household-hazardous waste
one-day collection events, and community
education/awareness and diversion programs.
The department did not request a CPI-based rate increase
for FY 2013-14. Despite the lack of a CPI-based rate
increase the department's charges for services and landuse
fee revenues are expected to increase in FY 2013-14
due to projected growth factors.
As of June 30, 2013, after adjustments for long-term debt,
budgetary retained earnings within the Solid Waste
Enterprise Fund were approximately $11 million. The
recommended budget is estimated to result in a decrease
to budgetary retained earnings of approximately $9
million. This is due to $11 million in capital projects
planned for FY 2013-14. The capital projects planned are
the Taft Landfill Module 2 Liner, the Bena Landfill
Entrance Road Maintenance, the Bena Landfill Phase 1
Closure, and the Kern Valley Transfer Station Entrance
Road Reconstruction and Overlay.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes the addition of two (2)
Waste Management Aide positions to operate new
equipment for the green and wood recycling programs, to
provide coverage for time-off requests, and to staff other
diversion activities. The recommended budget also
includes one (1) additional Waste Management Aide
position to implement community education and
awareness services.
The Employers’ Training Resource Department (ETR)
administers the federal Workforce Investment Act (WIA),
other Department of Labor grants, and Welfare-to-Work
funds received through the U.S. Department of Labor,
State Employment Development Department, other
counties or collaboratives, and the County Department of
Human Services (DHS). In addition, ETR administers the
federal WIA funding for Inyo and Mono counties,
although each of these counties operates its own
employment and training programs and services.
The recommended budget will allow the department to
administer the federal WIA funds and provide educational
and job training services, including post-employment
follow-up services.
The department’s staff and overhead costs incurred for
administering WIA and other programs are budgeted in
the department’s operating budget unit 5923. Based on
federal and State guidelines, all revenue received under
the WIA must be accounted for in a single budget unit.
WIA funding is affected by the federal sequestration in
FY 2013-14; however, the department was able to offset
the loss in revenue with the Back-2-Work Grant received
through Stanislaus County and a Paid Work Experience
Agreement with the Department of Human Services.
The Employers’ Training Resource Department (ETR)
administers the federal Workforce Investment Act (WIA)
funds. The department also administers Non-Workforce
Investment Act (non-WIA) funds for expenses not
covered by special grant funding or federal funding.
There is no General Fund cost associated with this budget
unit. The recommended budget provides sufficient
funding to administer and operate the non-WIA programs
in the County. Operating transfers reimburse expenses
incurred in the department’s operating budget unit 5923
and in budget unit 8907, Employers' Training Resource –
WIA, for which federal funding is not available.
The federally-funded Community Development Block
Grant Program (CDBG) provides funds for community
improvement projects, various housing programs, and
certain local economic development activities. Projects
and activities must assist people with low to moderate
incomes, eliminate physical blight, or meet other
qualifying criteria. The Planning and Community
Development Department administers this budget unit.
The recommended budget is a reflection of available
allocations. The program will continue to promote the
development of viable urban communities, ensure that
decent housing and suitable living environments are
available to the public, and pursue expansion of economic
opportunities. Examples of projects that represent these
activities within defined areas of benefit are curb and
gutter improvements, drainage improvements, public
facility improvements, park improvements, low-income
housing rehabilitation and accessibility improvements,
and business-development assistance.
Projects proposed for approval by both the Board of
Supervisors and the U. S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development for FY 2013-14 are:
? Pioneer Park Improvements: Design and
construction of a park, parking lot, and road
improvements at Pioneer Park located on Pioneer
Drive in unincorporated Metropolitan
Bakersfield.
? Smothermon Spray Park (Phase II): Design and
construction of a water-spray park recreation
area and related improvements within the City of
Arvin.
? Lakeview Mobile Home Village Improvements:
Demolition and clearance of vacant residential
structures that are a health and safety concern
within Tract Lakeview Mobile Home Village.
? Senior Center Renovation Improvements: Design
and construction of improvements to renovate
the Ridgecrest Senior Center.
? Veterans Park Improvements: Design and
construction of additional public infrastructure
and general facility upgrades for park
improvements at Veterans Park located in
Southwest Shafter.
? Freedom Plaza Parking Improvements: Design
and construction of site improvements including
parking; decorative walkway; streetscape
furniture; landscaping including lawn, trees,
shrubs, and irrigation system; electrical system;
work may include a water-fountain feature and
flag pole; and related improvements within the
City of Tehachapi.
? Kern River Valley/Mountain Mesa–Restroom
Improvements: Design and construction of a
restroom facility within Mountain Mesa Park.
Pioneer Park Spray Park Improvements: Design
and construction of a water spray park at Pioneer
Park, a community park/recreational facility
located on Pioneer Road in unincorporated
Metropolitan Bakersfield.
? Golden Hills Sewer System Improvements
(Phase I): Design only of a project to provide an
alternative for a local sewer system serving 169
households residing in the unincorporated
community of Golden Hills, located west of the
City of Tehachapi.
? Handicapped Access Improvements: Design and
construction of handicapped ramps and other
related improvements within the public right-ofway
at various street corner locations within the
City of Ridgecrest.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding to
support the Community Development Block Grant
Program pursuant to the Housing and Community
Development Act.
The federally-funded Economic Development Revolving
Loan Fund is used to fund loans for eligible economic
development projects, and to deposit income from loan
repayments. The Planning and Community Development
Department administers this budget unit.
Program revenue is derived from loan repayments and is
the source of funds for loans to other eligible economic
development projects. Projects include loans to for-profit
businesses for qualifying business purposes. To be
eligible for the loans, businesses must meet program
specific eligibility criteria.
Although there has been no activity in over five years, the
recommended budget continues to establish spending
authority in order to fund projects, should an eligible
business apply for funding. The department is analyzing
the possibility of using this funding to assist in the
development of an incubator program.
Eligibility criteria for the program may be too stringent
and create too many barriers for applicants. The Planning
and Community Development Department will examine
eligibility requirements for this program and re-tool the
program to better meet the needs of small businesses.
The Industrial Development Authority Program provided
assistance to for-profit companies for the acquisition of
qualified manufacturing/processing facilities and
equipment through the issuance of tax-exempt bonds. To
be eligible for assistance, projects were required to satisfy
specific public-benefit criteria. The Planning and
Community Development Department administered this
budget unit.
Due to lack of demand for this program, funding was
exhausted in the FY 2011-12 budget cycle.
FY 2012-13 was the second round of federal funds
granted to the County under the Housing and Economic
Recovery Act of 2008 Neighborhood Stabilization
Program. This funding will be used to address the effects
of abandoned and foreclosed properties in the
communities. The Planning and Community Development
Department administers this budget unit.
Local governments may utilize these funds for a variety
of activities to address the effects of foreclosures and
property abandonment, including acquisition of property;
demolition or rehabilitation of abandoned property; or to
offer down payment and closing-cost assistance to low to
middle-income homebuyers.
The recommended budget includes all of the remaining
funds available through the grant.
Federal funds granted to the County under the McKinney-
Vento Homeless Assistance Act have been consolidated
with funding from the Homeless Emergency Assistance
and Rapid Transition to Housing Act of 2009. As a result,
the Emergency Shelter Grants Program (ESG) has been
renamed the Emergency Solutions Grant Program (ESG).
The Planning and Community Development Department
administers this budget unit.
Funds are used to provide emergency shelter services or
facilities for homeless people and to assist people in
quickly obtaining permanent housing after experiencing a
housing crisis and/or homelessness.
The program will continue to provide emergency shelter
and transitional housing assistance to the homeless
through eligible activities: renovation, major
rehabilitation, or conversion of buildings for use as
shelters for the homeless; provision of essential services
to the homeless; payment of operations, maintenance,
rent, repair, security, fuel, equipment, insurance, utilities,
and furnishings for the homeless; and homelessness
prevention and housing stability activities.
ESG funding will enable service providers to improve the
quality and availability of emergency shelter capacity, and
to broaden the range of services available to prevent
homelessness and regain stability in permanent housing.
The recommended budget includes additional funding due
to available FY 2012-13 carry-over funds that were
received late in the fiscal year and were unable to be
spent.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding to
increase support provided to the homeless in the
community through the ESG Program.
This program was originally funded by federal funds
granted to the County under the Housing and Economic
Recovery Act of 2008, Neighborhood Stabilization
Program, which addressed the effects of abandoned and
foreclosed properties in the communities. Local
governments were provided funding under this program
for a variety of activities to address the effects of
foreclosures and property abandonment, including
acquisition of property; demolition or rehabilitation of
abandoned property; or to offer down payment and
closing cost assistance to low to middle-income
homebuyers. Grant funding for the Neighborhood
Stabilization Grant Program ended in FY 2012-13. The
Planning and Community Development Department
administered this budget unit.
Federal funds for this program were granted to the County
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009 for the Homelessness Prevention and Rapid Re-
Housing Program (HPRP) through the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development. The Planning and
Community Development Department administered this
budget unit.
HPRP funds were provided for a variety of assistance,
including: short-term or medium-term rental assistance
and housing relocation and stabilization services, which
included such activities as mediation, credit counseling,
security or utility deposits, utility payments, moving
costs, and case management.
Grant funding for the HPRP Grant Program ended in FY
2012-13.
As a designated participating jurisdiction, the County is
eligible to receive an annual allocation of federal funds
for the HOME Investment Partnerships Program. The
funds must be used to benefit households at or less than
80% of the County median-income level. For rental units,
90% of the monies must benefit households at or below
60% of the median income. The Planning and Community
Development Department administers this budget unit.
This program provides funding for eligible activities and
projects, such as expanding the supply of decent, safe,
sanitary and affordable housing; strengthening the ability
of local communities to design and implement strategies
for achieving adequate supplies of decent, affordable
housing; and extending and strengthening partnerships
between all levels of government and the private sector.
The department has multiple development projects that
crossover fiscal years. The recommended budget provides
approximately $4 million in funding over FY 2012-13
actual costs in anticipation of the completion of multiple
projects.
The 125 active County Service Areas (CSAs) were
established to provide such services as landscape
maintenance, street sweeping, sewer service, and street
lighting services. In order to form a CSA, property
owners must initiate the process. The formation request is
voted on by affected property owners who are asked to
approve the CSA and agree to pay for the services
provided. At least 50% of the returned ballots must
approve the CSA and associated charges in order for the
action to be completed. The Engineering, Surveying,
and Permit Services Department administers all of the
County Service Areas.
All assessments and fees charged to property owners are
limited to covering the cost of providing a special benefit
to the property being charged. California law does not
permit the fees collected through CSAs to be used to
benefit the general public residing outside a CSA. As a
result of this limitation, the cost for services benefiting the
general public, such as general fire protection provided by
fire hydrants and street lighting for non-area motorists,
totals $115,445 for all CSAs. This General Fund
contribution is included as an expenditure in the
Engineering, Surveying, and Permit Services budget unit
1900.
The Kern Sanitation Authority is a special district
administered by the Waste Management Department and
established to provide sanitary sewer system service for
the residents of the district. The district will continue its
current level of service through maintaining its
wastewater-collection system, sewage-treatment plans,
and treated water-disposal system. Disposal and
collection-system maintenance consists of cleaning
inspection, vector control, and line-segment replacement.
Plant maintenance also includes the repair and
replacement of major-treatment facility components. In
addition to providing service within the area served by the
district, the budget unit also contains the appropriations
for staffing and services to the Ford City-Taft Heights
Sanitation District. The expenditures are reimbursed by
the Ford City-Taft Heights Sanitation District budget unit
9146.
The recommended appropriations for the district are
anticipated to increase in FY 2013-14. The increase is
primarily due to anticipated salary increments and
promotions; increased costs for grit collector maintenance, clarifier maintenance, and sewer and
wastewater treatment plant maintenance, increased
Countywide Cost Allocation Plan costs; and the
replacement of the electrical motor in the Control Center
No. 1. The district’s recommended revenues are
anticipated to increase slightly in FY 2013-14. The
increase is based on the district receiving a 2.03% CPIbased
rate increase, which took effect on July 1, 2013.
On June 30, 2013, after adjustments for long-term debt,
the district’s budgetary retained earnings balance was
approximately $1.4 million. Retained earnings are being
decreased in FY 2013-14, with a projected ending
unrestricted budgetary retained earnings balance at June
30, 2014 of $269,000.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes no position additions
or deletions.
The Ford City-Taft Heights Sanitation District is a special
district administered by the Waste Management
Department and established to provide sanitary sewer
system service for the residents of the district. The
salaries and benefits of the employees for the district are
included in the Kern Sanitation Authority budget unit
9144 and are reimbursed by the district. Services are
provided through the City of Taft’s Wastewater
Treatment Plant, which is co-owned by the County of
Kern and the City of Taft.
The district’s recommended appropriations are
recommended at an increase in order to provide the
district with the funding necessary to complete all of the
sewer-segment replacements planned in FY 2013-14 and
complete an independent financial statement audit, which
occurs every two years. Additional appropriations are also
needed to cover an increase in the countywide cost
allocation plan and depreciation for sewer segment
replacement capitalized costs. The district’s
recommended revenues are based on receiving a 2.03%
CPI-based rate increase, which took effect on July 1,
2013. The CPI-based rate increase will allow the district
to maintain adequate reserves.
On June 30, 2013, the district’s retained earnings balance
was approximately $32,000.
POSITIONS DISCUSSION
The recommended budget includes no position additions
or deletions.
The In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Public
Authority was established by the Board of Supervisors in
November 2002, and is administered under contract by
the Aging and Adult Services Department. The Public
Authority is the employer of record for the purpose of
collective bargaining for individuals that provide services
to eligible aged and blind persons and persons with
disabilities, in order to allow those persons to remain in
their homes and avoid institutionalization.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding for
the Public Authority to perform its required functions.
The IHSS program is designed to assist persons with
disabilities and older adults in avoiding premature
placement in long-term care facilities. The Public
Authority and the Aging and Adult Services Department
also collaborate with other service providers and
community agencies to provide supportive services to
older adults in their homes.
The Public Authority contracts with the Aging and Adult
Services Department for staffing. Thus, personnel costs
for the Public Authority are found in budget unit 5610.
On June 27, 2012, Senate Bill 1036 established the
California In-Home Supportive Services Authority and
changed counties' share of cost for IHSS activities. The
bill requires counties, as of July 1, 2012, to have a County
IHSS Maintenance of Effort (MOE). Prior to the IHSS
MOE, counties were responsible for paying the
nonfederal share of IHSS costs. The MOE for FY 2013-
14 is $7,399,343. Beginning on July 1, 2014, and each
July 1 thereafter, the County IHSS MOE from the
previous year shall be adjusted by an inflation factor of
3.5%. Social Services Realignment revenue is used to
offset the County's IHSS MOE.
The recommended budget estimates the County’s
financial responsibility for the cost of IHSS services at
$7.86 million. The decrease in General Fund contribution
is related to a combination of an increase in Social
Services Realignment revenue and the County savings
associated with the IHSS MOE. In March 2013, the State
repealed the 3.6% reduction in service provider hours
enacted in prior years and instituted an 8% across-theboard
reduction effective July 1, 2013 through July 1,
2014 at which point the reduction decreases to 7%. These
decreases will continue to decrease the County’s net
General Fund contribution. The County’s contribution is
recommended in budget unit 5810, and is included in this
budget as revenue.
