1. Continue implementation of County priorities in the following areas: Promote the
role of agriculture; communicate county goals and objectives to employees and the
public; develop a long range plan for meeting future infrastructure needs; maximize
financial resources and opportunities; ensure an efficient and productive work
force; manage information resources effectively; provide effective and efficient
delivery of county services; support economic development; and promote programs
for healthy children and families.
2. Continue discussions with city councils and other local government entities
regarding most efficient means of delivering mutually provided services.
DISCUSSION:
This years Requested expenditure budget of $721,482 is $14,406 more than last
year's Budget of $707,076. Several of the Board of Supervisors members have
increased their traveling to discuss issues regarding the proposed California High
Speed Rail to include being heard in Sacramento as well as Washington D.C and
water issues continue to have to be monitored in Sacramento and throughout the
valley. There also are increases in salaries and benefits as well as services and
supplies, and decreases in some line items as an effort to keep costs down as the
Board has always strived to do.
In FY 14/15, the County is projecting to receive $225,729 more in discretionary revenue
than what was budgeted in FY 13/14. This represents an overall 1.01% increase in
revenues. We are projecting FY 14/15 taxes based on FY 13/14 estimated actuals in
increased Property Taxes due to the dissolution of Redevelopment (shown in the line
item titled RDA RPTTF Residuals $2,600,000) and a projected 2% decrease in Current
Secured Property Taxes Sales Taxes ($500,000) as a result of the Leprino assessment
appeals. The Hazardous Waste taxes are budgeted at $150,000, although at the time
this Proposed Budget goes to print, less than $120,000 had been received in FY 13/14.
These funds are still budgeted and committed toward a trust fund set up for building a
reserve for the Kettleman City Water Project. It should also be noted that in May, 2014
Chemical Waste Management did receive approval from DTSC on their expansion
permit. If there are no appeals, it is projected that their expansion project could result in
increase Hazardous Waste taxes within the new fiscal year, but it is antiCipated that
appeals may push the construction back beyond this new fiscal year.
Use of Money and Property continues to decline due to record low interest rates. The
projected interest earnings will be down by 14%, or $50,000 below the Adopted 13/14
Budget.
Intergovernmental Revenue is expected to increase by 8%, or $67,000. This increase
is made up in two parts, $19,000 decrease is associated with a reduced Homeowners Property Tax Relief and it is projected that reimbursement of State Aid - Land
Conservation or Williamson Act fees will increase by $86,0000.
Charges for services, which are CAP charges, have decreased by $431,271 from FY
13/14, for a total of $1,548,517 per information from the Department of Finance.
1. Budget constraints, which have been exacerbated by the drought and cautious
optimism, are both realities as the continuing recession begins (hopefully)
recovery. Administration will continue to be focused primarily on "living within
our means" in 2014/2015.
2. Continue to pursue funding for the Kettleman City Water project jointly with the
Kettleman City Community Services District. A Letter of Dissolution was sent to
the State Department Redevelopment Agency as all debts have been paid off
through the Successor Agency to the County Redevelopment Agency, also
known as the former Kings County Redevelopment Agency. Final approval is
still pending to date.
3. Pursue with the Sheriff, District Attorney, Chief Probation Officer and the Courts,
the implementation of new State laws requiring the incarceration, treatment and
application of other means necessary to handle low-level criminals at the local
level and seek additional realignment funds.
For Administration, the Requested Budget totals $880,268. This is a decrease in
expenditures from the 2013/2014 Adopted Budget of $146,760, although this is mostly
due to charges for staff for time spent on Risk functions was moved from Other
Revenue to the Intrafund Transfer account Cost Applied. The unreimbursed county
cost for the department went from $717,062 in the Adopted FY 13/14 budget to
$785,287 in the Proposed FY 14/15. This is an increase in unreimbursed cost of
$68,225, with the majority of that increase being projected salary and benefit increases
totaling $59,849.
 Completion of our audited Annual Financial Report by December 31st.
 Return to a full Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR).
 Continue to establish procedures to achieve monthly financial reporting.
 Conduct training sessions for County fiscal personnel.
 Develop and implement Internal Audit function.
 Create accounting policies and guidelines for countywide consistency.
 Monitor and timely file all State audits.
 Ensure all State/Federal mandatory reporting requirements are timely and accurate.
 Conduct May phone campaign for tax-defaulted properties.
 Conduct annual tax sale of tax-defaulted properties (if needed).
 Work cooperatively to advance the implementation of a third party vendor for county
acceptance of credit/debit cards.
 Manage the Kings County Investment Pool in such a manner as to ensure safety,
liquidity and return a market rate.
 Assist agencies with debt issuance.
 Continue cross training of Finance Department staff.
 Evaluate and redistribute the workload of the Treasury division to increase effiCiency.
 Provide responsive and courteous service to the public and other
departments/agencies.
 Provide input for best practices for implementing the Auditor and Tax Collector modules
of the new comprehensive Property Tax system (Aumentum).
The Department of Finance expects to complete fiscal year 2013/14 at a total cost of
$2,527,918 an increase of $45,335 (which was included in two budget transfers
totaling $134,767 which increased the appropriations) from the budgeted amount of
$2,485,083. Our actual un-reimbursed cost is estimated to be $1,766,039 or $95,044
less than the budgeted cost of $1,861,083. Savings of $45,022 from Services &
Supplies helped boost our budget savings. Lower banking and IT costs as well as
unused professional services allocation make up the majority of our savings.
Revenues are estimated to be $140,379 over budget primarily due to the receipt of $124,329 in Property Tax Administration fees that had previously been zeroed out in
the adopted budget.
For FY 2014-15, the Department of Finance is requesting a budget with a total cost of
$2,987,767, revenue of $813,500 and an unreimbursed cost of $2,174,176. This is up
from the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget by $286,093. Salaries and Benefits are
requested to increase by $163,005 due to a 2% raise and the request of $50,000 in
extra help to assist in the PeopleSoft upgrade. We are also requesting the addition of
.5 FTE Account Clerk II in the Treasury Division to make a currently part-time position,
full-time, for a total of $19,035. Also, a former employee was granted unemployment
which we estimate to be $23,450 in FY 14-15.
Total Services and Supplies and Other Charges are requested at $1,430,835, up
$359,788 from last year's adopted amount. The majority of this increase is from
Information Technology Services charges which are expected to increase by $362,861
due to an increase in mainframe and PeopleSoft support. With the Courts expected to
be off the mainframe by September, our department and the Assessor's Office will
now incur 100% of its costs until we can get off the mainframe ..
Department Revenue is expected to increase by $192,000 compared to last year's
budget. This increase is mainly reflected in our Charges for Services - Property Tax
Administration fees account.
The specific projects that were originally budgeted in the 2006/07 fiscal year included
$100,000 for an applicant tracking software program for Human Resources and
$500,000 toward replacement of the County's Financial and Budget systems, as well as
a security evaluation.
During the 2006/07 fiscal year, the applicant tracking software was purchased and
installed at Human Resources.
In FY 2008/09, the FMS (Financial Management System) was updated, and costs
associated with this project appeared in this budget unit. The upgrade was completed
in 2009/2010. Also in FY 2009/10, an upgrade to People Soft software was completed.
Both of these projects were completed, but this budget unit is now being used again for
upgrades to the County's PeopleSoft system from 9.0 to 9.2 and for the implementation
of the Time and Attendance modules. This represents the General Fund cost of the
project and shows the offset of revenues from Human Services.
1. Implement negotiated agreements with each bargaining unit, and maintain the
County Salary resolution where unrepresented management benefits are
detailed. Continue discussions on various issues that arise throughout the year
that are mandatory subjects of bargaining.
2. Conduct reorganization, classification and compensation reviews, as needed, to
accurately reflect the changing needs of the departments and to increase the
efficiency of County government.
3. Continue mandated AB 1825 bi-annual training on sexual harassment
prevention. Perform additional training for supervisors and staff on updated
FMLA policies and other areas of interest to department staff.
4. Continue to review, update and re-publish the County Personnel Rules and
Policies.
5. Update the County's pre-employment physical standards in cooperation with the
County Health Officer. These changes will be reviewed with the impacted
unions prior to being brought to the Board for approval.
6. Finish implementing a new automated time and attendance system that would
replace the current hard copy form completed by County staff which is expected
to be significantly more efficient in the collection and tracking of this information.
It is currently a very time intensive task for both department payroll staff as well
as the Finance Department.
DISCUSSION:
The industry standard for Human Resources staffing as a ratio to number of employees
supported is typically 1:100. With almost 1300 County employees, there should
arguably be 13 staff in the Human Resources Department to adequately ensure
compliance with various labor laws and statutory requirements as well as all other core
services. With less than half that level of staff support, services to both departments
and the public are obviously impacted. A request is included to increase the Personnel
Assistant 1111 from .5 to .75 in an effort to restore this position eventually to fUll-time
which it had been prior to the recession. The workload has not diminished during this
period, and it is not cost effective to have clerical duties absorbed by the technician or
analyst staff.
No fixed assets are requested in recognition of the fiscal constraints faced by the
County. Additional modifications have been made to various services and supplies
accounts to reflect our most recent expenditure experience primarily driven by the costs
of recruitment activity. Notable changes in this budget category include a decrease of
$20,000 to Contract Employee Relations as three year contracts have been entered in
to with the County's seven unions. However there is a pending Unfair Labor Charge
filed by the Fire Association for which the costs would hit next fiscal year. A reduction
in Professional Specialized Services expense, as well as revenue (from the selected
vendor), for a Request for Proposals (RFP) for the Deferred Compensation program
vendor is deleted as this project has been completed. An increase of $5,000 is
requested in the Education Reimbursement program to keep pace with actual costs
since this program was reinstated this fiscal year.
The Budget for Insurance for FY 2014/15 is 1,195,409, an increase of $79,528 over FY
2013/2014.
1. Blanket Bond covers employees' faithful performance and honesty. All
employees, including elected officials, are covered to $10,000,000. The
premium for 2014-2015 is $8,200.
2. Medical Malpractice insurance provides coordinated coverage with our general
liability policy to provide additional protection for services performed in County
facilities by County staff and outside contractors. The insurance is provided
through the CSAC Excess Insurance Authority and the premium for 2014/2015 is
estimated to be $19,000, an increase of $600 from the 2013-2014 Adopted
Budget.
3. General Liability excess insurance provides coverage to $15,000,000 for
personal injury or property damage caused by the County. The County selfinsures
the first $500,000 of any accident resulting in a damage award against
the County. The excess insurance is provided through the CSAC Excess
Insurance Authority. The cost of the program and the overall dollars necessary
to pay claims and fund reserves is $1,086,506.
4. Fire and Property Insurance provides protection for County owned buildings and
contents. The insurance is provided through the CSAC Excess Insurance
Authority and the premium for 2014/2015 is estimated at $93,809. This amount
includes coverage on the County's heavy equipment fleet including fire apparatus. Heavy equipment and fire trucks will be insured for their replacement
value after a $20,000 deductible. This program also includes Sabotage &
Terrorism coverage, as well as Boiler & Machinery coverage.
5. Pollution Liability Insurance is for a three year term starting in 2012-2013 through
FY 2014-15, in the amount of $24,518, the premium is financed over three years
at $8,000 a year.
6. Fiduciary Insurance - provides protection to the Members of the Deferred
Compensation Oversight Committee. This premium of $15,183 is paid for out of
the Human Resources Budget.
7. Cost Applied figures are those costs associated with insurance on leased
facilities not included in Countywide Cost Allocation Charges as well as
reimbursement from departments for medical malpractice and aircraft coverage.
$1,086,506 is budgeted for liability claims administration and claims expense. These
moneys are transferred to Budget Unit 867000, Fund 2800, out of which all
expenditures are tracked.
This Budget reflects a summary of the Employee Benefit costs as reflected in each
department budget. Requested Expenditures for 2014-2015 total $25,803,890, an
increase of $2,338,148 from the 2013-2014 Adopted Budget. The increase is due to
the additional staff added related to the Public Safety Realignment and Human
Services caseload growth. The departments' requested budget includes all employer
costs associated with those requests.
This Budget is for display purposes and is zeroed out by cost applying these
charges to individual departmental budgets.
Cost per permanent employee is estimated at $100 per person. Costs are included
in each individual department budget and displaced in this budget unit to show the
overall cost of this insurance. The projected costs for FY 2014-2015 are $221,000.
Implementation of the replacement property tax system and subsequent staff training
will take place through the entire 2014-15 budget year as scheduled under the project's
timeline, with final implementation occurring during the first part of the 2015-16 budget
year.
The addition of a new part time Office Assistant is requested to help handle the backlog
of general clerical duties caused by increased activity in the Assessor's Division as well
as assisting in data conversion to the new property system. This new position would
replace the two existing extra help positions in the Assessor's Division.
An ongoing evaluation of products and services purchased by the department will
continue to be done in an effort to provide the most value to the taxpayers as well.
DISCUSSION:
The Assessor-Clerk-Recorder-Elections budget is projected to increase by 9%.
Increases in the Assessor and Elections Divisions are partially offset by a decrease in
the Clerk-Recorders Division. The most Significant impact on the departmental budget
is changes in IT costs. With the implementation of the new Recorder's Document
System, IT costs in this division are projected to decrease by 33%. However, with the
Courts projected to move off of the legacy mainframe system by the end of Calendar
Year 2014, the Assessors share of the mainframe maintenance cost is expected to
increase by 43%. When the new property tax system implementation is completed in
2015, property system maintenance costs are expected to decline.
The Assessors Division budget is expected to increase, due in part to decreased
revenues and the aforementioned increase in IT costs. Changes in State regulations
have removed the ability of county Assessors to charge for certain services, reducing
revenues in this division. These declines are partially offset by an increase in the
number of Passport applications processed through the Assessors Office. Passport
Application fees for the 2013 - 14 budget year are projected to increase 10% over the
prior year, with an additional 9% increase projected for the 2014 - 15 budget.
The Elections Division budget is expected to increase, primarily due to an increase in
staffing during the 2013 - 14 budget year. A new ballot tabulating system is not being
requested at this time; however, a replacement system will be required in the near
future. The machines acquired in 2005, under the Help America Vote Act, were
decertified by the California Secretary of State shortly after implementation. Replacing
it has been the Department's objective but certification for a comparable system has
not been accomplished during the last few years. There are currently several systems
nearing certification. The Elections Division will be requesting a replacement system
once certification is achieved.
The Clerk-Recorders income is projected to continue to cover the total cost of their
office. The two major projects undertaken by the Office last year are at or near
completion. The first is now near completion which involves the conversion of
documents from the microfilm medium to a computer storage medium at a cost of up
to $100,000. The second is an upgrade of the broader computer storage system to be
compatible with the future Assessor's Property Tax system. This system went live in
June 2013 and has improved public access to the Recorder's Index and vital health
statistics requests. The funds for both projects came from the Department's Record
Modernization Trust accounts. Decreases in IT related costs can be directly attributed
to the implementation of this new system, and coupled with projected increases in
document recordings result in an overall increase in net revenues.
Per the Mitigation Agreement with the Santa Rosa Rancheria, the County anticipates
receiving a total of $900,000 in revenue in this budget unit. Although the Mitigation
Agreement allows for any receipt of these funds to be an offset against the $900,000
payment from the Tribe, none is reflected here as they are currently unallocated at the
State.
As was the case in FY 10/11, FY 11/12, FY 12/13 and FY 13/14:
 $700,000 is proposed to be utilized by the Fire Fund in FY 14/15, going toward
operating costs at the South Lemoore Station, on the ladder truck purchased
by the Tribe and located at the Houston Avenue Station, and for service and
supply purchases.
 $200,000 is proposed to be utilized by the Sheriffs Department for the staffing
of deputy sheriff positions.
The proposed 2014-15 budget includes General Fund contributions (Other Charges) to
Building Maintenance in the amount of $3,129,760, the County Engineer (Surveyor)
budget, whose title by State law is Surveyor, receives $161,101, The former Williamson
Act funds that come into General County Revenues State Aid - Land Conservation are
transferred out to the Capital Building Projects $175,000 through this budget in the line
item titled Contribution to ACO Fund, $225,000 to the Fire Fund through the line item
titled Contribution to Fire Fund and $250,000 to a new Contribution to the Jail Bond,
The Cost Applied of $600,000 is the amount of Building Maintenance costs that can be
charged out to other funds or departments, thereby reducing the net cost to the County,
The 12/13 Adopted Budget included transferring $1,000,000 out from the General Fund
to the Workers Compensation and General Liability funds, Those transferred happened
in 12/13, but were not repeated for 13/14 and are not recommended at this time for
14/15. The transfer out titled Contribution to Kettleman Water of $150,000 is the
established annual transfer of Hazardous Waste fees to the established trust/reserve for
the Kettleman City Water Project.
The requests in this budget reflect the Board's policy as stated in the program
description. All requests received are listed for consideration of the Board. The Board
may add to or delete any item during budget deliberations. Only those items which
were adopted in the prior fiscal year are included as expenses in the requested
budget. Each request received is reflected below:
Industrial Promotion: $53,000 is requested for the County share of the cost for Kings
County Economic Development Corporation which seeks to encourage business and
industrial development in the County. The County and cities share in the total cost for
the Economic Development Corporation on a population basis.
Homecoming Parade: $2,000 is requested for the Kings County Homecoming Parade
and related events for FY 2014/2015. There has been a grant identified from PG & E
to cover these costs, so this is shown as both expense and revenue, with the revenue
coming from the PG & E grant.
In Home Support Services Public Authoritv (lHSS PAl: In the Proposed State Budget,
the IHSS MOE is projected at $47,846 and will be billed through the Human Services,
Welfare department for a total IHSS MOE of $2,729,650. So we are removing the
County General Fund contribution from this budget unit which was previously shown
as $65,443.
1. Maintain accreditation of the Veterans Services Office and Public
Guardian staff, as required by both State and Federal regulations. This
includes the initial accreditation of the new Deputy Public
GuardianNeterans Service Officer, and the new Deputy Public
Guardian.
2. Continue to provide services to veterans and their dependents in a timely
manner.
3. Expand outreach efforts to senior centers, Family Resource Centers,
and senior housing developments. Better utilize social media as part of
our outreach efforts.
4. Continue oversight and support of the Kings County Military and
Veterans Coalition.
5. Establish computer access terminals in the Veterans Service Office for
use by veterans and their families to access VA online programs to
assist staff in preparing claims for benefits.
DISCUSSION:
In this budget this department is projecting a slight increase in both Probate and
LPS Conservatorships. The department is also projecting an increase in
Representative Payee clients. This projection is consistent with the past several
years of data. Revenue generated from court approved fees will continue to
decline this year. LPS clients, for the most part, have fewer assets available to
collect fees from than the typical Probate client.
For FY 14/15, this department will receive through the Behavioral Health
Administration the amount of $170,000, the same as the previous year. This
revenue will fund LPS Investigations/Conservatorships, and Representative
Payee services for Behavioral Health consumers identified through the County's
Behavioral Health Plan. The Behavioral Health Administration continues to fund
a full time Public Guardian Technician for additional Representative Payee
services. As Mental Health Services Act funding continues to be reduced, the
department continues to work very closely with Kings View and the Behavioral
Health Administration to identify those conservatorship clients that are ready to
be moved to a lower, less expensive, level of care. The Behavioral Health
Administration also partially funds one Veterans Service Representative position.
This department is projecting a slight increase in California Department of
Veterans Affairs Subvention Funds this year, due to an increase in auditable
claims processed. The department continues its outreach efforts, and is
currently handling services to veterans on both a walk-in basis and
appointments.
This department conducts speaking engagements at local retirement homes,
colleges, activity fairs, hospitals, service organizations, prisons, etc. A
representative from the office serves as the Service Officer for many of the
Veterans Service Organizations in the county. The office is also responsible for
updating and maintaining the Kings County Freedom Memorial. The office also
has a major support role for the Kings County Veterans Employment
Committee.
The department continues to support the Kings County Military and Veterans
Coalition, whose main purpose is to distribute information of interest to our
military and veterans community. As part of this effort the information email
distribution list has over 3000 that have signed up. The office issues 1.0. Cards
to honorably discharged veterans. These cards can be used as proof of military
service for discounts at many of our local businesses. Veterans that come into
the office for an 1.0. Card are also told about the many other benefits they may
be eligible for. The office is also a satellite office of the County Recorders
Office and is able to assist veterans and their families with recording and
accessing documents.
By working with the California Department of Veterans Affairs, this department
identifies recently released county veterans and is sending "Welcome Home"
letters to each. These letters discuss the many services the office provides,
and invites the veteran and their family to come in and discuss benefits they
have earned. The department continues to use "Veterans Corner" newspaper
articles and numerous speaking engagements to reach out to county veterans.
The office also receives Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) information on all
drivers license applicants who identify themselves as veterans.
Working with veterans and their families involves sensitive and complex issues
that are often very personal in nature such as those related to combat or sexual
trauma. The clients represent all ages, ethnic and socio-economic
backgrounds. The staff requires "Geriatric" awareness of specific issues such
as dementia, Alzheimer's, stroke and profound hearing loss. The office
endeavors to be alert, sensitive, respectful and compassionate to the needs
and concerns of the clients.
The Veterans Service Office significantly impacts the lives of veterans and their
families in Kings County. In addition to benefit claims, the many other programs
that this office assists clients with such as VA and Department of Defense
(DOD) TRICARE medical care access, VA and CALVET home loans, burial
benefits, survivor benefits, and education benefits all contribute to the costeffectiveness
of this department.
The budget for the Law Library includes the following changes from last fiscal year: an
increase of $783 for salaries and benefits; including a $281 increase for Health
Insurance; a decrease of $67 for IT costs, and Books & Periodicals was reduced in the
amount $20,000 due to the canceling various print subscriptions as well as the
anticipated renegotiation of certain contracts associated with print subscriptions. This
reduction in Books and Periodicals is a direct impact of the projected reduction in
revenues for the Law Library.
Based on the trend for the past 8 months, filing fee revenue is expected to increase by
approximately 5.2% over the FY 13/14 projected revenues for Fiscal year 2014/2015.
Interest revenue decreased by $400 due to the interest rates and deposits being lower,
and is expected to stay low, and copy machine revenue is estimated to remain the
same. At this writing, civil filing figures are only available for January and February of
2013, so 12 months of 2013 were compared to 12 months of 2012. Mindful of the
current economy, expected filing fee revenue is based on a 5% increase in the amount
of filing fees paid during FY 2013/2014 compared to FY 2012/2013.The amount of fees
paid has decreased in the past due to more litigants qualifying for filing fee waivers, not
necessarily because of fewer filings.
As of April 2014, use of the Law Library by non-attorney patrons has increased by 12%
over 2013, mainly due to a continual increase in Unlawful Detainer (Eviction) actions. There are approximately 60% more clients for Unlawful Detainers than for Small
Claims, which has been beneficial because rental property owners filing Unlawful
Detainer lawsuits are less likely to be eligible for a filing fee waiver, and they have to
pay the filing fees, which increases the filing fee revenue for the Law Library. Total
number of non-attorney patrons for period 07/12 to 03/13 was 1278. Total number of
patrons, including attorneys, for period 07/13 to 03/14 is 1421.
The objective of the District Attorney's Office is to protect the people in our
community through the effective and efficient administration of criminal justice
and to redress the harm done to the victims of crime.
DISCUSSION:
Criminal Justice Realignment has dramatically changed our judicial and
correctional system. Under our new and radically different sentencing structure
the majority of convicted felons serve their time in county jail and in alternative
programs instead of prison. Many inmates are now supervised by probation
officers and available custody sanctions have been severely reduced.
Proposition 36, which became effective November 7, 2012 and applies
retroactively, has significantly limited the effect of our prior "Three Strikes" Law.
Under our prior "Three Strikes" Law a criminal convicted of any new felony after
having been convicted of two prior "serious" or "violent" felonies would receive a
sentence of at least 25 years to life. Under the changes mandated by
Proposition 36, with limited exceptions, a criminal with two prior "serious" or "violent" felonies whose new felony offence was a "non- serious" or "non-violent"
felony will be treated as if he or she had only one strike.
In summary, under Realignment and Proposition 36 career criminal have been
and will be spending less time in custody and more time on the street.
Not surprisingly, felony filings are estimated to increase by 17% over FY13/14
However, as expected, impact of Realignment (AB109) has been an increase in
filing in the area of economic crimes and drug crimes. Drug and economic
crimes are among the most numerous crimes where sentencing under new Penal
Code, section 1170(h) and jail crowding has resulted in shorter sentences for all
of these criminal offenders. These changes, along with more generous time
credits are introduced at a time when nationally, small rural communities are
overwhelmed with methamphetamine use and when violent crime is dramatically
increasing. Increasing despite the prior change in focus from punishment to
treatment wrought by proposition 36. When the focus is on how drugs affect the
meth addict rather than how the meth hurts the innocent - children, spouses
and citizens who are the victims of the increasing crime caused by
methamphetamine and when long sentences on serious crimes are to be served
in county jail, resulting in overcrowding, it was not unexpected that the early
releases of inmates resulting in an even greater increase in economic and drug
crimes.
We expect this trend to continue and to be acerbated by the shorter sentences
mandated by Proposition 36. In addition, there are currently a minimum of 36
career criminals sentenced from Kings County serving 25 years to life under the
prior version of "Three Strikes" law who will be applying for release back into
Kings County pursuant to Proposition 36. Although the court has discretion to
deny release if it determines the petitionerlinmate will pose an unreasonable risk
of danger to the public safety, many of these 36 lifers may be release back into
Kings County.
In summary we expect felony filing to increase during FY14/15 and our workload
to increase due to the continued impact of AB109 and the additional impact of
Proposition 36. Given our expectation of an increased volume of felony cases,
we believe emphasis on the most violent crimes and the most violent offenders
with a dedicated violent crime unit to continue to be increasingly important in FY
2014/15.
Administration
An official salary study for the Records Clerk classification is requested. In a survey,
they were identified as having a low starting wage compared to surrounding agencies.
It is an illustration as to the difficulty in recruiting and retaining quality personnel for this
division which operates 2417, unlike other local law enforcement Records divisions. The
Records Clerks classification clearly needs an increase in pay to be comparable with
surrounding agencies.
We are requesting to reclassify the current Records Supervisor and Automation
Coordinator to a management position .. We would assume the new title would simply
be "Records Manager." The role of the Records Supervisor and Automation
Coordinator has evolved over the years and, with the recent conversion to Spillman
public safety software, the Records Supervisor has truly become the Spillman
Application Administrator (SAA). With these additional duties, the Records Supervisor
is forced to manage a division within the Sheriff's Office and coordinate the successful
automation process involving multi-agencies in Kings County. As the Spillman SAA, the
Records Supervisor is responsible for setting system privileges, user passwords,
permissions, code tables, etc., not just for the Sheriff's Office Operations, but also for
Kings County Probation Department, Gang Task Force, Narcotics Task Force,
Dispatch, Animal Services and the Detentions Division.
Sheriff's Administration, including the Civil and Records Divisions, will continue to
identify our customers and work in partnerships to improve services to the community.
Communications
In coordination with the request for the reclassification of the supervisor in the Records
Division to a management position, we are also requesting that the title for the
Communications and Records Manager be changed to Emergency Communications
Manager to be consistent with the Emergency Dispatcher classification/title.
The 14/15 requested budget also includes replacement of four (4) repeaters required to
maintain dispatch services. We will continue to work on the analog radio system and
convert to the Fire Department's vacant UHF channel for improved radio
communications throughout the county.
We will continue utilizing and increasing our working knowledge of the Spillman system
following the "go live" that took place in the fall of 2013 and spring of 2014, including the
on-going training of staff.
Operations
The new morgue broke ground in early 2014. Following the completion of construction
over the summer, we will move into the new building this fall. It is designed to be state
of the art and will allow for more room and updated equipment. The new morgue will be
located in the same complex as our new Jail.
With the lease-purchase of the Composite Technology Law Enforcement (CTLE)
airplane in spring of 2014, KCSO will continue work in 14/15 to create policies and
procedures for the usage of the aircraft. Plans will also be reviewed on the scope of
utilization for the airplane in law enforcement/public safety functions. The addition of
this asset to KSCO will have a direct impact on the activities for which it is purposed.
Reporting on the usage of the plane and the effect on the desired outcomes will be part
of the ongoing department objectives for future years, as well.
We will continue utilizing the NEC Corp. of America Automated Fingerprint Identification
System (AFIS), countywide including Fast ID stations at the local police departments
and the local latent fingerprint analysis completed by the Fingerprint Technician in the
Sheriffs Office for all county law enforcement agencies.
The Operations unit will continue to strive to maintain a full staff of sworn Patrol
Deputies through aggressive recruitment and hiring practices and the prioritization of
background investigation resources.
Narcotics Task Force
In service to the citizens of Kings County, the NTF members will continue to: work
diligently to significantly diminish the availability and use of illegal drugs by aggressively
pursuing and prosecuting those involved in illegal narcotics; strive to provide a safe and
drug free environment; and educate the public regarding the hazards and
consequences of illegal/dangerous drugs.
Rural Crimes Task Force
Detectives aSSigned to the Rural Crimes Task Force will continue to provide responsive
services and to develop a strong working partnership with the agricultural community.
Education will be provided to farmers and Sheriffs Office personnel to current trends
and methods of Ag related thefts, and emphasizing the importance of marking their
equipment for the purposes of recovery and tracking.
Staff will aggressively investigate, recover, and return stolen property to its owner and
will seek to prosecute those involved in Ag Crime activity. To meet these goals, an
additional Rural Crimes Task Force Detective has been requested in the FY 14-15
budget.
Court Security
It is anticipated that the Court Security Services staffing will need to be increased in
order to meet the needs and demands of the Courts once the move to the new
Courthouse is completed.
Detentions
Construction for a new inmate transportation tunnel will break ground in fall of 2014 to
connect the Jail to the new Courthouse. The Jail Tunnel will include holding cells at the
entrance to the tunnel within the Jail. This is a 3 million dollar project.
As we strive to identify all possible solutions for jail overcrowding, we will coordinate the
awarded funding through SB 1022, and AB900 to continue working on the Jail
Expansion Project for the build-out of 252 new jail beds.
We will continue to aggressively recruit and hire custodial personnel to remain fully
staffed and compliant with Title 15 and Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations governing custodial facilities to utilize Reserves and "extra help" staff to reduce overtime
expenditures. We will seek local training opportunities; including hosting training
sessions when possible and working with COS Public Safety division to identify which
training classes will be most valuable to KCSO, including hosting Detentions Core
Academy training opportunities.
In order to maximize the efficiency of the Jail staffing, and to increase detentions staff
awareness and safety, we will implement "shift briefings" similar to those routinely held
with Patrol staff. This will allow for staff from two shifts to come together for regularly
scheduled meetings with supervisors and managers. The 14/15 budget has an
increased amount for overtime charges in order to facilitate the implementation of these
staff briefings.
KCSO staff will work with County Administration to conduct a Request for Proposal
(RFP) for Jail Medical Services, as the current contract is set to expire in June, 2014.
With the continually rising costs of health-care services, it is imperative to go out for
competitive bids to insure that the best value is being obtained.
Kitchen
A new kitchen has been approved for construction at the new Jail as part of the Jail
Expansion Project and will hopefully be ready for occupancy within the next three years.
All Jail Cooks will be given an opportunity to provide input and participate in the
planning of the new Jail Kitchen.
The Kitchen staff will continue to meet all regulations in the preparation of all meals to
both adult and juvenile inmates. To meet this goal, we will acquire membership to the
online Nutritional Care Manual.
The use of opportunity buys, competitive bids, etc. will continue and all effort will be
made to minimize food costs.
Due to increased food production needed for the larger inmate population, the addition
of two Jail Cook positions is requested in the 14/15 budget.
Animal Services
KCAS staff will continue to update County Animal Codes and to implement a new policy
and procedure manual. The Outreach Coordinator will continue to foster and expand
the volunteer and adoption programs. Chameleon software will continue to be utilized
to provide for accurate record keeping. Enhanced training for all employees of the
KCAS will be sought out. With the non-profit status of the Foundation, staff will
vigorously pursue grant and funding opportunities to maintain and add programs to the
public.
The Sheriff and his staff kept their "belts tightened" during difficult economic times.
Savings were realized by freezing positions, delaying purchases, and seeking out other
revenue sources. It is now imperative that staffing levels be increased to obtain a relief
factor that is critical for divisions that function on a 2417 basis ..
A position allocation increase of 26.00 Full Time Equivalent (F.T.E.) is requested for
various units in the Sheriff's Office as part of the 14/15 budget, to include:
Administration: The Sheriff's Records Division requests an additional Records Clerk
position. There has been a noticeable increase in the workload of the day shift, which
now requires two Records Clerks, the Live Scan/Receptionist Records Clerk and the
Records Supervisor during regular business hours. This additional position is necessary
in order to accommodate the increase in phone and lobby contact to provide service to
the public.
An addition of a Deputy Sheriff 1111 position to the Civil Division is requested. There is
an ever-increasing work load, with most of the responsibilities of the unit being time
sensitive. Currently, the Chief Civil Deputy and the Senior Deputy Sheriff assigned to
the unit are the only staff charged with serving documents such as evictions. This
additional position is necessary in order to meet the heavy work load of the division.
Communications: Due to increasing radio traffic, the Communications Division is in
need of an additional Emergency Dispatch position. The increased radio traffic stems
primarily from the additional Probation units in the field checking on Post Release
Community Supervision (PRCS) releases. This additional traffic has necessitated two
dispatchers to "tag-team" the law radio during extremely high traffic periods. This will
put additional phone traffic responsibility on the Fire Dispatcher, as that position is the
primary phone back-up. It would be beneficial, and an added officer safety issue, if we
could open a Secondary Law Channel for Probation and Animal Control. However, we
have not had the staff to do so when only three dispatchers are on duty per shift.
Operations: Currently, there are three Deputy Sheriffs assigned to Rural Crimes unit
which are paid through grant funds. It is the agency's desire to put another Deputy
Sheriff in this Task Force to enhance the unit's response to rural crime. With the
continued level of agricultural property crimes which are occurring, the need for an
additional Rural Crimes Task Force Detective is apparent.
Detentions: It will be critical in the future that the Branch Jail be opened to full capacity
in order to reduce the inmate early releases due to over-crowding, so as to reduce the
impact on our community. Additional funding will be needed to support full
implementation. To this end, new personnel requests in 14/15 include: one Detentions
Commander, one Senior Deputy (to be assigned to Administration/Backgrounds), one
Secretary, one Data Analyst, five Detentions Sergeants, three Senior Detentions
Deputies, two Detentions Deputies, three Senior Detentions Technicians, and three Detentions Technicians. A staffing analysis for both the Main Jail and Branch Jail was
conducted by the Crout Consulting firm and this data is the reference for the requested
positions.
A Senior Jail Cook position is requested in the 14/15 budget. In 2007, with a daily
production averaging 1,245 meals, the Kitchen staff was allocated 11 full-time. Jail Cook
positions. In 12/13, the first full fiscal year following the implementation of Realignment,
a staff of only 10 was preparing 1,779 meals per day and that number increased to
2,133 in 13/14. The Kitchen staff is in dire need of more manpower hours to keep up
with the increasing workload. It has been determined that an additional Senior Jail
Cook will provide not only more manpower hours, but will also allow for the scheduling
of another supervisor for a unit that runs seven days per week/365 days per year.
Animal Services: KCAS is requesting an additional full-time Animal Control Officer. It is
increasingly difficult to maintain the State-mandated requirements of an animal control
operation with only two Field Services staff members. There is a constant lack of
manpower. When one Officer is on vacation, sick leave, etc., the remaining Officer
must bear the workload alone, accruing over 200 hours of stand-by time per two-week
pay period in addition to their hours worked. A third Officer will allow for the adequate
relief of stand-by hours and help provide required man power coverage. To assist in
funding this requested additional position, extra help and overtime in the requested
14/15 budget for 227700 and 227710 is reduced by a total of $31,538.
As part of the requested 14/15 budget, there are many charges to our various account
lines from other County departments that show a substantial increase from the 13/14
fiscal year.
From the IT Department, increased charges to KCSO in 14/15 are: telephone costs up
4%, postage fees up 2%, printing charges 22% higher and purchasing tolls up 8%.
Our Workers Compensation Insurance premiums rise by 21%, S.1. & G. maintenance
estimates are increased by 17%, Fleet - Motor Pool prices are 17% more costly and the
bills for Utilities are projected at 5% higher than in 13/14.
A change by the Finance Department in the method of payment to employees for
negotiated uniform allowances has increased the costs for our department each fiscal
year. The prior procedure paid the employee a lump sum in July. This was changed to
pay each employee 1/26th of the annual uniform allowance each pay period. In 13/14,
effected employees were paid their lump sum amount in July, as it was earned in the
previous fiscal year, and then they also began to receive their 1/26th amount each pay
period, causing uniform allowance costs to be double that for which we budgeted. In
14/15 and following fiscal years, this doubling up will only effect new hires, as they will
receive a lump sum for the full amount of the uniform allowance and then begin to also
receive 1/26th of the annual amount each pay period.
Negotiated salary raises and their associated increases to retirement and social
security/medi-care benefits, and the re-instatement of the deferred compensation match
for management staff contribute to higher salaries and benefits costs.
Ammunition has been in high demand in the last two years and prices are much higher.
Our staffing levels have increased in the last year, creating a greater need for
ammunition. It is imperative to replenish our supplies in the armory and a budget
increase in this account line is requested.
Costs associated with the CTLE airplane have been requested for 14/15 in the "new"
column for budget unit 222000, to include a lease payment of $43,466, which is offset
by revenue transfer in from another fund, such as the Sheriffs Tow Fund. Costs to
operate the airplane are estimated at $72,730.
The drought, increased fuel costs and other such factors have driven the food costs up
each year. For 14/15, our food costs for the Jail Kitchen have increased by 22%.
A budget deficit at the California P.O.S.T. department caused a substantial decrease in
the training reimbursements for all law enforcement agencies throughout the State from
January, 2014 through June, 2015. This computes to an approximate $65,000
decrease in reimbursement for our agency in the 14/15 fiscal year, a loss of 38%.
For FY 14/15, the Sheriffs Office is requesting a budget with a total cost of
$35,963,472, of which $739,649 are in one-time expenses. The anticipated revenue is
$18,444,222, leaving unreimbursed costs of $17,519,250, a 9% increase over the 13/14
fiscal year.
1. Extend the use of the Day Reporting Center to female offenders, with the
use of SB678 funding.
2. Expand the live-in program at Samuels House from 18 to 30 participants
to address the dire need of drug/alcohol abuse.
3. Bring the "Courage to Change" Program into the Branch Jail to start
before the offenders are released.
4. On the Juvenile side, we will implement PACT Program from
Assessments.com to better determine the needs of juvenile offenders on
probation.
5. Provide greater security for staff and minors with the installation of a state
of the art surveillance camera system. Replacing an outdated system that
currently fails to meet our ongoing needs.
DISCUSSION
Highlights for 2014-2015 are:
Juvenile Treatment Center - (233000) The 2014-2015 Requested Budget reflects an
unreimbursed cost to the General Fund of $3,488,793 (a $484,302 increase over the
FY 2013-2014 Adopted Budget). This increase is associated with the addition of five
(5) FTE Juvenile Correction Officers, a security barrier upgrade, and the installation of
a state of the art surveillance camera system as required by the Prison Rape
Elimination Act (PREA).
Probation AB109 - (233100) The Public Safety Realignment Act took effect October
1, 2011 and transfers responsibility for supervising specific low-level inmates and
parolees from the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) to
counties. The 2014-2015 Requested Budget reflects a reduction in replacement
desktop computers from six to one, an addition of a copier in the North Annex to
better serve the continuing increase of AB 109 probationers, and the reclassification
of an Account Clerk 1111 to an Account Clerk 1111/111.
Probation SB678 - (233200) The 2014-2015 Proposed Budget reflects the addition
of one (1) FTE Probation Aide and the addition of a female Day Reporting Center.
YOBG - (233600) This budget unit is fully funded by YOBG (SB81) and requires no
general fund dollars. This budget reflects the request for a new vehicle for the one (1)
FTE Probation Officer 1111 position that was added in budget year 2013-2014, related
vehicle equipment, and an increase in training for current and new staff.
Probation - (234000) The FY 2014-2015 Probation Budget reflects the addition of one
0.1 FTE Supervising Probation Officer, the reclassification of an Account Clerk 1111 to an
Account Clerk 1111/111, and an increase for the Chief Probation Officers of California
annual membership fee.
Victim Witness - (234200) The FY 2014-2015 requested budget funds staffing levels
that include one .60 FTE Supervising Probation Officer, which is a reduction of .10 FTE,
and 1.25 FTE Victim Witness Advocate 1111 positions. There is no general fund cost
associated with this budget unit.
Victim Witness Assistant Program - (234700) The FY 2014-2015 requested budget
funds staffing levels that include one Victim Witness Advocate 1111 position that will work
with the District Attorney's Office. There is no general fund cost associated with this
budget unit.
JJCPA - (234800) The FY 2014-2015 requested budget funds staffing levels that
include one (1) FTE Deputy Probation Officer III, two (2) FTE Deputy Probation
Officers, one (1) Juvenile Corrections Sergeant, and one (1) Department Specialist
11111111. This budget reflects an increase in equipment maintenance and an increase due
to a copier lease expiring in August 2014. There is no general fund cost associated
with this budget unit.
 Continue to provide the highest level of professional response and emergency services to our
communities
 Continue to monitor and assess the expected changes to the Insurance Services Office (ISO),
Fire Services rating Schedule in order to maintain our current Public Protection Classification.
 Develop a staffing plan that meets the requirements of an expected ISO review and eliminates
single person stations. This plan would provide for at least two (2) firefighters in each apparatus
in a rural assignment.
 Develop and implement a "Standards of Cover" plan for the fire departments jurisdiction.
 Continue to expand the Wellness and Fitness Program and continue the downward trend of
illnesses and injuries to department personnel.
 Continue to seek funding opportunities to update the Fire Fleet and reduce the age of the
department's apparatus.
 Actively pursue alternative/grant funding for department equipment needs (e.g. Federal Fire Act
grant, State Domestic Preparedness and Equipment Program, and other Federal Homeland
Security grants).
 Continue to seek opportunities and partnerships, in our operational area, to improve and expand
service and training capabilities.
 Continue tq work with the Santa Rosa Rancheria/ Tachi Palace Hotel and Casino administration
to address personnel, equipment, and apparatus needs that will improve and/or enhance fire and
life safety on tribal lands.
 Encourage and promote employee development through enhanced training programs, new
training, and formal education opportunities. Establish and support a succession training
program to facilitate building future department managers and leaders.
 Continue to improve and enhance our public education programs to address fire and life safety
education.
 Continue to work with the Central Planning Area to secure funding and resources to improve
Interoperability Communications for the Operational Area, Region and State.
Fire Administration Objectives:
 Currently the Fire Department is without two crucial documents to establish a level of service
standard within its jurisdiction. The first plan is a 'Standards of Cover" model which details
response times related to travel distances, resource availability, and station locations. This
document uses the department's current level and compares it to a national model for evaluation
purposes and to suggest resource improvements that improve service delivery. The second document is a "Master Plan' which establishes short, medium and long range goals for the
department. This is the road map that contemplates growth of the community, impacts of
workloads, organizational structure and establishes milestones in order to guide the responsible
growth of fire services based on needs.
 Establish an "Automatic Aid Agreement" with the City of Hanford, review and update the existing
current agreements with surrounding agencies. This project will enhance the emergency
response to the communities and cities located in Kings and the surrounding Counties.
 To develop and utilize Automatic vehicle Locator (AVL) technology in an effort to reduce response
times to calls for service. This project will be accomplished utilizing the new Spillman Computer
Aided Dispatching software employed at the Dispatch Center. Once completed, this strategy will
allow for dispatching of the closest available unit instead of the traditional station dispatching
currently utilized.
 Continue to improve our plan for management reorganization in order to enable operational
efficiency and improve span of control configuration for all divisions.
 Establish a system of succession for department staff to support promotional opportunities and
establish minimum qualification guidelines.
 Develop and present new web sites for both the Fire Department and Office of Emergency
Management. This objective will allow for increased information sharing and notification.
 When available, continue to work with the Central Planning Area to secure funding and
resources to improve Interoperability Communications for the Operational Area, Region and
State.
 The department continues to expand the Fire and Life Safety Program with emphasis on K
through 4th grades, the Hispanic community and senior citizens. This year we will continue the
public education program which includes the public education trailer and the extremely popular
"Patches and Pumper" that the department received from the Federal Assistance to Firefighters
grant. The department continues to teach Fire and Life Safety as part of the Health Education
program at West Hills College. For the past 15 years, the department has been providing free
smoke detectors and maintenance to seniors and other citizens of the County of Kings.
 Training objectives include Confined Space Operations, Train the Trainer, (instructors and
participants); In-house Emergency Medical Technician Recertification program; In-house
Hazardous Materials First Responder Operations recertification program; Ladder Truck
Operations, Coordinator, Joint Apprenticeship Committee participation; College of the Sequoias
Basic Fire Academy, (instructors and participants), Regional Type II Hazardous Materials
Response Team in conjunction with Hanford City Fire Department. California Emergency
Management Agency Type II Urban Search and Rescue Team.
 To provide high quality life safety and code compliance services to the County of Kings and the
contract cities.
 Ensure that the Public Education Program reaches all segments of our communities regarding
the preservation of life and property.
 Ensure that prompt contact is made with entities involved with construction projects in order to
prevent delay, undue cost and enhance completion of the final fire inspection.
 - Provide liaison and consultation services to the Cities of Avenal and Corcoran in order to
clarify California Fire Code and Fire Department requirements.
 Promote increased installation of fire sprinkler systems, fire alarms, and special hazard
systems as the first line of defense against fire losses.
 Investigate and determine the origin and cause of all fires occurring within our jurisdiction.
 Ensure expedient fire cause determination service in order to analyze and affect loss control.
 Provide assistance and support to law enforcement agencies conducting criminal investigations
and prosecutions of arson and related crimes.
 Increase department participation in the Tulare-Kings County Fire Investigation Strike Team.
 Provide support to the Operations, Emergency Management, and Training Divisions in the
areas of emergency planning, response and subject matter expertise.
 Maintain competence and proficiency through continuing education.
 Enhanced record keeping and statistical analysis through the use of the Firehouse Software
database.
 Provide fire code enforcement services that match the needs of the communities we serve.
Community Risk Reduction Goals:
 Review and update County Ordinances related to the Fire Department.
 Adoption of the 2013 California Fire Code.
 Implementation of the permitting process described in Section 105 of the CFC.
 Establish a formal Fire Investigation Unit for the investigation of all fires within the County and
contract cities.
 Strive toward NFPA 1033 Standard for training for fire investigators, leading to Fire
Investigator Certification (CFI) status for all department investigators.
 Establish Peace Officer status for at least two investigators.
 Implement third-party inspection, maintenance, and testing record keeping improving
compliance and operability of installed fire protections systems and features.
 Complete data entry of all fire hydrants into the Firehouse database.
 Provide exceptional fire education programs and services to the public.
 To develop and maintain a turnout time of 120 seconds, from receipt of emergency call.
 To develop and establish a minimum response time based on geographical and resource
availability factors.
 To utilize Automatic vehicle Locator (AVL) technology to reduce response times to calls for
service.
 Maintain all equipment, apparatus, and personnel in a state of readiness to ensure a rapid
response to emergencies.
 To utilize response data and informational systems to enhance the quality of our response to
emergencies.
 Develop, identify, and update target hazards and preplans.
 To meet the minimum amount of training hours as determined by the Trairiing Division.
 The Office of Emergency Services Coordinator will participate in State-sponsored meetings,
workshops and training conferences to enhance communications and operations between
various State and local agencies.
 To continue OEM training activities. Training in SEMS, NIMS, ICS, EOC Operations and
disaster preparedness is available to the Operational Area.
 To utilize State Homeland Security Grant Program funding to update the current Emergency
Operations Plan (EOP) for the County of Kings, City of Avenal, City of Corcoran, City of
Hanford and City of Lemoore as an Operational Area project. The current EOP's are
approximately 5 years old and are in need of update to meet State and Federal guidelines.
This program will be administered by the OEM Division.
 To assist in the implementation and administration of the current, and pending, State
Homeland Security Grant Program (SHSGP) and Emergency Preparedness Grant Program
(EMPG).
 To continue to participate in State training, meetings and workshops in order to expand skill
level and to advise other agencies and the community of important issues.
 To increase the visibility and effectiveness of the Office of Emergency Management by
building reliable relationships with municipalities, special districts, private businesses and
volunteer organizations within the Operational Area.
 Maintenance of the Office of Emergency Management webpage. Necessary to provide up-todate
information related to current disasters, emergency preparedness goals, and links to
state and federal resources.
Office of Emergency Management Goals:
 To continue to apply for new grant opportunities to enhance capabilities regarding disaster
mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery efforts within the County of Kings.
 To continue to offer presentations and training to other departments and agencies in SEMS,
NIMS, ICS, EOC/DOC operations, disaster preparedness and other important issues.
 To conduct tabletop exercises, drills and seminars to enhance skill level and to train additional
key personnel in the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) and Department Operations Center
(DOC) functions.
 To continue to work toward re-establishing the Kings County Disaster Council in order to better
serve the Operational Area.
 To continue the development of the mass notification system and expand its use to other
agencies within the Operational Area.
 Creation of the Office of Emergency Management webpage, which will provide valuable
information related to current disasters, emergency planning and preparedness, community
events, and links to state and federal resources.
FIRE DEPARTMENT DISCUSSION
As in previous years, overtime remains a major concern for the Fire Department. While the
department is able to schedule overtime costs for vacation and training, staffing shortages as a result
of sick leave and particularly Workman's Compensation issues is significant. The availability of relief
and regular staff to offset the impact of this issue is crucial to the lessening of the effect to the
budget. For FY 13-14, the Fire Department had as many as seven (7) personnel on Workman's
Compensation at one time. Many of these cases resulted in the employee being off dUty for
extended periods, some up to nine months. This coupled with scheduled overtime costs resulted in a
considerable impact to the fire budget and caused a record amount of overtime to be paid out.
As in previous years, staffing deficiencies and understaffed stations continue to negatively effect the
department. Four (4) of the department's ten (10) fire stations continue to be staffed by a single
person and are located in remote rural areas of the County. Given this diminished level of staffing,
the end result is a reduction in the effectiveness of emergency service operations, exposure of the
department to potential personnel injuries, a rise in workman's compensation cases that reduce
available staffing levels, and a direct increase in overtime costs.
The change in the Insurance Services Office (ISO) rating schedule and the application of the
National Fire Protection Agencies 1710 Standard will likely provide a huge hurdle for the department.
The ability to hold our current ISO rating scale is in question and if increased, could result in a rise in
residential and commercial insurance rates. The addition of personnel, establishment of automatic
aid agreements, and development of a "Standards of Cover" model will assist with easing. the impact
of current and future evaluation by ISO.
One area of improvement is in the Fire Department Fleet. With the addition of several new
apparatus, the average age of our fleet continues to improve. Once the grant funded engines are
placed into service, the department expects to realize a reduction in maintenance costs and the
ability to down size the number of reserve apparatus that are needed. We will still need to address
fleet purchases on an annual basis and allocate funding to regularly replace engines on a 15-20 year
schedule.
The continued need to maintain our fire stations is a primary issue. Due to this, we will be required to
fund updates and repairs to these facilities. Items such as fixtures, windows, and garage doors will .
need to be replaced due to costly service issues and parts availability. Department personnel
continue to inspect, repair, and make minor improvement to the facilities; however, large .scale
maintenance issues will need to be completed by qualified contractors to alleviate the impact to shift
personnel and their duties. Currently we have two (2) stations that require remodeling in order to
remain efficient and operational. These stations, located at Hardwick and South Lemoore, are
currently being evaluated for potential construction and project costs. This information will be utilized
to support future updates to these facilities in coming budgets.
The Office of Emergency Management (OEM) is progressing and doing an excellent job. The OEM
Coordinator has taken on the full task of county preparedness and provided a conduit to the state
related to the current drought. To date the required update to the Local Hazard Mitigation Plan has
been completed and an update to our Emergency Operations Plan is in progress. As previously
stated, the joint effort between Office of Emergency Management, Information and Technology
Department, and the Health Department resulted in the establishment of a new Emergency
Operations Center (EOG). This facility is currently operational as an EOC and is also utilized for
meetings and computer training.
Overall, the Fire Department continues to seek out opportunities to improve and increase the quality
of service we provide to the community. We actively seek any and all financial and grant programs
that will support the mission of the department. We continue to explore our funding process to
identify revenues that will support the allocation of additional field staff pOSitions. However, the
available fire fund revenues are limited and support from general fund revenues will be needed to
eliminate the understaffed station in our county. The fire department believes that the ability to
initiate hiring of 3 additional firefighters is appropriate in the FY 14-15 budget and that sufficient
revenues are available to do so. Working with Administration, the department will continue to move
forward with this effort and seek approval from the Board for this endeavor.
1. Pest Detection - Surveillance for pests and diseases not known to occur
within Kings County or be established in the State by performing detection
trapping consistent with state and federal standards. Provide pest
identification services for the public.
2. Pest Eradication - Prevent the establishment and spread of high priority pests
in accordance with USDA and California regulations. The Pink Bollworm
Cotion Plowdown Program is one of our Eradication programs.
3. Pest Management - To assist in the mandated control of recognized economic
pests of agriculture, pests affecting the public health, and those causing
environmental harm; to enable the reduction of agricultural losses through
grower enabled control programs; and provide specific control materials, at
cost, and technical advice as needed.
4. Pest Exclusion - Protect and enable the commercial trade of Kings County
agriculture, pursuant to Federal, State and County regUlations through the
inspection of incoming and outgoing shipments for quarantine compliance,
especially in high-risk environments or market pathways, therefore promoting
the high quality and cleanliness of Kings County export commodities.
5. Pesticide Use Enforcement - To enable people to succeed in the production
of commodities of optimum quality and yield while assuring the safety of their
partners, the public, and our environment.
6. Seed Law Enforcement - To assure the quality of seed and that it is properly
labeled as to its contents, treatment, and viability.
a. Seed Certification - Working with the California Crop Improvement
Association certification program to verify the purity and quality of seed
grown in Kings County.
7. Nursery Inspection - To ensure the production and sale of commercially
clean, pest-free, true-to-variety, vigorous and healthy nursery stock.
8. Fruit and Vegetable Quality Control - Protects the consumer, producer, and
shipper, through inspection programs for compliance with standards of the
California Food and Agricultural Code, federal regulations, marketing orders,
and other related enforcement activities; thus promoting the local Fruit and Vegetable industry, including Farmers Market and Organic inspections of local
producers and venders.
9. Egg Quality Control - Inspect and certify eggs as required by the California
Food and Agricultural Code and the USDA.
10. Apiary Inspection - Maintain the identification of bee locations in the County
for the purpose of notification of pending pesticide applications and provide
colony strength and health certification inspections services upon request.
11. Crop Statistics - Maintain current and reliable agricultural production statistics,
as required by the California Food and Agricultural Code and the USDA.
Prepare and present an annual County crop report. Monitor and collect crop
disasterlloss statistics and report significant findings to CDFA, the USDA, and
the County Board of Supervisors.
12. Vertebrate Pest Control - Maintain a level of control sufficient to ensure the
protection of the health and safety of the public, food safety, crops, livestock,
and the environment from the detrimental impacts of physical damage or
diseases caused by such pests. The Department's rodent bait mixing program
is a resource used locally in addition to providing sales to numerous other
county programs around the state.
13. Emergency Animal Disposal - Provide guidance to efficiently and effectively
protect the health of the public, and the environment, while ensuring the
sustainability of the livestock industry through the use of safe and efficient
means of dead animal carcass disposal during times of emergency.
1. Service Agencies - Verify licensing and inspection of services performed by
service agents for accuracy and integrity.
2. Device Inspection - Assures equitable protection to all persons in the sale of
commodities (weighed, measured or counted) through enforcement of
prescribed device standards and specifications.
3. Quantity Control - Assures consumer protection against deception or
misrepresentation as to the quantity of products in package form, through
testing and undercover purchase programs; test purchases are made to
discern the accuracy of advertised price computations; investigations of all
consumer complaints relative to transactions utilizing units of weights and/or
measures.
4. Weighmaster Enforcement - Assures that all licensed weighmasters are
performing in accordance with established state laws and regulations.
5. Petroleum Enforcement - Provides assurance that petroleum products offered
for sale in Kings County meet Federal and State quality specifications while
ensuring sale conditions are accurately and lawfully conducted.
DISCUSSION:
The Department of Agriculture [Department] projects the unreimbursed cost to the
County General Fund, in the current 2013-14 Fiscal Year (FY) to be approximately
$90,000 less than was adopted, a projected 13% savings. The cost savings
projection is based on revenue expected to be received by current FY end coupled
with overall expenditure reductions. Revenue for the current FY, 2013-14, is
projected to be $1,709,877 representing a $9,287 increase to the current adopted
budget.
For FY 2014-15 the Department requests a net expenditure of $2,488,530 which is
$120,080 (5%) more than was adopted in the 2013-14 FY budget. The expenditure
request includes a $63,203 (3.6%) increase in Salaries and Benefits, a $28,418
(4.8%) increase in Services and Supplies and a new Truck for FY 14/15 in the
amount of $29,000. Factors contributing to the increase in Salaries and Benefits
are a $9,653 increase in Mgmt. BenefitslLife Insurance, a $21,512 increase in
Health Insurance, a $14,437 increase in Retirement costs, a $55,506 increase to
Regular Employees, coupled with a $35,505 decrease in Extra Help, and a $4,026
decrease in Workers Compo The Services and Supplies category, is increased by
$25,000 in Ag Services and Supplies and by $7,796 in Motor Pool. Utilities is
decreased by $5,776 in the Services and Supplies category.
The requested revenues, for FY 2014-15, total $1,752,257 and is 3.0% ($51,667)
more than the 2013-14 Adopted Budget. The requested total revenues for FY
2014-15 represent the anticipated funding increases of $15,267 from federal and
state sources at the time of this Requested Budget submittal. Agricultural Services
are expected to increase 8.5% ($14,400) due to calls for services coupled with fee
increases. Other Sales is increased by $25,000 to correspond with anticipated
increased expenditures created from an expected increase in rodent bait sales.
The Agriculture Department's requested FY 2014-15 budget will result in the
Unreimbursed Net Cost of $736,273 to the county's General Fund. This Requested
Budget is a net expenditure increase of $68,413 (10.2%) from the 2013-14 FY
adopted budget.
1. Insure that the Building Official, a Building Inspector, or the Permit Technician is
available one-hundred percent of the time for office consultation with builders on
construction requirements, provide for responsive plan check turn-a-round, issue
building permits, and to keep up with the latest technology in the building
industry.
2. Provide monthly, quarterly, and fiscal year building activity reports for the
unincorporated area of Kings County.
3. Provide inspection services the next workday after the request for inspection is
received or the closest date and time available.
4. Carry out the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
5. Carry out the Water Well Ordinance.
6. Abate dangerous buildings.
7. Conduct Code Compliance programs including, but not limited to: vehicle
abatement, nuisance abatement, building compliance, and zoning compliance,
8. Insure that support staff is available to receive alleged code violations in the
office or over the phone during regular business hours.
9. Maintain and track active violation cases.
10. Provide monthly, quarterly, and fiscal year activity reports for the unincorporated
area of Kings County concerning resolutions of code violation cases and vehicle
and building abatements.
11. Provide initial investigation services generally five days a week, however
depending on the threat to the public health and safety and the workload of the
Building Official it may take a few days for the initial investigation after a
complaint is received.
12. Carry out the Abandoned Vehicle Abatement Program.
13. Provide vehicle and building abatement to address health and safety issues.
14. Ensure new development meets the provisions of the Accessibility Standards
Compliance Act (SB 1608, Chapter 549 of the Statutes of 2008) and government
Code Section 4459.5, by retaining a Certified Access Specialist (CASp).
15. Ensure compliance with the California Building Standards Code as adopted
January 1, 2014.
1. Continue the implementation of the Kings County Subdivision Ordinance.
Ensure that both divisions of the Advisory Agency for Parcel Maps and
Subdivision complete action on tentative maps within 50 days of the application
being certified complete, or completion of the environmental review. This review
period includes a required 20-day public review period for comments on
proposed negative/mitigated negative declarations. Continue the implementation
of streamlined procedures for administrative processing of lot line adjustments,
parcel map waivers, and certain minor divisions of land.
2. Ensure Planning Commission completes action on conditional use permit
applications within two (2) months of the application being certified complete, or
completion of the environmental review.
3. Process applications for site plan reviews within three (3) weeks of application
being certified complete.
4. Conduct environmental reviews for all projects within required time intervals:
within 105 days after submittal of a complete application with approved
negative/mitigated negative declarations or within one year when an
environmental impact report (EIR) is required. This includes the requirement for
a 20-day public review (30 days for state agencies comments) for proposed
negative declarations.
5. Carry out grant application and management tasks assigned by the Board, for
the following programs: Community Development Block Grant (CDBG); HOME;
BEGIN, and CalHome.
6. Manage the National Flood Insurance Program, Local Flood Plain Management
Program through building and zoning permit reviews and environmental review
processes.
7. Carry out the policies of the Kings County Hazardous Waste Management Plan
through zoning permit review and environmental assessment process.
8. Implement the Kings County General Plan in coordination with the cities and
unincorporated communities in Kings County.
9. Continue the Zoning Ordinance Updates to bring it into compliance with the 2035
Kings County General Plan.
10. Implement all of the elements of the General Plan.
11. Work on the Regional Housing Needs Allocation and begin updating the Kings
County Housing Element.
12. Implement the mandated Integrated Waste Management Plan, (lWMP) through
zoning permit review and environmental assessment process.
13. Continue the Countywide Regional implementation of the GIS system, and
automate the General Plan and Zoning maps, continue implementation of the
GIS System into the general plan, zoning, land division, and environmental
assessment procedures, and provide GIS information to the Board and
Commissions, other departments and agencies, and the public where and when
appropriate.
14. Implement and maintain the County's GIS web application to provide increased
accessibility to planning information, and support Kings EDC, Kings County
Emergency Services and First Responding Agencies, and other County
Departments.
15. Provide GIS Services to the City of Avenal, City of Hanford, and other Cities or
Districts that contract with the County for such services.
16. Coordinate effort to produce a new countywide aerial image for the GIS and
other computer applications.
17. Provide staff and administrative services for the Building Division (Budget Unit
279000) and LAFCO of Kings County (Budget Unit 280000).
18. Continue staff training and mentorship efforts to build and retain a strong
foundation of knowledgeable and experienced staff and decrease potential
attrition.
19. Continue to provide staff support to the Agricultural Advisory Committee and
conduct studies as necessary.
20. Continue to provide staff support to the Kings County Water Commission and
conduct research as necessary.
The Requested Budget for the Building Division for 2013-14 is $577,931 with $329,655
in revenue and $7,803 in Cost Applied Funds for services provided to the Planning
(270000) Division. This includes an un-reimbursed cost of $240,473. This is
approximately a 5.4% increase from last year's un-reimbursed cost. The increase in
cost for this division is due to estimated decrease in Licenses and Permits Revenue ..
Revenues are projected at $329,655, which is a decrease of about 10.4% in revenue
from what was estimated for FY 2013-14.
Planning Division Discussion:
The Requested Budget for the Planning Division for 2014-15 is for a total of $1,139,190
down $81,097 from last year's approved budget. This includes an un-reimbursed cost
of $957,397. This is an approximate 7.2% decrease from last year's un-reimbursed
cost. CAP charges represented the largest decrease in the overall budget with a
decrease of $189,688 from last year representing a 94.05% decrease.
Revenues are projected at $67,120, a 16.10% decrease from estimated 2013-14
Revenue. The Community Development Agency's annual dues payment to KCAG is
estimated at $6,020.
No Fixed Assets are requested.
1. Continued training for LAFCO staff and counsel on operational procedures
and processes.
2. Process all applications for reorganization, etc., within the prescribed time
limits.
3. Process all spheres of influence amendments for the cities, communities, and
special districts in Kings County and prepare resources for the next required
update.
4. Review and assist Cities and Districts with the preparation of detailed MSRs
for any Sphere of Influence Amendment application submitted to LAFCO to
ensure compliance with Government Code Section 56430.
5. Conduct studies and analysis to comply with new State law requirements.
6. Continue involvement in CALAFCO workshops and training events to keep
staff informed and knowledgeable of State Law changes and innovative
approaches to more effectively conducting LAFCO practices.
Kings County Department of Finance provides accounting services to LAFCO, and
this budget is included in the County's budget as a General Fund program for this
purpose. The County's portion of the LAFCO budget is shown under General Fund
Contribution. The cities' portion is shown as Intergovernmental Revenue.
LAFCO Discussion:
The 2014-15 Budget for LAFCO, which is proposed for adoption on May 21, 2014,
includes the day-to-day operations of LAFCO, including administration and
application processing activities. The General LAFCO Activities represents about
half of the overall effort in this budget.
The budget is for a total of $51,411, which is a decrease of $5,261 from last year's
approved budget due primarily to a decrease in Administrative Allocation expenses
related LAFCO staff as additional training time consideration was added to the FY
budget last year. The staff related cost reduction is $7,051 from last year. Revenues
are projected at $27,206, down $2,630 from the 2013-2014 Budget. This amount
includes the estimated LAFCO Application Fees of $3,000 and City shares for half of
the remaining LAFCO budget. The County covers the remaining half of the LAFCO
Budget share of $24,206, which is a reduction of $2,630 from last FY and shown as
Unreimbursed Cost in the budget. The total budget estimate is $51,411.
The budget is funded equally between the cities and the County, except for
estimated LAFCO Fee activity projected for LAFCO application processing. The total
cost of the budget, less any revenue, is divided evenly and the Kings County
Department of Finance collects the money and accounts for it in ~eparate accounts.
Any money remaining from the previous year's budget will be carried over and applied to this budget. Next year's funding support will include any carryover funds,
but the amount will not be known until the books are closed for the year.
The County is the recipient of fines, fees and forfeiture and other revenues that were
previously included in the Court's budget exclusively. An agreement was reached with
the Court that established a mechanism of revenue sharing for a long list of specific
fines and fees. It is out of the proceeds of these revenues and State Trial Court realignment funds that the County makes its contribution to the State, which then
dispenses funding back to the Courts in Kings County.
In place of a Public Defender's office, Kings County contracts with independent
attorneys to represent indigent defendants. Contracts are issued to twenty
attorneys; eleven are assigned to represent felony defendants (three of those
attorneys handle prison cases), and five are assigned to represent misdemeanor
defendants, three are full-time juvenile contract defense attorneys, and there is one
misdemeanor contract conflict attorney. Also included in this budget is the contract
for the Coordinating Attorney who oversees the activites of these twenty attorneys'
between the Courts and the County.
For multiple defendant cases, or conflicts among the attorneys and/or defendants,
the Court appoints counsel from a separate list. These attorneys, generally referred
to as "conflict attorneys," are paid on an hourly basis.
Contract increases of 3.0% for all contracted attorneys are recommended to be
included for FY 14/15.
 Maintain Annual Performance Indicators in the collection of current support and
collection on arrears.
 Maintain a zero net cost to the County of Kings.
 Remain in compliance.
 Provide quality customer service.
DISCUSSION:
In the requested 2014/15 budget, several major assumptions are made. The first
assumption is that our department's administrative baseline funding will remain flat from
the 2013/14 baseline funding.
Our preliminary planning allocation letter issued by the California Department of Child
Support Services on February 05, 2014 indicated funding of $4,133,667. This amount
does not include the Electronic Data Processing (EDP) portion of the budget. The
State EDP budget request will increase from $41,010.00 to $48,177.00 in 2014/15 and
is subject to approval. This increase is a result of a new published pricing/billing model
implemented by the County Office of Information Technology in 2012/13. As a result of
this new billing method, our information technology charges and EDP budget will vary
from year to year.
Our department's EDP portion of the budget is the second major assumption, in which
the department is assuming the previous year's EDP budget as a baseline to budget for
the 2014/15 budget year. If funding from the State does not come through as
anticipated, or if the EDP portion of the department's budget is modified at the State
level, we will have to revise our budget request.
Total anticipated revenue from the state is $4,174,677 contingent upon a state
approved budget. Additional revenue of $4,000 is anticipated from interest earnings
and $11,000 is anticipated from "disregard" revenues the department receives from
Human Services.
For FY 14/15 the Department is not requesting any fixed assets, or capital
improvements. The Department is requesting software maintenance renewals for
Quest, Time Clock Plus, Survey Monkey, and Appriss Justice Xchange - a total of
$3,779.00.
Some of the changes of note for FY 14/15 in salaries and employee benefits are as
follows:
 The department is requesting to delete 1 vacant Child Support Specialist I
position that was added in FY 12/13. The position was originally added to assist
with receiving any additional calls as a result of a proposed statewide call center
project. However, the statewide call center did not transpire as anticipated.
Currently a Plan of Cooperation (POC) was approved to create a "shared
services" Call Center arrangement between Ventura County Department of Child
Support Services (VCDCSS) and this Department for the purpose of answering
Kings County Department of Child Support Services (KCDCSS) telephone calls
delivered via the Enterprise Customer Service Solution (ECSS) at VCDCSS.
 The department is requesting to delete an Account Clerk 1111 position that was
added in the FY 12/13 budget. This position was originally added to assist the
Fiscal Specialist with the processing and maintenance of the department's
accounts payable files and vendor payments. This left the Fiscal Specialist
available to comply with audit findings relating to a lack of contract, MOU or
agreement between this Department and many of its vendors providing services
to 'support the IV-D functions of the child support agency. The Fiscal Specialist
was also tasked with inventory control of all state owned electronic data
proceSSing equipment, which had been previously supported by an in-house
Information Technology (I.T.) technician. Although these tasks took a substantial
amount of time and effort, they have been completed and methods to efficiently
ensure future compliance are in place.
 The department is requesting to delete the Fiscal Specialist III in conjunction with
the addition of a Child Support Supervisor position. In October 2013, the Fiscal Specialist III promoted to the vacant Program Manager position. In reviewing the
Fiscal Specialist III classifications, it was determined that a Child Support
Supervisor would be more feasible to fill the spot. The Fiscal Specialist III
position was implemented due to the Department going through a Statewide
Child Support System conversion. Prior to and following the conversion, the
Fiscal Specialist III was the Department's liaison between the local and State
levels of Child Support. In addition to supervising the four Centralized Financial
Workers (CFWs), the Fiscal Specialist III was responsible for ensuring that all
financial data properly converted into the new Child Support Automated System.
Along with the implementation of the Statewide Child Support System, the State
implemented a State Disbursement Unit. This State unit is responsible for the
processing of all child support payments, which previously were processed at the
local level. After reviewing the changes in duties of the Centralized Financial
Workers (CFWs) and the promotion of the Fiscal Specialist III to a Program
Manager position, the department believes that it is the proper time to eliminate
the Fiscal Specialist III position and underfill it with a Child Support Supervisor
position.
 The department is requesting to reclassify one Child Support Program Manager
to implement one Assistant Child Support Director. Currently the Department
has two Child Support Program Managers, a Supervising Attorney, and a Fiscal
Analyst. In consideration of succession planning, the Director feels that there is
a need for the Assistant Child Support Director position. The Child Support
Director is required to spend a considerable amount of time in Sacramento and
other locations meeting with the State Department of Child Support Services and
the Child Support Director's Association (CSDA) on legislative and program
policy issues and direction. Presently, these meeting are focusing on program
improvement and program funding. As a result of the Director's absence for
these and other meetings, there is definitely a need for an Assistant Child
Support Director to take on more responsibility for daily management of the
Department. The Assistant Child Support Director would assume the
responsibilities for the operation of the department in the absence of the
Director, provide consultations, and make recommendations with regard to
problems, standards and procedures. In addition, the Assistant Child Support
Director would be available to assist Child Support advocates, Board of
Supervisors, and other elected officials.
Some of the changes to note for FY 14/15 in services and supplies are as follows:
 DA Charges - This category was decreased from $34,000.00 to $0. This
department was planning on partnering with our County District Attorney's Office to contract an extra help DA Investigator to assist with the prosecution of noncustodial
parents under California Penal Code 270. Due to other priority
projects, this particular project was unable to be completed. At mid-year we
anticipate reviewing this project for possible renewal.
 In-Service Training - This category was increased from 4,000 to 6,000 to reflect
costs associated with the Rapid Learning series as well as sending additional
staff through the county Leadership Academy. We have also increased the
utilization of other departmental trainings, such as Behavioral Health.
326000
 Travel & Expense - This category was increased from 17,500 to 25,000 to
accurately reflect the costs of sending staff offsite for state sponsored trainings.
In order to ensure succession planning, staff are attending more training related
to leadership, and the Child Support Enforcement process.
 Outreach Advertising Expense - Although the moratorium is still in effect
restricting promotional incentives, this Department actively partiCipates in Child
Support Awareness month and will expand the media message to ensure both
custodial and non-custodial parents are aware of their rights and responsibilities
relating to caring for their children.
The Budget for Court Reporters is requested at $22,868. Costs include $22,868 for
Social Security & Retirement costs.
The Requested and Recommended Budget have been prepared by the County
Administrative Office and reviewed with the assigned member of the Grand Jury.
Meeting reimbursement has traditionally been paid to Grand Jurors at the rate of $10
per meeting. In FY 01-02, an increase to $11 per meeting was adopted. Since FY
2002-03, the Requested Budget includes a $15/meeting day, State-mandated rate.

1. Maintain quality legal representation
2. Cooperate with Probation, Human Services and District Attorney's offices to
resolve issues whenever possible so as:
a. To better ensure the clients' best resolution to their case and/or
problems
b. To assist in judicial economy whenever possible
c. To participate and assist any organization whose purpose is to offer
services to aid in the protection of children and their family.
d. To assist in the gathering of information to provide for proper
recommendations pertaining to emotionally disturbed juveniles.
There is continued need in the budget for psychological evaluations and an investigator
for the Minor's Advocates Department.
1. Contract for the professional services of a psychologist. Due to change in court
funding, it is necessary for the Minor's Advocates Department to provide for a
psychologist who will complete thorough psychological evaluations for juveniles
with serious emotional and mental health disorders. Such evaluations will
provide diagnosis and recommendations for treatment, which are necessary for
determining appropriate dispositions for juveniles before the court due to criminal
offenses, but who are also emotionally disturbed. This department is dedicated
to providing the best of legal representation, which includes aiding the court in
determining the best course towards rehabilitation for all juveniles; however, the
court must be made especially aware of the problems and recommendations for
those children suffering from emotional disorders. This appears to be an
ongoing problem with minors who have serious mental health problems. At this
time there is problem acquiring a clinical psychologist.
2. The department is responsible for the billing of interpreting services for out-ofcourtroom
interviews. To maintain quality legal representation for Non-English
speaking clients, hearing impaired clients and their parents.
3. There is a continuing need for an experienced bilingual investigator due to the
complexity and seriousness of delinquency cases, including, but not limited to
gang cases.
Court Charges and Billing
1. The department's procedure for billing the courts for legal representation of
parties before the court on a dependency case, (Welfare and Institutions Code 300) continues to remain unchanged. Dependency case attorneys include
attorneys from this department, 3 juvenile contract attorneys and list of conflict
attorneys.
Although the number of cases seems to be running constant from the previous
year, the number of children would appear to be increasing. This is directly
reflected in the amount of investigation cost incurred. [State law requires any
child over four (4) to be interviewed.] However, those costs are then in turn back
billed to the State which explains why our "recovery" has dramatically increased
by approximately fifity percent (50%).
Billing to the courts includes:
a) Services of the Minor's Advocates Department, including attorneys,
support staff, and investigator.
b) Services of the contract attorneys, also for dependency cases
c) Services of the conflict attorneys, on dependency cases
2. Conflict Attorneys billing to the County for legal representation on delinquency
and dependency cases is also processed through this department.
The requested 2014/2015 budget includes only $2,250 in expenses and revenues
awaiting specific projects to be approved by the Fish & Game Commission and the
Kings County Board of Supervisors.
The Proposed 2014/2015 Budget includes contributions (Other Charges) to the Road
budget (925100) from the Road Fund in the amount of $12,189,234. This is an
increase of $4,834,234 from the Adopted 2013/2014 Budget of $7,355,000. The
projected $3,836,334 of unreimbursed costs will come from the Road Fund ending
fund balance from FY 13/14 which is projected to be $9,635,741.
1. Continue the on-going assessment of department organization and staffing to
assure community effectiveness and operational efficiencies.
2. Provide input to the Board, the CAO, state agencies and local legislators on the
state budget, federal health care reform and other issues that could affect Health
Department programs as well as other health care services available to Kings
County residents.
3. Implement the goals identified in the Departmental Strategic Plan for achievement
in FY 2013-14, including:
a. Updating/creating a written manual of all policies, procedures, and
protocols and cross-train staff to ensure that each position has a
designated back-up.
b. Develop a county-wide Emergency Response Committee that will define
agency roles and responsibilities in responding to disasters.
b Develop a cross-training program in the workforce to protect the public in
the event of an emergency.
4. Prepare the Department to apply for accreditation by the Public Health
Accreditation Board to be achieved no later than December 31, 2016.
5. Assess all programs, policies and procedures using the Criteria for Performance
Excellence adopted by the Baldrige Performance Excellence Program.
1. Continue to strengthen and prioritize services for children and their families;
meeting the demand for National and State-driven outcome measures and
mandates. A partnership with Kings County Child Welfare Services resulted in
the implementation of the State mandated program, "Katie A." and provides
Behavioral Health entitlement and access to care services for foster children.
Other services that are expanding are Parent-Child Interactive Therapy (earlyage
mental health program), mental health screenings for children up to the age
of 17, Truancy Intervention and Prevention Program (TIPP) and further
outreach through the PEl plan of the Mental Health Services Act and other
evidenced-based pilots to address early on-set behavioral problems that
continue to impact the developmental school years.
2. Begin Developing the SB1022 framework with Kings County Sheriffs Office.
Probation. and providers; establishing program plans and outcomes for the full
implementation of a Day Treatment Center, vocational, SUD and mental health
services for inmates transitioning back into their communities. This program is
slated for FY 2015/2016 rollout.
3. Lead the 5150 Work Group Collaborative (with the assistance of the Hospital
Council facilitator) in the on-going implementing a 5150 Countv-Wide Protocol
and the Development of Residential Crisis Beds; that will include Behavioral
. Health, Kings View Crisis Services, Adventist Health Medical Center, all Kings
County Law Enforcement, and other community stakeholders that ensures the
safety, security, and minimization of county resources in dealing with psychiatric
emergencies.
4. Expand. Fund, and Train the Implementation Team of a Collaborative Justice
Treatment Court with Courts and other County Agency partners. Continue to
advocate for the least restrictive environment for individuals suffering from
substance abuse disorders, PTSD and mental illnesses who are incarcerated or
face incarceration, or face an eminent release into the community without
resources. The pilot for this Veteran's Court, Drug Court, Behavioral Health
Court combination will move into a permanent program; inclusive of evaluation
and adjustment of outcome measures.
5. Completely convert and implement the protocols of all service related activities
into the department's new Data Management System; Anasazi. With this
automated system, reporting outcomes and creating performance based
measures with help the department track effectiveness, access to care and
service gap areas to be addressed. Ensure that data collected at local level is
interfaced with State data management system-DRC on an on-going basis.
6. Continue to Improve and Monitor HIPAA practices. and structural and policy
safeguards that ensure the protection of all private health information for the
department. Re-vamp and/or improve encryption mechanisms and monitor
ongoing risks to breaches in security in partnership with Information Services
Department.
7. Create goals. objectives, and strategies that serve to prevent Suicide in Kings
County. Through the Tulare/Kings Suicide Task Force, the department will seek
to lower the risks associated with suicide ideation and follow-through. As part of
the Prevention and Early Intervention Statewide programs, a suicide response
LOSS team was implemented in Kings County and will need to be strengthened
and the volunteer base expanded to ensure the availability of post-vention
services to family members in Kings County. As of June 30, 2014, the
Statewide PEl plans sunset, however Kings will continue to fund and partner
with Tulare County toward Suicide Prevention, Student Mental Health, and
Stigma reduction.
8. Establish a Medi-Cal/EPSDT billing component with Department; ensuring that
funding is being maximized for the County and increasing sustainability and
growth toward community services.
9. Contribute to the sustainabilitv of CalMHSA efforts; shifting a percentage of
local County PEl funds to this governing board (through stakeholder process)
for the benefit of capacity building and leveraging their resources for Kings
County.
10. Implement only new AOD Prevention, Treatment, or Mental Health Programs
which have been established as Evidenced-Based: remaining consistent with
the expectation that an evaluation and monitoring component accompany all
programs funded by the department. Continue to re-visit and adapt department
Strategic Plans and MHSA Plans to meet the State (CaIOMS) and Federal
(NOMS) performance expectations and accountability standards.
11. Develop a QAlSystems Implementation/HIPAAlAccountabilitv/Safetv function
within the department to meet the growing needs of data collection, IT
responsibilities, security and safety practices, and quality compliance and
consistency across all units within the department.
The expenditure budget for Behavioral Health Administration budget unit
#422500 is cost applied across four budget units (420000, 420100, 422100, and
422200) in the amount of $877,719; Budget Unit #420000 is $7,100,183; Budget
Unit #420100 is $1,103,808; Budget Unit #422100 is $1,648,079; Budget Unit
#422200 is $6,598,064; and Budget Unit #422400 is $128,686. The combined
total expenditure budget for Behavioral Health Department is $16,578,820
for FY 2014/2015. Revenues for FY 2014/2015 are $16,544,269. In addition, the
department has a mandated MHSA prudent reserve at the County level in the
amount of $2,138,118. Net County Costs total is $34,551, which is the MOE total
for this department.
1. Implement 2012-2015 Strategic Plan to include services provided by the
Family Resource Initiative, the School Readiness Initiative, and the
Elevating Early Care and Education (E3) Initiative
2. Continue to implement:
i. Linkages to Learning Program
ii. Backpack to Success Program
3. Provide site visits and technical assistance for all grantees.
4. Update on a regular basis the First 5 Kings County website.
5. Establish a Strategic Plan for FY 2015-2020.
6. Submit all necessary and required reports to State Commission.
7. Complete restructure of First 5 to better fit workload and needs as a
program at the Kings County Department of Public.
8. Revise policy manual to reflect new structure as a program at the Kings
County Department of Public Health.
The requested expense budget for the Health Department is $1,864,750 for FY
2014/15. This is a decrease of $185.546 from the FY 2013/14 Adopted Budget. The
. decrease includes reductions of $116,951 in salaries and benefits and $68,595 in
operational costs from FY 2013/14. These reflect the transition from a county
department to a program at the Department of Public Health, as well as the elimination
of the Children and Families Director position. It also reflects the modification of the
Executive secretary to a First 5 Technician:
2013/2014 Amended
Executive Director
Executive Secretary
Additional Support Position
First 5 FTEs for FY 2014/2015 (as of 7/1114)
1. Implement an automated time study process to distribute salary and benefit costs
within the quarterly administrative claim template (CEC).
2. Develop and implement an audit system for the administrative claim (CEC), assistance
claim (CASOO), inter-departmental MOUs, and outside contracts.
3. Fully implement the Family Stabilization Program (FSP).
4. Review and apply new Affordable Care Act (ACA) changes to all cases while cleaning
up the lists provided by DHCS due to late and incomplete implementation in our
automated systems.
5. Scan all Social Services Division hard files for soft storage to move to a paperless
case management system across the division.
6. Work with the Blue Ribbon Commission on educational services for minors at the
Probation Department's Juvenile Hall.
7. Assist the California Child Welfare Directors Association (CWDA) and Child and
Family Policy Institute of California (CFPIC) in its work with counties to develop a
standardized best practice guide entitled, "The California Child Welfare Services
Common Core Practice Model."
Funding Background:
The requested expense budget for the administration of Social Services, CaIWORKs, Cal
Fresh, and Medi-Cal is $35,692,453 for FY 14/15. This is an increase of $1,942,692 from the
FY 13/14 adopted budget. This increase is primarily the result of an increase in salaries and
benefits for the requested positions and increased fixed asset requests. The increase in
computer hardware/software is due to the change in fixed asset rules. The increase in
contract services is due to increases in job training and outreach and enrollment. The net
County cost for Administration is $369,145 and includes the required match for senior
services including nutrition resulting from the contract with the KingslTulare Area Agency on
Aging, the Corcoran modular lease payment, and the lease payment for the new Adult
Services building. The budgets for departments 510000 and 520000 reflect the application of
$17,910,890 in Realignment revenue. This reflects the revenue from the 2011 Public Safety
Realignment and the 1991 realignment. No transfers from the Health Realignment trust are
planned. The 510000 budget unit for Administration uses $5,033,283 of realignment. The
remaining $12,877,607 of realignment is applied to the 520000 budget unit for Categorical
Aid. Social Services realignment is heavily dependent on State sales tax collections. We are
anticipating similar economic conditions to FY14 and have budgeted accordingly. The
unreimbursed cost for 520000, after the application of available revenues and realignment, is
$2,180,052; a decrease in requested County General Fund unreimbursed costs of $406,924
from FY 13/14. This is due to strong realignment revenue. The requested FY 14/15 expense
budget for Dept. 520000 is $2,040,931 more than FY 13/14. The largest expenditure
increase is in foster care. This expense increase reflects the recent court decision granting a
30% rate increase to foster homes, and group homes. The expense increase in CalWORKS
cash assistance reflects anticipated caseload increase resulting from the drought and the 5%
grant increase that was effective in March, 2014. The expense budget request for department
540000 is $193,500, no change from FY 13/14. No changes in service delivery are
anticipated.
With the uncertainties surrounding FY 14/15 funding, it is possible that Human Services
might not receive funding necessary to support this budget as requested. Although the State
budget appears stable, our Agency will proceed with extreme caution into the FY 14/15
budget year. Human Service Agencies in many counties have suffered large funding
shortages during the State budget crisis and have had to resort to serious layoffs to
compensate. Our Agency has, so far, weathered the storm without having to sacrifice
services or staff. This is because the Kings County Human Services Agency has always
operated conservatively. We did not build capacity unnecessarily simply because funding
was available; rather, the philosophy of this Agency has been to build staff and service
delivery capacity only to the levels necessary to adequately and reasonably meet the needs
of our residents and community.
1. Facilitate over 30,000 visits to the One-Stop Career Center. Provide case-managed
career technical training, On-the-Job Training, work experience and other
employment, training and placement services for 485 Kings County residents.
2. Meet or exceed performance standards set forth by the U.S. Department of Labor.
3. Effectively respond to business closures impacting Kings County employers and
employees, placing at least 65% of the dislocated workers into jobs or vocational
training.
4. Serve as a primary point of contact for labor market and socia-economic data for
Kings County.
5. Manage the One-Stop Job Center, which includes the JTO/EDC offices, the
Employment Development Department, the State Department of Rehabilitation,
Youth Services, and other education, employment and training partners.
6. Closeout the Kings County Enterprise Zone effective December 31, 2014; and
administer local, state and federal business incentive zones which benefit local
businesses and help to attract new jobs and investment into Kings County.
7. Begin implementing a national branding update for employment and training
programs to include a tagline of .~ proud partner of America's Job Center of
California" on all marketing material and facility signage.
8. Complete a major revision to the Job Training Office and Economic Development
Corporation websites ..
DISCUSSION
Revenue for Workforce Investment Act (WIA) funded programs is subject to the receipt
of federal funding. Funding for economic development marketing is provided through a
$282,000 contract with the Kings County Economic Development Corporation (EDC).
JTO's role in coordinating economic development activities in Kings County has
resulted in strong relationships with existing businesses. Our involvement with the
California Central Valley Economic Development Corporation favorably positions Kings
County with real estate brokers and other decision makers across the U.S.
This Department will continue to oversee business incentive programs such as the
Recycling Market Development Zone, the Governor's Economic Development
Incentives, Foreign Trade Zone and the Federal HUB Zone through its association with
the EDC.
JTO plans to continue the operation of a large work experience program in conjunction
with the Kings County Human Services Agency. Funding for this program is anticipated
at $1.6 million for the fiscal year, and has been included in anticipated revenues. The
objective of this strategy is to assist TANF public assistance recipients to gain work
experience, get hired, and become self-sufficient. The operation of this activity is
dependent upon available funding from the Kings County Human Services Agency.
Major programmatic changes for the 2014-2015 budget include: strong continued
partnerships with Valley workforce agencies to compete for regional workforce grants;
the final issuance of hiring vouchers and other administrative responsibilities to formally
end the Kings County Enterprise Zone effective December 31, 2014; the continued
emphasis on business retention and attraction; and the pursuit of funding needed to
maintain the Kings County EDC.
Line item changes of significance from the previous budget include a reduction in
several categories we can directly manage, such as such as various Maintenance
categories, Books and Periodicals, Rents and Leases, Motor Pool Services and Travel
and Expense. The Management Benefits line item reflects an increase due to the
reinstituting of the deferred compensation match by your Board. Requested equipment
includes a replacement printer and a $9,950 card swipe system to automate tracking of
persons utilizing the Career Center.
This budget anticipates the receipt of $4,648,864, representing a decrease of roughly
$200,000 from planned 2013-2014 receipts, but an increase of approximately
$1.1million over projected 2013-14 revenues through June 30, 2014. The 2013-2014
budget included a $400,000 grant program that did not materialize. The projected
increase also includes revenues from awarded regional grants and a projected increase
to the contract with the Kings County Human Services Agency.
 Administrative Services
 Conduct performance management meetings with all staff by June 2015.
 Implement and monitor Staff Development Training program. Report
outcomes to Library Advisory Board by June 2015.
 Update Library Card and Meeting Room Policy by May 2015.
 Develop new volunteer, social media, and meeting room policy by May
2014.
 Analyze, plan, the redesign of branch libraries in Corcoran, Stratford, and
Kettleman City based on library facilities master plan. Cost account
budget needs for future fixed assets.
 Complete marketing work with Library Aware by April 2015.
 Develop a system wide promotion/presentation strategy on library
programs and services to the community by April 2015.
 Branch Services
 Hold 5th Annual County Wide Open House in December 2015.
 Conduct six community presentations of library databases to be
completed by May 2015.
 Investigate the feasibility of portable electronic devices for mobile
reference, children's, and teen services. Share findings with the Library
Advisory Board by January 2015.
 Establish a staff workgroup to develop and assemble themed Story Time
in a Box kits by December 2014.
 Recruit five to six teens to pilot a Teen Advisory Group at the Hanford
Branch by April 2015.
 Install safety features highlighted in the Security Assessment by June
2015.
 Develop digital strategy to increase the Library's presence with social
media, electronic resources, and the library's website by February 2015.
 IT Services
 Complete library website design by December 2013.
 Participate with the California State Library's Edge Initiative Pilot by
August 2013.
 Increase bandwidth from 3.0mb/sec to 10mb.sec at Hanford Branch
Library and 1.5mb/sec at Corcoran and Lemoore Branch Libraries by
August 2013.
 Investigate the feasibility of RFID integrated technology and report
findings to the Library Advisory Board by March 2015.
 Establish wireless service at the Kettleman City branch library by
November 2015.
 Purchase furniture and install additional electrical outlets at already
established wireless hotspots at Corcoran and Avenal by January 2015.
 Complete already in progress, increased bandwidth from 3.0mb/sec to
1 Omb.sec at Hanford Branch Library and 1.5mb/sec at Corcoran and
Lemoore Branch Libraries by June 2015.
 Materials Management
 Expand media collections (CD's and DVD's) at all branch libraries by 15%.
 Digitize microfilm collection by February 2015.
 Weed the print reference collections at all branch libraries by May 2015.
 Establish DVD collection at the Armona November 2014.
 Update the Collection Development Policy by June 2015.
 Develop pre-processing profiles and procedures with library material
vendors by May 2015.
 Purchase $5,000 of children and teen library materials to support the
Common Core curriculum. Funds provided by the California State Library.
DISSCUSSION
This year's 2014-2015 budget reflects the following major changes:
 Salaries & Employee Benefits
o An 18.34% increase in Salaries & Employee Benefits for Extra Help. This
increase is to accommodate the increase hours of operation for the
Corcoran Branch Library and a one hour adjustment for the Avenal Branch
Library. The Kings County Library is purposing the increase Corcoran's
hours by seven hours per week to include Saturday hours. Corcoran is
the third busiest branch library circulating 23,215 annually with 20,795
volumes. Avenal's hour adjustment will alleviate overtime pay of current
staff of two hours a week and resulting in a savings of $1 ,329 annually.
 Services & Supplies
o Communications reflects an increase of $9,200 for increased monthly
telephone costs to County IT. In 2013-2014 the Library purchased new
telephone equipment and transitioned over to the county's telephone
system.
o In-Service Training reflects an increase of $5,000 to support staff
development training to implement the library's Staff Development
Program (SOP). The Kings County Library is committed to workforce
development allowing staff to grow professionally, maximize staffing
efficiency, and effectiveness. To support workforce development, staff
members of the Kings County Library will have an opportunity to take
formal classroom learning, informal workplace learning, and self-service
models based on staff training needs and the organizational competency
needs of the library department. During 2013-2014 the library conducted
a four phase assessment, data collection and analysis process; and
developed a staff menu of training opportunities for the library staff. The
SOP will encourage employees to become adaptable, take initiative in
order to keep skills current through organization-wide initiatives, and
ongoing departmental efforts. The SOP will also assist library staff to need
to embrace cultural sensitivity and have language abilities to serve diverse
communities.
For 2013-2014 the Kings County Library did not receive any funding revenue from the
California State Library. For 2014-2015 will not include any funding revenue from the
California State Library.
1. Continue agricultural research to provide local science based information that will
help sustain economic stability in Kings County's major industry.
2. Assist local clientele in the adoption of new technologies for improved production
practices.
3. Develop updated educational tools for use in the dairy and forage programs. The
new extension materials may be produced in multiple media formats and will focus
on various aspects of modern dairy management and production practices.
4. Grow and structure the county 4-H program to allow more middle management
opportunities for volunteers to be engaged.
5. Provide nutrition education training, materials and support to classroom teachers in
low-income schools.
DISCUSSION
The requested budget for FY 2014-15 is $238,504 Net County cost. This amount
represents Additions over 2013-2014: $22,300 for the 40% Master Gardener
Coordinator, $10,000 for conversion of outdated laboratory space to useable space to
preserve needed office space; and $2,500 for additional office expense. In addition
there are proposed reductions in Motor Pool services and equipment to offset
significant increase in communications cost and a revenue line for reimbursable grant
and operational expenses of $4,000. During this year, UC Cooperative Extension will
add on professional (4-H Advisor) and one para-professional (Nutrition Program
Representative), to continue to grow the programs offered and the impact of the effort
in Kings County.
The Proposed 2014/2015 Budget includes General Fund contributions (Other
Charges) to the Park Budget in the amount of $1,185,981, an increase of $10,638
from 2013/2014. This increase is due to the following factors: adding Extra Help of
$6,423 as well as changes in both services and supplies and Other Charges. This
budget request includes replacing one mower at a cost of $5,920.
Phase I of the Jail Facility construction was completed in the summer of 2006. In FY
2006/2007, the remaining budget was divided between the new Jail Facility and the
Branch Jail remodel. This project is complete and no further projects are scheduled
for this budget unit.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
It was adopted in FY 2010/11 to fund a portion of the Morgue using $390,000 of these
impact fees. In FY 2011/12 the Board approved using $2,290,000 for the design of
the housing unit of the jail. A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held during the first
quarter of FY 2014/15, and an updated construction schedule will be adopted. At this
time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The balance in this fund for the proposed
budget was $0.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held during the first quarter of FY 2014/15, and an
updated construction schedule will be adopted. At this time, all funds are set-aside in
reserves. The balance in this fund for the proposed budget is $861,666.
The balance in this fund for the proposed budget is $634,450.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
In FY 2010/11 it was adopted that these impact fees will no longer be collected. The
funds in the reserve were adopted to be used on the Sheriff's Evidence space
expansion. Those funds were not used, therefore Administration will be returning to
your Board at a new Impact Fee Hearing to be held during the first quarter of FY
2014/15, with an updated construction schedule for adoption. At this time all funds are
set-aside in reserves. The balance in this fund for the proposed budget is $99,344.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
In FY 2011/12 the Board suspended collecting impact fees related animal control
facilities. A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held during the first quarter of FY 2014/15,
and an updated construction schedule will be adopted. At this time, all funds are setaside
in reserves. The balance in this fund for the proposed budget is $5,276.
A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held during the first quarter of FY 2014/15, and an
updated construction schedule will be adopted. At this time, all funds are set-aside in
reserves. The balance in this fund for the proposed budget is $29,803.
In prior years, Administration recommended that your Board contribute the equivalent
amount of the Williamson Act ($2,413,014 in 08/09) to the Capital Projects budget unit
to help to pay for upcoming capital projects. However, due to the serious financial
difficulties at the state, Williamson Act revenues was not budgeted in FY 09/10 or
10/11. FY 09/10 did not show any Williamson Act revenues in the capital budget, due
to the state not appropriating them in FY 09/10 and FY 10/11. In FY 11/12, $623,559
was received due to new revenue generated by revisions to the term for newly
renewed and new Williamson Act and Farmland Security Zone contracts related to
Assembly Bill 1265. It is estimated that the County will receive $175,000 in FY 14/15
for capital projects.
Hazardous Waste Revenues have been budgeted in the capital projects budget in the
past because these revenues have historically been treated as one-time revenue. In
FY 11112 the County received only $211,786 of the $300,000 Budgeted in Hazardous
Waste funds, and all of that was budgeted in the Fire Fund revenues. No Hazardous
Waste funds were included in the FY 11/12 or FY 12/13 for the capital project budget.
In FY 12/13 and FY 13/14 it was adopted to budget the Hazardous Waste Revenues
showing a contribution to the Kettleman City Water project. The projection for FY
2014/15 is at $150,000, which is also recommended to go towards the Kettleman City
Water project.
The scheduled payments for 2014/2015 total $1,245,000 and there is an expense for
the Trustee fee of $2,500, and service fees totaling $3,700. Revenue is generated
through charges to the Retirement accounts for County departments and interest on
deposits totaling $1,251,200. This reflects anticipated lower costs of borrowing, when
compared to PERS charges applied to departments. We are approaching the 10 year
anniversary of the POB issuance.
We are approaching the 10 year anniversary of the POB issuance. At the time, it was
novel to issue these bonds using a variable rate of One Month Libor plus .30 basis
points. The good news is that the risk so far has paid off handsomely! Analysis
completed by Treasury Staff shows the actual saving through April 2014 compared to
the fixed rate POBs the County issued is $2,450,273.14. The current annualized
monthly rate charged in April 2014 was at an all time low of .45%. Because we expect
interest rates to begin slowly rising again, we are continually evaluating the possible
savings (if any) of refunding these bonds at a fixed rate. However, we are very pleased
with the success of this variable rate issue, as we continue to borrow at less than
1.00%.
Based on estimates provided by the Department of Finance, the Budget for FY
2014/2015 totals $1,031,019 and includes the Debt Service of $781,019 for the Jail
Lease Revenue Bonds and $250,000 for the AB109 Phase II match.
Based on estimates provided by the Department of Finance, the Budget for FY
2014/2015 totals $1,121,739 and includes the Debt Service for three areas where lease
payments are involved:
 The Cogeneration facility lease is budgeted at $262,104.
 The 2008 Chevron Energy Project is budgeted at $513,613.
 Covered Parking Solar Project is budgeted at $346,022.
For these projects, revenue is generated by charging departments through their Utilities
account for the cost of making this annual payment.
1. PeopleSoft Upgrade
The County leverages a software application from PeopleSoft in support of Human
Resources and Finance (payroll) functions. The vendor notified the County that the
current version (9.0) is at end of life. An upgrade to version 9.2 will occur by end of
calendar year 2014.
2. Credit Card Clearing System
Currently the County restricts methods of public payment for departmental charges
(taxes, fees, fines, etc.) to check and cash. ITO will continue the process of adding
technology necessary to support credit cards, debit cards and electronic checks,
including via our Website and the Internet, to the list of available payment options.
3. eBenefits System
The employee management system in use by Human Resources and Finance lacks the
capability for employees to self-service their payroll and benefit needs. ITO will continue
installation of enhancements to the existing system necessary to provide this selfservice
capability.
4. HIPAA Data Tracking Compliance
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) requires specific
protections be maintained over all health information which is stored electronically. ITO
will continue deploying controlling technology, which monitors the location and use of
restricted information and helps ensure compliance with related HIPAA regulations.
5. IP Telephony Features
Migration of the telephony system from digital services to Voice-Over-Internet Protocol
(VoIP) technology is complete. During the Fiscal Year 2014/2015 ITO will continue
deploying phase II and phase III advanced features which will allow the County to fully
realize the promise of advanced telephony services.
6. Time and Attendance System
County collection of time and attendance (payroll) information is currently performed in
a manual fashion. ITO will continue the automation process such that employees will be
able to self-serve timecard information, managers will have the ability to approve
(electronically) timesheets and the resulting payroll data will be automatically uploaded
into the County's Payroll System.
7. Assessor/Clerk/Recorder Record Management System
The ITO is working closely with the Assessor, Tax Collector, Auditor, and
Clerk/Recorder Departments to replace current applications (Property and
Clerk/Recorder management systems) with a new state-of-the-art system provided by
the Manatron Corporation.
8. Network Backbone Upgrade
The core County network switch infrastructure, which supports all computer connectivity
between departments and the Data Center, will continue undergoing an upgrade from
one Gigabit to ten Gigabit speed. In addition, replacing key portions of the copper wiring
with fiber optics in planned. The modifications will greatly advantage computer users by
reducing system response times.
9. Wi-Fi Deployment
The need forWIFI connectivity of handheld devices is growing rapidly. The wireless
infrastructure supporting these mobile devices is undergoing expansion, in terms of
security, availability (number of County office locations) and resiliency from failure ..
10. Exchange Email System Archiving
Managing email communication to and from County offices occurs through a Microsoft
Exchange system. The vendor is discontinuing the current third party system used to
archive historical email messages. Selecting and implementing a replacement solution
will occur during the upcoming fiscal year.
11. County Counsel's Office Software System
To increase efficiency County Counsel has asked ITO to support the evaluation,
selection, implementation of and training for a case management system. The new
integrated solution will include support for document scanning, indexing, storage and
retrieval of current case information and historical records.
12. Microsoft SharePoint
The Human Services Agency has requested implementation of the SharePoint System
from Microsoft. The solution advantages employees and the clients they serve by
supporting enhanced collaboration, better case management functionality and the
implementation of a workflow toolset.
13.Application Software Upgrades
Several County support systems take advantage of the computing capability of the
County's mainframe system. Since decommissioning of the mainframe system will
occur in 2015, transitioning these functions to more modern software and hardware
environments is under way.
14. Server Environment Version Upgrade
A virtual server operating environment upgrade from version 2008 to 2012 is scheduled.
The options available through the new version will add numerous important features
and greatly streamline management of the server hosting system.
SPECIAL DISCUSSION NOTE:
While the focus of effort is customer service, the Information Technology
Department must plan for keeping the County's technology infrastructure current
and secure. Ongoing Federal and State audits focused on data security will continue intensifying over the next several of years. We expect the increased
attention to result in additional requirements that ultimately change how the County
leverages technology. The County, through efforts of the lTD, is currently ahead of
many other Central Valley counties - however, the new rules will result in even more
restrictions on how we protect technology assets and how they are used.
Another focus of Kings County is the migration and or replacement of applications
on the legacy mainframe system. We will continue working with departmental users
of the various systems involved to eliminate the County's dependency.
The FY 20142015 Liability Selflnsurance Budget is requested at $1,094,506, a
decrease of $59,644 from last year. This request includes funding of administrative
and claims costs as well as funding catastrophic reserves,
The Revenue Transfer In is from the General Fund, Budget Unit 141000, Insurance.
Effective July 1, 2004, the Board of Supervisors approved a self-funded health
insurance program for all medical benefits as opposed to only self-funding the vision
and dental components of the plan as in the past.
In December, 2005 a $900,000 loan from the General Fund was transferred to the
Health Insurance Fund for cash flow purposes. This loan was completely paid off in
the 2007/2008 Fiscal Year.
In July 2008, the County implemented a Well ness Program. There were a total of 481
participants in the blood draw portion of the Well ness Program in 2008. In 2009, there
were 462 participants, in 2010, there were 500 participants, and in 2011 there were
509 participants, which includes spouses and their over 18 year old dependents.
Currently the Health Insurance Fund is projecting a fully funded reserve. The County
agreed to absorb the employee's increase in premium up to $500,000 over two fiscal
years 2014/15 and 2015/16. The increase that will be paid out of the reserves for fiscal
year 2014/2015 is $42,653.
In April, 2014, the County approved the on-site Kings County Employee Health Center.
The facility will open in late summer of 2014 and will be available to employees who
are in the Kings County Health Plan as well as their spouses, dependents, retirees and
Cobra participants. The costs for the Health Facility will be funded out of the Health
Insurance Reserve account. The 2014/2015 Budget for the Self-Insured Insurance Plan is $11,875,651.
The Kings County Health Insurance Advisory Members recommended that Kings
County open an on-site health facility to the Board of Supervisors. In April, 2014, the
Board of Supervisors approved the health facility, with Medcor as the vendor. The
Kings County Employee Health Center is scheduled to open in late summer of 2014.
The health facility will be located in Building 5 at the Kings County Health Department.
The facility will be open Monday through Saturday, with varying hours to accommodate
the employees' work schedules. The employees will not be required to use their sick
time for their own appointments and will not have to meet the insurance deductible for
services provided by the health facility.
The contractual cost for the first years' fees for Medcor is $555,720 plus a $93,070 one
time start up fee. These costs were approved by the Board of Supervisors in April,
2014. At that time it was not known what other costs would be associated with the
health facility. Those costs are now known and are as follows: miscellaneous charges
which include a one-time facility improvements, an AED unit , the Wellness program
which includes blood draws and incentives and miscellaneous costs totaling $65,000;
Medical supplies which include labs, some prescriptions and medical supplies - $52,500
per year, office supplies - $10,000; Janitorial- $36,400; Utilities - $14,000; and IT costs
- $2,200 for a total budget of $828,890.
The Worker's Compensation Budget is recommended at $3,034,000 for FY
2014/2015. $3,000,000 in costs are zeroed out because they are cost applied to
individual department budgets to reflect those departments' Worker's Compensation
insurance premiums. The majority of the remaining costs are offset by insurance
proceeds on former employees whose costs are borne by an excess insurance policy.
This Budget Unit is a summary showing the total cost Countywide for Worker's
Compensation insurance coverage.
 Administration:
1. Assist all divisions in securing grants to address some services/equipment that
cannot be provided currently due to funding shortages.
2. Continued involvement in the San Joaquin Valley Clean Energy Organization as
a means of keeping up- to-date on available grants and energy saving programs
3. Have each division prioritize the tasks/services/projects that need to be done by
identifying those tasks or projects that cannot be completed with current
available funding.
4. Continue to monitor all maintenance operations to ensure courteous, prompt,
and professional response to requests and complaints. Respond quickly to
comments and/or inquiries by members of the public or members of the Board of
Supervisors.
5. Continue to assist County Administration in the implementation of policies to
ensure cost effective use of vehicles; and to establish the most cost effective
fleet size.
6. Assist County Administration and represent the County's needs with respect to
the design and construction of the expansion of the County Jail.
7. Have divisions continue to work with the Human Resources department in the
preparation of evaluations and disciplinary procedures.
8. Continue to provide oversight on the various construction projects. Work closely
with other departments, Administration and outside agencies to ensure timely
and cost effective completion of each project.
9. Provide timely personnel, accounting, fiscal and administrative services to all
Public Works Divisions and County Departments.
 Building Maintenance:
1. Continue working on the inventory system and incorporate it into our work order
system. It will be tied into the Preventive maintenance program that is now 100%
implemented.
2. Continue to utilize internet trainings on our TMA software system for all supervisors,
Facility Manager and Office Assistant in an effort to complete the inventory program.
Staff only scratched the surface on this item and we want to try and spend more
time in training this next year. We are also going to check into upgrading our TMA
system to be more user friendly in regards to inventory.
3. Continue scheduling webinar trainings in our training room as well as in-service
trainings for janitorial and building maintenance staff on a regular basis. We will also
offer the training lab to other divisions.
4. Continue the Preventative Maintenance program for the underground high voltage
system as well as all our electrical rooms and Central Plant.
5. We will also continue to service our transformers and all electrical rooms
throughout the Government center on a rotating schedule.
6. Continue the maintenance contract for the high voltage running to our repeater site
at Flat Top Mountain. We have a continuous issue with loose connections, nesting
birds and failing guide wires.
7. Continue implementing more web training programs on specialized equipment and
continue sending staff to outside trainings as needed.
8. Start a certification program thru Ernest Packaging for janitorial staff.
9. Send supervisory staff to more classes and trainings offered.
10. Implement an updated program for lock out/tag out procedures for all electrical
rooms. We also need to check and label all high voltage breakers and switches thru
out the Government Center as well as put high voltage and instruction signs up
where they are needed thru out the government center and also in outlying areas.
We have been doing this on an ongoing basis and need to continue until completed.
11. Expand the central plant office area to allow for better work spaces for staff and also
allow an area for all blueprints to be stored and also looked at as needed. We will
also be trying to create a storage area outside along with a work shop are for repairs
on equipment.
 Engineering:
1. Begin using the Pavement Management System to analyze the maintenance
needs of the County road network.
2. Continue to provide contract management services to other departments.
3. Continue to maintain the traffic collision database and proactively use the
program to provide analysis to recommend corrective action when warranted to
improve traffic safety on County roads.
4. Pursue the abandonment of minor roads where appropriate.
5. Provide construction project management on major and minor projects.
6. Provide engineering design comments on development projects being processed
by the Community Development Agency.
7. Continue to seek outside funding sources for major road construction and
maintenance projects. Our goal is to use Federal/State funds to pay for our
design, right of way, environmental, construction, and staff costs to the greatest
extent possible.
 Fleet Management:
1. Continue to search for the best available technology to ensure that all the
equipment continues to run as clean as practicable.
2. Continue to monitor equipment usage and make recommendations to
departments to ensure the most efficient use of equipment.
3. Continue to promote compliance with State and Federal air pollution
requirements.
4. Take advantage of as many grant opportunities as practicable to provide
technology upgrades to equipment to ensure compliance with regulations.
5. Continue to add alternative fuel vehicles to the County fleet, while striving to find
grant funding that can assist in the purchasing of alternative fuel vehicles.
6. Continue to monitor diesel powered equipment, as well as preparing the fleet to
meet California Air Resources Board requirements for off road diesel powered
equipment by 2018.
 Parks:
1. Continue to provide safe and enjoyable parks that the public and schools may enjoy.
2. Continue to cooperate with the Burris Park Foundation with the goal of further
developing the Burris Park Outdoor learning center.
3. Encourage more special event use of the parks to generate revenue as well as
introduce the public to the Burris Park museum, wagon barn and the multi-purpose
room. Continue development of the Parks and Grounds Division webpage through
the County Information Technology Department.
4. Continue performing quality maintenance while reducing quantity of services
wherever possible to match the staff levels of the Division. This is primarily in the
form of transformation of turf areas into low-maintenance bedding, replacement or
elimination of dying landscape at the Government Center, renovation of irrigation
systems, replanting climate-appropriate trees and dense groundcovers, and
installation of rubberized decorative bark. Progress on this objective can be seen at
the Agriculture Complex and Health Complex.
5. Continue to search for grants and other opportunities, such as volunteers, to assist
in the goals of the Division. The State Beverage Container grant was applied for
and awarded to the County. This grant has been used to improve the recycling
opportunities within County buildings. Re-application will be made for future rounds
of this grant, but the State has notified the County that this grant will be phased-out
over the next two years. Application to the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control
Board for various grants has, and will continue to be made. The National Wildlife
Federation has several opportune grants that the Department should apply for.
6. Purchase and install new pre-fabricated restroom(s) at Park(s).
7. Continue to execute and comply with grants received.
 Roads:
1. Continue to maintain the roads and bridges in a safe condition.
2. Complete the annual edgeline and centerline restriping by winter of 2014.
3. Continue the annual night time sign survey program.
4. Prepare Plans and Specifications to replace the bridge on 16th at Tulare Lake
Canal. Open bids in summer 2015.
5. Prepare Plans and Specifications for the Federal and State Grants for Safe Route
to School Projects. Road Fund will pay for $500,000 street reconstructions.
Construction to begin in January 2015.
6. Use $350,000 CMAQ Funding to seal 8 miles of gravel roads.
7. Construct patching and overlay on 13.6 miles of major roads for approximately $2.9
Million. These road segments to be overlayed will be selected from the following
list:
8. Place maintenance seals on 95 miles of the Road System. The seals will consist of
20 miles of reclamite, 5 miles of cape seals and 70 miles of chip seal. The cost to Road
fund will be approximately $3.2 million.
9. Prepare plans and specifications for the bridge widening, road approach work and
traffic signals at 13th Avenue and Lacey Boulevard. Constructions anticipated in the
Fall of 2015.
10. Prepare plans and specifications for the bridge widening at Lacey Boulevard and the
South Fork of Kings River. Construction anticipated in Fall of 2016.
11. Reconstruct the intersection of 5 Y2 Avenue and Benecia Avenue to be a
conventional 'T" intersection. Construction will be August 2014 and cost approximately
$50,000
DISCUSSION:
General Discussion:
The Department is maintaining the highest levels of service possible considering the
funds available. Staff is actively involved in the largest amount of design and
construction projects seen in many years, including construction of a new morgue, the
addition of holding cells and transfer tunnel to the jail, two jail expansion projects, 3
Safe Route to School projects, 2 highway safety improvement projects, and numerous
bridge and intersection improvement projects - all in addition to our normal
maintenance and construction activities. This is being accomplished within existing
staff levels, in part by leveraging our work force by using consultants.
Administration:
The Administration Budget has increased from $470,158 to $546,484 due to a new
account utility rebates/incentives and we will have a revenue account to offset this
expense. Our CAP charges will be $12,449 whereas last year we paid $33,968.
Administration is cost applied to the other divisions in the Public Works Department.
Our requested budget that is cost applied will be less than that of last year by $23, 674.
Roads and Bridges:
The 2013/2014 budget anticipated the Road Fund Revenue at $7,355,000. The
estimated actual end of year revenues will be $6,335,198. The proposed 2014/2015
Roads Division Revenue totals $8,352,900 million dollars. The division proposes to use
$3.74 million from the road reserve to balance revenues with the proposed expenditure
total of $12,089,070.
AB 720 has had an impact on the operation of the Roads Division. This law went into
effect last year and limits the amount of road reconstruction work that can be done with
County forces. Roads Division has been forced to contract out more work at higher
costs. There are two specific issues about this statute that concern the division. First,
the State Controller's Office (SCO) determines which projects are labeled as
reconstruction. It is possible that our crews do work assuming it does not fall under AB
720 restrictions, only to have the SCO determine otherwise and thus being a technical
violation of AB 720. Secondly, AB720 requires a local agency to declare its intent to do
work by force account in advance of doing the work. It is not unusual for an opportunity
to arise whereby the Roads Division can acquire recycled material and only pay freight
costs. If the material is located such that it can be incorporated on a particular project,
and cannot be stored, we would want to make use of the offer of material. AB 720
would not allow this if time is a consideration. Therefore, to allow the maximum
flexibility to the Roads Division, and to avoid a technical violation of AB 720, Public
Works would like to use this budget to declare its intent to use force account labor to
the maximum extent allowed under AB 720.
Parks and Grounds:
The Division has continued in its attempt to make ends meet by utilizing the Sheriffs
Alternative Sentencing workers (Work In-lieu's), AB 109 workers, Welfare-to-Work
employees, JTO employees, and summer youth workers. The Division is now at a
staffing level that can adequately maintain it's responsible areas. The Chief engineer
acted as the Interim Parks and Grounds Superintendent until that position was filled in
June of 2014. The Parks and Grounds Superintendent has been acting as the unofficial
Museum Curator-a task more appropriate for a part-time curator considering the value
and sensitivity of the museum collection as well as the extensive use of the museum for
the outdoor education component of Burris Park. Funds equivalent to 500 hours of
work for a part-time museum curator should be allocated. The overtime line item has
exceeded the budgeted amount and will not exceed the 2014/2015 budgeted amount if
an additional $5,000 is applied toward the Extra Help line item.
Implementation of new irrigation and landscape technologies has reduced maintenance
in some areas. This has also resulted in a reduction of water use. Some specific
changes have been the installation of water-wise sprinkler nozzles at all lawns in the
interior of the Government Center. Reliance on chemical herbicides and growth
regulators is a standard practice when staff levels are low. New landscape
technologies and modern equipment are assisting the Division, but funds will need to be
allocated in future budgets to fully acquire these benefits. The Division obtained a
replacement tractor for Hickey Park in 2013/2014 and now the Government Center
tractor is due for replacement. Lawrence Tractor is willing to credit the County with a
trade-in of the seldom-used Goossen Lawn Vac in the amount of $3,800 to when
purchasing the new tractor ($47,300). One mid-sized mower located at Hickey Park is
due for replacement ($17,100) and one final small-sized mower is also due for
replacement ($5,700).
Fleet Management:
Fleet is requesting to spend $701,500 in fixed asset purchases versus $1,764,500
during FY 13-14. We will continue to replace equipment that has met or exceeded its
cost effective life. In general, we will need to replace equipment that is over ten years
old and/or has over 120,000 miles.
The Board of Supervisors was designated as the Successor Agency of the dissolved
Kings County Redevelopment Agency on January 31, 2012. On April 11, 2012 the first
meeting of the Oversight Board for the Successor Agency for the County of Kings was
held. This Oversight Board is made up of seven members, three Board of Supervisor
appointments, two Superintendent of Schools appointments, one Community Service
District appointment and one Community College appointment.
This budget unit is included in the County budget for historical purposes only. The
Redevelopment Obligation Retirement Fund is no longer included as a County Budget
Unit.
