1. Continue implementation of County priorities in the following areas: Promote the
role of agriculture; communicate county goals and objectives to employees and the
public; develop a long range plan for meeting future infrastructure needs; maximize
financial resources and opportunities; ensure an efficient and productive work
force; manage information resources effectively; provide effective and efficient
delivery of county services; support economic development; and promote programs
for healthy children and families.
2. Continue discussions with city councils and other local government entities
regarding most efficient means of delivering mutually provided services.
This years Requested expenditure budget of $683,319 is $16,953 more than last
year's Budget of $666,366. Several of the Board of Supervisors members have
increased their traveling to discuss issues regarding the proposed California High
Speed Rail to include being heard in Sacramento as well as Washington D.C. There
also are increases in health insurance and deferred compensation costs as well as
increased costs in services in supplies. The Board office has worked to decrease their
services and supplies budget in the past and will continue to try to find cost saving
measures for the future.
In FY 12/13, the County is projecting to receive $1,067,918 more in revenue than what
was budgeted in FY 11/12. This represents an overall 3% increase in revenues. We
are projecting FY 12/13 taxes based on FY 11/12 estimated actuals and higher
projections in Sales Taxes.
Use of Money and Property continues to declining due to record low interest rates. The
projected interest earnings will be down by 10%, or $50,000 below the Adopted 11/12
Budget.
Intergovernmental Revenue is expected to decrease by 11%, or $91 ,000. The majority
of this decrease, $71 ,000, is associated with the projected reimbursement of State Aid
-Mandated cost claims being paid by the State, these were estimated at $120,000 for
FY 11/12, and are only estimated at $50,000 for FY 12/13. In addition, State Aid- Land
Conservation is expected to be $25,000 less than in 11/12.
Charges for services, which are CAP charges, have increased by $38,918 from FY
11/12 per information from the Department of Finance.
In FY 07/08, your Board approved Hazardous Waste Taxes revenues to be moved from
this budget unit to the Capital Project (700000) and Fire Fund (241 000) budgets in order to use these revenues of a one-time nature toward our projected Capital and Fire
needs. This proposed budget continues that shift, although the total anticipated for FY
12/13 is at $250,000 and is recommended to be in the Capital Projects budget only.
Budget constraints, due to State Budget cuts and the continuing recession, are
more severe than probably at any time since the great depression. This will
result in "'re-benching" basic service levels that will be driven by anticipated
dramatic budget reductions. Administration will continue to be focused primarily
on "living within our means" in 2012/2013.
2. Continue to pursue funding for the Kettleman City Water project jointly with the
Kettleman City Community Services District and the Successor Agency to the
County Redevelopment Agency.
3. Pursue with the Sheriff, District Attorney, Chief Probation Officer and the Courts,
the implementation of new State laws requiring the incarceration, treatment and
application of other means necessary to handle low-level criminals at the local
level.

For Administration, the Requested Budget totals $610,780. This is a decrease in
expenditures from the 2011/2012 Adopted Budget by $6,407, primarily as a result of the
net increase from the following changes: Increase in Cost Applied of $22,272 from
Successor Agency Admin charges for 16% of the Assistant GAO's time, and charges to
Workers Compensation and General Liability for all of the Risk Analyst ll's time and
$15,869 in State Aid - Public Safety Realignment for 15% of the Deputy County
Administrative Officer's time. It is recommended that the allocation of Deputy County
Administrative Officer (DCAO) be added and that the allocation of Management Analyst
Ill be frozen (not funded) effective August 20, 2012, the beginning of the first pay period
following Final Budget Hearings.
 Continue to establish procedures to achieve monthly financial reporting .
 Develop training program for County financial personnel.
 Develop and implement Internal Audit function.
 Create accounting policies and guidelines for countywide consistency.
 Monitor and timely file all State audits.
 Ensure all State/Federal mandatory reporting requirements are timely and accurate.
 Timely completion of basic financial statements or Comprehensive Annual Financial
Report.
 Conduct May phone campaign for tax-defaulted properties.
 Conduct annual tax sale of tax-defaulted properties (if needed).
 Complete evaluation and begin initiation of e-payables.
 Contract with vendor for acceptance of credit/debit cards.
 Manage the Kings County Investment Pool in such a manner as to ensure safety,
liquidity and return a market rate.
 Improve efficiency and effectiveness in all processes.
 Assist agencies with debt issuance.
  Continue cross training of Finance Department staff.
 Provide responsive and courteous service to the public and other
departments/agencies.
 Plan, prioritize, and maximize our resources to face the challenges presented at all
levels of government in California.

The Department of Finance expects to complete fiscal year 2011/12 at a total cost of
$2 ,238,583, a decrease in cost of $102 ,632 from the budgeted amount of $2,341 ,215.
Due to a significant reduction in Salaries & Benefits, the actual un-reimbursed cost is
estimated to be $1 ,293,511 or $152,731 less than the budgeted cost of $1 ,446,242.
Of the decreased cost, approximately $86,000 is from Salaries & Benefit savings and
$15,472 from Services & Supplies. Our Salary savings is mainly the result of unfilled positions. An Internal Auditor position approved for our department was never filled in
FY 11/12. The Finance Director also resigned in the fall and the position was not filled
until January. Revenues are estimated to be $50,000 over budget as a result of higher
than expected Property Tax Administration Fee allocations.
For FY 2012-13, the Department of Finance is requesting a budget with a total cost of
$2,395,971, revenue of $918,400 and an unreimbursed cost of $1,477,571. This is up
from the FY 2011-12 requested budget by approximately $31,329. Salaries and
Benefits are requested to increase by $12,975 due to our department being fully
staffed as well as some internal reclassifications.
Total Services and Supplies are requested at $353,964, down $21,000 from last year's
adopted amount. Information Technology Services charges are expected to increase
while Records, Postage, & Printing costs are budgeted to decrease as a result of a
new billing structure implemented by Information Technology. The allocation for Bank
Charges is being increased by $15,000 since the Treasury is planning on investing
more funds while leaving less in our bank accounts which results in higher bank costs.
Department Revenue is expected to increase by $23,427 over the FY 11/12 budget.
This is reflected in three major areas; projected decreases to the Supplemental
Property Tax line from $30,000 to $10,000 due to a high number of taxpayer refunds,
an increase in Property Tax Administration fees from $225,000 to $290,000 and a
$20,000 decrease in Tax Collector Fees.
Conduct negotiations with the General Bargaining unit, the Deputy Sheriffs
Association and the Prosecutor's Association for successor agreements this
fiscal year. Continue discussions on various issues that arise throughout the
year that are mandatory subjects of bargaining.
2. Work with Administration and the departments to plan possible workforce
reductions and potential layoffs, if needed. This requires meeting and
conferring with the unions regarding the impacts of layoffs and working
aggressively with individual employees to avoid layoffs by placing them in
vacant alternative positions within the County or assisting with other job
placement resources.
Conduct reorganization , classification and compensation reviews, as needed, to
accurately reflect the changing needs of the departments and to increase the
efficiency of County government.
4. Continue mandated AB 1825 bi-annual training on sexual harassment
prevention as well as a re-fresher course for all County employees. Perform
additional training to County supervisors and staff on updated FMLA policies
and other areas of interest to department staff.
5. Continue to review, update and re-publish the County Personnel Rules and
Policies.
6. Update the County's pre-employment physical standards in cooperation with the
County Health Officer. These changes will be reviewed with the impacted
unions prior to being brought to the Board for approval.
7. Implement a new automated time and attendance system that would replace
the current hard copy form completed by County staff which is expected to be
significantly more efficient in the collection and tracking of this information. It is
currently a very time intensive task for both department payroll staff as well as
the Finance Department.
DISCUSSION:
The Department's current budget reflects the loss a Personnel Analyst and Personnel
Assistant over the past two years which represents a 25% reduction in staffing (from 8
to 6 staff). Recruitment activity is up significantly due to AB 1 09 related hiring, and
other areas of workload have also increased, which impacts our ability to be responsive
to departments. To deal with this staffing reduction, staff continues to prioritize
workload in order to respond to the most critical and statutorily required functions such
as harassment and discrimination reports, employer relations activities, disciplinary
matters and ADA interactive process meetings. Recruitments and classification and
pay activity, while important to departments, may be delayed based on staff availability.
While the Human Resources staff is proud of providing outstanding customer service,
these reductions will unfortunately continue to impact service levels at various points in
the year.
New Permanent Personnel Assistant I - .50 FTE
In recognition of the increased workload resulting from the AB 109 hiring which will
continue into next fiscal year, a .50 Personnel Assistant I is requested at a cost of
$28,143 which is proposed to be offset by AB 109 State revenue. This assistance is
needed to free up the Personnel Technicians who do the bulk of the payroll and
recruitment workload and are also responsible for covering the front desk which only
has one staff person. With over 50 new employees hired in this fiscal year due to AB
109, this also adds a layer of overall ongoing support provided to all employees as well
which is provided by the Personnel Analysts such as training, leave tracking and
processing, classification and pay analysis, evaluation and discipline assistance to departments, etc. Having already lost one of three Personnel Analysts, our capacity to
absorb additional workload is severely strained.
During FY 2011-12, Extra Help was budgeted in the amount of $68,652 for clerical
support for the AB 109 workload but due to the limitation on total hours that can be
worked , two different individuals have been utilized. This is not efficient as the training
time is significant and the level of work that can be assigned is therefore impacted.
This funding has been deleted and substituted with the cost for a permanent half-time
position and the AB 109 anticipated revenue was adjusted accordingly. Staff will
continue to time study their work on this program to document use of the AB 1 09
revenue to validate the $28,143 in cost requested .
The industry standard for Human Resources staffing as a ratio to number of employees
supported is typically 1:100. With almost 1300 County employees, there should
arguably be 13 staff in the Human Resources Department to adequately ensure
compliance with various labor laws and statutory requirements as well as all other core
services. With less than half that level of staff support, services to both departments
and the public are obviously impacted.
Fixed Assets/Services and Supplies
No fixed assets are requested in recognition of the fiscal constraints faced by the
County. Additional modifications have been made to various services and supplies
accounts to reflect our most recent expenditure experience primarily driven by the costs
of the increased recruitment activity. Notable changes in this budget category include
an increase of $24,7 42 for Contract Labor Relations related to three contacts up for
renegotiation this Fall, and $6,000 in training which is offset by reimbursement from
County departments and outside agencies which purchase our services.
Conclusion
Overall, the requested budget totals $821 ,344, or $50,943 over last year's budget which
is a result of projected cost increases due to negotiations (Contract Employee Relations
up $37,665 from the FY 11/12 Adopted Budget) and a decrease in the amount of State
Aid - Public Safety Realignment revenues (was $68,652 in the FY 11/12 Adopted
Budget, but only $28,143 in the FY 12/13 budget, which equals the half time Personnel
Assistant I position).
The Budget for Insurance for FY 2012-13 is $1 ,054,802, an increase of $154,683 over
FY 2011-2012.
1. Blanket Bond covers employees' faithful performance and honesty. All
employees, including elected officials, are covered to $10,000,000. The
premium for 2012-2013 is $7,150.
2. Medical Malpractice insurance provides coordinated coverage with our general
liability policy to provide additional protection for services performed in County
facilities by County staff and outside contractors. The insurance is provided
through the CSAC Excess Insurance Authority and the premium for 2012-2013
is estimated to be $17,000, an increase of $3,000 from the 2011-2012 Adopted
Budget.
3. General Liability excess insurance provides coverage to $15,000,000 for
personal injury or property damage caused by the County. The County selfinsures
the first $500,000 of any accident resulting in a damage award against
the County. The excess insurance is provided through the CSAC Excess
Insurance Authority. The cost of the program and the overall dollars necessary
to pay claims and fund reserves have increased from $814,589 to $1 ,254,139,
or an increase of $439,550.
4. Fire and Property Insurance provides protection for County owned buildings and
contents. The insurance is provided through the CSAC Excess Insurance
Authority and the premium for 2012-2013 is estimated at $84,191. This amount includes coverage on the County's heavy equipment fleet including fire
apparatus. Heavy equipment and fire trucks will be insured for their replacement
value after a $10,000 deductible. This program also includes Sabotage &
Terrorism coverage, as well as Boiler & Machinery coverage.
5. Pollution Liability Insurance is for a three year term starting in 2012-2013 through
FY 2014-15, in the amount of $24,518.
6. Aircraft Liability Insurance provides protection to the County when the
helicopters are fighting fires. The State of California pays the County 10% when
the helicopters are engaged in fighting fires. The projected revenue is expected
to more than offset the cost of the aircraft liability insurance which is $11,000 for
2012-2013.
7. Fiduciary Insurance - provides protection to the Members of the Deferred
Compensation Oversight Committee. This premium of $11,200 is paid for out of
the Human Resources Budget.
8. Cost Applied figures are those costs associated with insurance on leased
facilities not included in Countywide Cost Allocation Charges.
$954,139 is budgeted for liability claims administration and claims expense. These
moneys are transferred to Budget Unit 867000, Fund 2800, out of which all
expenditures are tracked.
This Budget reflects a summary of the Employee Benefit costs as reflected in each
department budget. Requested Expenditures for 2012-2013 total $21 ,270,892, an
increase of $977,117 from the 2011-2012 Adopted budget. The increase is due to
the additional staff added related to the Public Safety Realignment. The
departments' requested budget includes all employer costs associated with those
requests.
This Budget is for display purposes and is zeroed out by cost applying these
charges to individual departmental budgets.
Cost per permanent employee is estimated at $100 per person. Costs are included
in each individual department budget and displaced in this budget unit to show the
overall cost of this insurance. The projected costs for FY 2012-2013 are $221,000.
The Department Head hopes to have a contract to build a replacement system for the
existing integrated property tax system. The twenty year old plus tax system currently
used is approaching a day of complete obsolescence or at the very least becomes
more costly and inefficient as technology and support change.
An ongoing evaluation of products and services purchased by the department will
continue to be done in an effort to provide the most value to the taxpayers as well.
DISCUSSION:
The Assessor-Clerk-Recorder budget is projected to increase by 42%. The significant
increase is primarily due to the additional costs of the Elections Office. A new ballot
tabulating system that is estimated to cost approximately $1,000,000 is being
requested. The machines acquired more than five years ago, under the Help America
Vote Act, were decertified by the California Secretary of State shortly after
implementation. Replacing it has been the Department's objective but certification for
a comparable system has not been accomplished during the last few years. The requested units are in their final stages of approval. The Elections Office budget
specifically is estimated to increase by 72% as a result.
The budget for the Assessors Office is projected to increase by 8%, primarily because
of the reduction in revenue associated with property values.
The Clerk-Recorders income is projected to continue to cover the total cost of their
office. Two projects are planned for the Office. The first is now underway which
involves the conversion of documents from the microfilm medium to a computer
storage medium at a cost of up to $100,000. The second is an upgrade of the broader
computer storage system to be compatible with the future Assessor's Property Tax
system. This phase is expected to cost approximately $300,000. The funds for both
projects will come from the Department's Record Modernization Trust accounts.
Per the Mitigation Agreement with the Santa Rosa Rancheria, the County anticipates
receiving a total of $900,000 in revenue in this budget unit. Although the Mitigation
Agreement allows for any receipt of these funds to be an offset against the $900,000
payment from the Tribe, none is reflected here as they are currently unallocated at the
State.
As was the case in FY 10/11 and FY 11/12:
 $700,000 is proposed to be utilized by the Fire Fund in FY 12/13, going toward
operating costs at the South Lemoore Station, on the ladder truck purchased
by the Tribe and located at the Houston Avenue Station, and for service and
supply purchases.
 $200,000 is proposed to be utilized by the Sheriff's Department for the staffing
of deputy sheriff positions.
The proposed 2012-13 budget includes General Fund contributions (Other Charges) to
Building Maintenance in the amount of $3,200,780, the County Engineer (Surveyor)
budget, whose title by State law is Surveyor, receives $157,722. The former Williamson
Act funds that come into General County Revenues State Aid - Land Conservation are
transferred out to the Capital Building Projects through this budget in the line item titled
Contribution to ACO Fund and the Cost Applied of $600,000 is the amount of Building
Maintenance costs that can be charged out to other funds or departments, thereby
reducing the net cost to the County.
The requests in this budget reflect the Board's policy as stated in the program
description. All requests received are listed for consideration of the Board. The Board
may add to or delete any item during budget deliberations. Only those items which
were adopted in the prior fiscal year are included as expenses in the requested
budget.
Each request received is reflected below:
Industrial Promotion: $53,000 is requested for the County share of the cost for Kings
County Economic Development Corporation which seeks to encourage business and
industrial development in the County. The County and cities share in the total cost for
the Economic Development Corporation on a population basis.
Homecoming Parade: $2,000 is requested for the Kings County Homecoming Parade
and related events for FY 2012/2013.
In Home Support Services Public Authority (IHSS PA): $65,443 is requested for FY
2012/2013 which, when combined with the $41,583 contributed from the Kings County
Human Services Agency equals 17.5% of totaiiHSS PA budget, a sum that is required
by the State to be paid by the County to support the IHSS PA using County General
Fund dollars.
To maintain accreditation of the Veterans Services Office and Public Guardian
staff, as required by both State and Federal regulations. This includes the
initial accreditation of a new Veterans Service Representative.
2. To continue to provide services to veterans and their dependents in a timely
manner.
3. To expand outreach efforts to include community colleges, senior centers,
Family Resource Centers, and senior housing developments.
4. To continue oversight and support of the Kings County Military and Veterans
Coalition.
In this budget this department is projecting a slight increase in both Probate and LPS
Conservatorships. The department is also projecting an increase in Representative
Payee clients. This projection is consistent with the past several years of data.
Revenue generated from court approved fees will continue to decline this year. LPS
clients, for the most part, have fewer assets available to collect fees from than the
typical Probate client.
For FY 12/13, th is department will receive through the Behavioral Health Administration
the amount of $170,000, the same as the previous year. This revenue will fund LPS
lnvestigations/Conservatorships, and Representative Payee services for Behavioral
Health consumers identified through the County's Behavioral Health Plan. The
Behavioral Health Administration continues to fund a full time Public Guardian
Technician for additional Representative Payee services. As Mental Health Services
Act funding continues to be reduced , the department continues to work very closely with
Kings View and the Behavioral Health Administration to identify those conservatorship
clients that are ready to be moved to a lower, less expensive, level of care. The
Behavioral Health Administration also partially funds one Veterans Service
Representative position.
This department is projecting a decrease in California Department of Veterans Affairs
Subvention Funds th is year, due to a decrease in auditable claims processed. The
department continues its outreach efforts, with the average wait time for an
appointment at 2-4 weeks. This is a decrease in wait time from the previous year due
primarily to the accreditation of one new Veterans Service Representative.
During FY 10/11 , the total amount of VA Compensation and Pension benefits paid to
Kings County veterans and their families was over $44 million dollars. This is a tremendous increase over the $18 million paid in FY 05/06. This increase is due to
the outreach effects conducted by this department.
This department conducts speaking engagements at local retirement homes, colleges,
activity fairs, hospitals, service organizations, prisons, etc. A representative from the
office serves as the Service Officer for many of the Veterans Service Organizations in
the county. The department continues to support the Kings County Military and
Veterans Coalition, whose main purpose is to distribute information of interest to our
military and veterans community. As part of this effort the information email
distribution list currently has over 1900 signed up. The office is also responsible for
updating and maintaining the Kings County Freedom Memorial. The office also has a
major support role for the Kings County Veterans Employment Committee.
By working with the California Department of Veterans Affairs, this department
identifies recently released county veterans and is sending "Welcome Home" letters to
each. These letters discuss the many services the office provides, and invites the
veteran and their family to come in and discuss benefits they have earned. The
department continues to use "Veterans Corner" newspaper articles and numerous
speaking engagements to reach out to county veterans. The office also receives
Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) information on all drivers license applicants who
identify themselves as veterans.
Working with veterans and their families involves sensitive and complex issues that
are often very personal in nature such as those related to combat or sexual trauma.
The clients represent all ages, ethnic and socio-economic backgrounds. The staff
requires "Geriatric" awareness of specific issues such as dementia, Alzheimer's,
stroke and profound hearing loss. The office endeavors to be alert, sensitive,
respectful and compassionate to the needs and concerns of the clients.
The Veterans Service Office significantly impacts the lives of veterans and their
families in Kings County. In addition to benefit claims, the many other programs that
th is office assists clients with such as VA and Department of Defense (DOD)
TRICARE medical care access, VA and CAL VET home loans, burial benefits, survivor
benefits, and education benefits all contribute to the cost-effectiveness of this
department.
The budget for the Law Library includes the following changes from last fiscal year: an
increase of $1,794 for salaries and benefits; an increase of $788 for IT costs; a
decrease of $1000 for office expense because the copy machine lease is paid off, and
a decrease of $5000 for Books & Periodicals, due to having to cancel three print
subscriptions.
Based on the trend for the past 8 months, filing fee revenue is expected to decrease by
approximately 15% over the course of Fiscal year 2012/2013. Interest revenue
decreased by $200 due to the interest rates and deposits being lower, and is expected
to stay low, and copy machine revenue is estimated to remain the same. At this writing,
civil filing figures are only available for January and February of 2012, so 12 months of
2011 were compared to 12 months of 2010. Mindful of the current economy, expected
filing fee revenue is based on a 15% decrease in the amount of filing fees paid during
FY 2011/2012 compared to FY 2010/2011 .The amount of fees paid has decreased due
to more litigants qualifying for filing fee waivers, not necessarily because of fewer
filings.
As of March 2012, use of the Law Library by non-attorney patrons has increased by
13% over 2011. Total number of non-attorney patrons for period 07/11 to 03/12 was
1036. Total number of patrons, including attorneys, for period 07/11 to 03/12 is 1161.
The objective of the District Attorney's Office is to protect the people in our
community through the effective and efficient administration of criminal justice
and to redress the harm done to the victims of crime.
DISCUSSION:
The following quote from the preamble of the California District Attorneys
Association (CDAA) publication, Prosecutors' Analysis of the 2011 Criminal
Justice Realignment, summarizes the problems our office will be facing for the
foreseeable future.
California stands at the precipice of the biggest challenge to public
safety in generations. Criminal justice realignment, as embodied in AB
109 and related legislation, will dramatically change California's current
judicial and correctional systems. The new felony sentencing structure
will be radically different. Specified felons will now serve their custody
in county jails or in alternative programs instead of prison. Many
inmates released from state prison will be supervised by local
probation officers instead of state parole agents. Available custody
sanctions for many offenses and parole violations will be markedly
reduced under this comprehensive reform. And local law enforcement
will be tasked with developing and implementing new programs to
reduce recidivism rates and protect public safety. While the focus on
rehabilitation instead of incarceration has enjoyed mixed results in the
past, it has never been used on the scale envisioned in current
Realignment. This experiment in criminal justice policy poses a huge
challenge for prosecutors and a significant risk of increased crime
rates throughout California.
Referrals from the law enforcement agencies and case filings during FY 11/12
approximated FY 09/10 and FY 10/11 levels. We have regained the two
prosecutor positions which were previously frozen and have been approved and
funded for a new position with AB109 funds.
However the expected impact of Realignment (AB109) will be an increase in
filing in the area of economic crimes and drug crimes. The Legislature has
amended almost 500 criminal statutes, including some of the most serious drug charges, to require sentencing pursuant to section 1170(h), absent particular
disqualifiers. Drug and economic crimes are among the most numerous crimes
where sentencing under new Penal Code, section 1170(h) and anticipated jail
crowding will result in shorter sentences for all of these criminal offenders.
These changes, along with more generous time credits are introduced at a time
when nationally, small rural communities are overwhelmed with
methamphetamine use and when violent crime is dramatically increasing.
Increasing despite the prior change in focus from punishment to treatment
wrought by proposition 36. When the focus is on how drugs affect the meth
addict rather than how the meth hurts the innocent - children, spouses and
citizens who are the victims of the increasing crime caused by methamphetamine
and when long sentences on serious crimes are to be served in county jail,
resulting in overcrowding, it is not unreasonable to expect early releases of
inmates resulting in an even greater increase in economic and drug crimes.
We have just begun to notice the effects of Realignment. For example, in 2011
the CHP arrested a defendant on Interstate 5 in Kings County who was
transporting 230 pounds of cocaine. He faces a sentence of 34 years. Under
AB1 09 whatever sentence he receives he will serve in county jail. Again, for
example, our prosecutors have already experienced the situation where a
sentenced felon wearing and ankle transmitter on "Home Detention" appears
before the Court and is once again "sentenced" under the new law.
In summary we must agree with the assessment of CDAA that, "This experiment
in criminal justice policy (Realignment) poses a huge challenge for prosecutors
and a significant risk of increased crime rates throughout California ." Given this
existing framework and the significant risk of an increased volume of cases, we
believe emphasis on the most violent crimes and the most violent offenders with
a dedicated violent crime unit to be increasingly important in FY 2012/2013.
1. Identify and begin implementation of a new and current Public Safety Software
system.
2. Pro-actively hire and maintain full staffing levels in all allocated positions, to
include unfreezing four Deputy Sheriff Patrol positions.
3. Continue to identify possible solutions for jail overcrowding.
4. Continue to utilize Reserves and "extra help" staff to reduce overtime
expenditures.
5. Continue to work on the analog radio system and convert to the Fire
Department's vacant UHF channel for improved radio communications
throughout the county.
6. Proactive find local training opportunities including hosting training sessions when
possible and working with COS Public Safety division to identify which training
classes will be most valuable to KCSO, including hosting Detentions Core
Academy training opportunities.
7. Continue meeting time-lines associated with phase II of AB900 schedule for buildout
of 252 new jail beds.
8. Begin construction of new morgue.
9. Continue efforts towards ground-breaking of court transfer tunnel.
Narcotics Task Force
1. Significantly diminish the availability and use of illegal drugs in Kings County by
aggressively pursuing and prosecuting those involved in illegal narcotics.
2. Provide a safe and drug free environment for the citizens of Kings County and
the State of California.
Rural Crimes
1. Continue to provide responsive services and develop a strong working
partnership with the farming community.
2. Educate farmers and Sheriff's Office personnel to current trends and methods of
Ag related thefts, and emphasizing the importance of marking their equipment for
the purposes of recovery and tracking.
3. Aggressively investigate, recover, and return stolen property to its owners.
Prosecute those involved in Ag Crime activity.
Detentions
1. Continue to aggressively recruit and hire custodial personnel to remain fully
staffed and compliant with Title 24 of the U.S. Government code governing
custodial facilities.
2. Continue to look at addressing overcrowding issues.
3. Identify possible alternative shifts to diminish the amount of sick leave utilized
and maximize the efficiency of the jail staffing.
Kitchen
1. Continue to meet all regulations in the preparation of all meals to both adult and
juvenile inmates.
2. Implement food services at the new Juvenile Academy.
Animal Control
1. Update County Animal Codes.
2. Continue to implement new policy and procedure manual.
3. Hire new Outreach Coordinator to implement new volunteer and adoption
programs.
4. Continue records keeping upgrades through the Chameleon software.
5. Continue to enhance training for employees.
DISCUSSION:
The bottom line has decreased since 2008-2009, from an actual unreimbursed cost of
$18.5 million to a requested $15.4 million, however this is an increase of $1 .3 million
from 2011-2012. This overall increase is summarized by expenditure and revenue
categories as follows:
Salaries and Benefits are up from $8.9 million to $18.7 million since 2008-2009. This
increase is associated with an increase in staffing levels throughout the Sheriff's Office and the overall increase in benefit costs between the 5 year time span. Staffing level
increases are directly tied to AB 109 changes implemented by the State in 2011 .
Service and supplies and Other Charges combined are up $9 million and are associated
with an increase in Clothing and Personal Supplies, Uniform Allowance, Data
Processing costs, Medical Services for the jails, maintenance of jail facilities, Motor
Pool, and Utility costs. These costs are affected by the uniform allowance negotiations,
the increase in the number of computers, the number of vehicles, and the increase in
the price for energy and fuel as well as the impacts of AB1 09.
Costs applied increased by $2.3 million during this time span and can primarily be
attributed to a new budget unit created for the purpose of tracking AB109 costs in the
Sheriff's Office along with the Jail Kitchen unit, whose costs are allocated out 100%
between the adult and juvenile detention facilities.
Revenues have increased by an anticipated $9.45 million from FY 2008-2009. While the
Sheriff's Office did see a loss in Animal Services contracts that resulted in a loss of
revenue from last fiscal year, there was a corresponding reduction in expenses, creating
an overall minimal effect to the budget. Once again the changes implemented by the
State with AB109 have changed the overall revenue numbers coming into the Sheriff's
Office, significantly increasing revenues, but also increasing costs.
Effectively use the funds provided through AB1 09 to provide alternatives
to incarceration.
2. Bring back the Juvenile Work Program through the use of funds through
the Youthful Offender Block Grant.
3. To work with the Courts and Sheriff's Department to begin a program of
supervision of pre-sentenced adult offenders.
Highlights for 2012-2013 are:
Juvenile Treatment Center - (233000) The 2012-2013 Requested Budget reflects
an unreimbursed cost to the General Fund of $3,869,965 (a $177,065 decrease over
the FY 2011-2012 Adopted Budget). This decrease is associated with an increase of
revenue from State-Aid Boot Camp.
Probation AB109- (233100) The Public Safety Realignment Act took effect October
1, 2011 and transfers responsibility for supervising specific low-level inmates and
parolees from the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) to
counties. This budget reflects staff additions related to the program.
Probation SB678 - (233200) This grant is funded by the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009 to implement Evidence-Based practices to reduce
recidivism.
Prop 36 - (233400) The funding for the Prop 36 budget unit is requested to be paid
by the CaiEMA Evidence-Based Probation Supervision Program grant through
September 2012, and the remainder will be funded from SB 678 Evidence based
funding.
YOBG - (233600) The FY 2012-2013 requested budget continues to improve
Probation's access to mental health treatment by partnering with Kings View Mental
Health to have a dedicated therapist for Probation referred youth. We have
contracted with Westcare to provide an additional AOD counselor, bringing the total
number of counselors to 3 during the 2011-2012 fiscal year. This budget unit is fully funded by YOBG (SB81) and requires no general fund dollars. This budget also
reflects the request for 1.0 FTE Juvenile Corrections Sergeant in order for the unit to
bring back the Work Program.
Probation - (234000) The FY 2012-2013 Probation Budget reflects the deletion of one
(1) Deputy Probation Officer due to the Central School Union District grant program
discontinuing. This budget also reflects a $130,000 increase for the $24,000/year cost
for offenders committed to the State Division of Juvenile Justice (DJJ) out of juvenile
court.
Victim Witness - (234200) The FY 2012-2013 requested budget funds staffing levels
that include one . 70 FTE Supervising Probation Officer and 1.25 FTE Victim Witness
Advocate 1/11 positions. There is no general fund cost associated with this budget unit.
JJCPA - (234800) The estimated allocation for JJCPA funding in fiscal year 2012-
2013 is $435,500. The 2012-2013 requested budget includes the elimination of 1.0
FTE Probation Aide.
Continue to provide the highest level of professional response and emergency
services to our communities.
 Develop a staffing plan that eliminates single person stations and provides for at
least two (2) firefighters in each apparatus.
 Continue to expand the Wellness and Fitness Program and continue the downward
trend of illnesses and injuries to department personnel.
 Continue to seek funding and opportunities to update the Fire Fleet and reduce the
age of the department's apparatus.
Actively pursue alternative/grant funding for department equipment needs (e.g.
Federal Fire Act grant, State Domestic Preparedness and Equipment Program, and
other Federal Homeland Security grants).
 Continue to seek opportunities and partnerships in order to improve and expand
operational/training capabilities.
 To continue to work with the Santa Rosa Rancheria/ Tachi Palace Hotel and Casino
administration to address personnel, equipment, and apparatus needs that will
improve and/or enhance fire and life safety on tribal lands.
 Encourage and promote employee development and through enhanced training
programs, new training, and formal education opportunities. Establish and support
a succession training program to facilitate building future department managers
and leaders
 Continue to improve/enhance our current effective public education programs that
address fire and life safety.
 Continue to improve/enhance the Fire Department Firefighting Helicopter Program.
 Continue to work with the Central Planning Area to secure funding and resources
to improve lnteroperability Communications for the Operational Area, Region and
State.
To continue to participate in State training, meetings and workshops in order to
expand skill level and to advise other agencies and the community of important
issues.
 To continue to offer presentations and training to other departments and agencies in
SEMS, NIMS, RIMS, EOC/DOC operations, disaster preparedness and other
important issues.
 To conduct additional tabletop exercises to determine skill level and additional
training needed for key personnel in the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) or
Department Operations Center (DOC).
 To continue to work toward restructuring the Operational Area Advisory Committee
in order to better serve the Operational Area.
 To continue to support the operational area during times of emergency.
Overtime remains a huge concern for the Fire Department due to staffing shortages as
a result of vacation, sick leave, or Workman's Compensation issues. Currently, there is
insufficient relief staff available to cover the daily staffing shortages due to these
factors. This has occurred in the previous years, resulting in as many as five people
working unscheduled overtime to fill those vacant positions. Each year, these staffing
shortages continue negatively impact the department's available overtime budget.
Additionally, four (4) of the department's ten (10) fire stations continue to be staffed by
a single person. This diminished level of staffing continues to hamper the effectiveness
of emergency service operations and contributes to the number of potential injuries to
our personnel.
Although the Volunteer Firefighters do an outstanding job responding to incidents and
assisting in fire department operations, the amount of trained and qualified volunteers
has continue to decrease each year. This is a national trend that continues to be
supported by data and has caused alarm within the emergency services community.
The department will continue to work with County Administration to search for revenue
in order to add additional staffing, both paid and volunteer, eliminate the single person
fire stations, and provide for a minimum of two (2) personnel on each apparatus.The age of our fire apparatus has and continues to be an urgent issue that needs to be
addressed. As the age of the fleet increases, maintenance costs increase and
replacement parts availability becomes a critical issue. Each year rising costs of
materials, as well as changing federal mandates, have increased replacement costs by
many thousands of dollars. Even with the current and previous year's apparatus
purchases, the fleet continues to experience high levels of repairs and has no ability to
maintain adequate protection against mechanical failure and unavailability of the
apparatus. The development of a staffing plan that minimizes the number of
responding units by increasing staffing on an individual apparatus will aid in possibility
reducing costs, however a replacement schedule must be maintained in future budget
cycles to avoid any further critical shortages of emergency apparatus.
The condition of facilities must also be addressed in the upcoming budgets by
development of replacement and maintenance schedules in order to adequately
maintain the stations. Many of our stations are 30-40 years old and continue to need
costly updates and repairs. Items such as fixtures, windows, and garage doors will
need to be replaced due to costly service issues and parts availability. Department
personnel continue to inspect, repair, and make improvement to the facilities, however
large scale maintenance issues will need to be completed by qualified contractors and
alleviate the impact to shift personnel and their duties.
The Office of Emergency Management (OEM) continues to struggle with meeting the
Federal and State program requirements without full time positions allocated. Due to
the change in professional development and grant requirements, the promotion of full
time positions to OEM is imperative. Developing, and delivering training to the County's
managers, in order to ensure emergency preparedness, is a primary goal of OEM. This
coupled with the twelve (12) professional development classes and exercise
involvement, makes the workload unrealistic for part time Emergency Services
Manager.
Pest Detection - Surveillance for pests and diseases not known to occur
within Kings County or be established in the State by performing detection
trapping consistent with state and federal standards. Provide pest
identification services for the public. The Asian Citrus Psyllid (ACP) and the
European Grape Vine Moth (EGVM) are two serious insect pests recently
added to our detection trapping program.
2. Pest Eradication - Prevent the establishment and spread of high priority pests
in accordance with USDA and California regulations. The Pink Bollworm
Cotton Plowdown Program is one of our Eradication programs.
3. Pest Management - To assist in the mandated control of recognized economic
pests of agriculture, pests affecting the public health, and those causing
environmental harm; to enable the reduction of agricultural losses through
grower enabled control programs; and provide specific control materials, at
cost, and technical advice as needed.
4. Pest Exclusion - Provides protection and promotion of Kings County
agriculture, pursuant to Federal, State and County regulations through the
inspection of incoming and outgoing shipments for quarantine compliance,
especially in high-risk environments or market pathways, therefore promoting
the high quality and cleanliness of Kings County export commodities.
5. Pesticide Use Enforcement- To assure the appropriate use of all pesticides;
to protect the public and the environment, while assuring safety of working
conditions for pesticide handlers and agricultural workers.
6. Seed Law Enforcement- To assure the quality of seed and that it is properly
labeled as to its contents, treatment, and viability.
a. Seed Certification - Working with the California Crop Improvement
Association certification program to verify the purity and quality of seed
grown in Kings County.
7. Nursery Inspection - To ensure the production and sale of commercially
clean, pest-free, true-to-variety, vigorous and healthy nursery stock.
8. Fruit and Vegetable Quality Control - Protects the consumer, producer, and
shipper, through inspection programs for compliance with standards of the
California Food and Agricultural Code, federal regulations, marketing orders,
and other related enforcement activities; thus promoting the local Fruit and
Vegetable industry.
9. Egg Quality Control - Inspect and certify eggs as required by the California
Food and Agricultural Code and the USDA.
10. Apiary Inspection - Maintain the identification of bee locations in the County
for the purpose of notification of pending pesticide applications and provide
colony strength and health certification inspections services upon request.
11 . Crop Statistics - Maintain current and reliable agricultural production statistics,
as required by the California Food and Agricultural Code and the USDA.
Prepare and present an annual County crop report. Monitor and collect crop
disaster/loss statistics and report significant findings to CDFA, the USDA, and
the County Board of Supervisors.
12. Vertebrate Pest Control - Maintain a level of control sufficient to ensure the
protection of the health and safety of the public, food safety, crops, livestock,
and the environment from the detrimental impacts of physical damage or
diseases caused by such pests. The Department's rodent bait mixing program
is a resource used locally in addition to providing sales to numerous other
county programs around the state.
13. Emergency Animal Disposal - Provide guidance to efficiently and effectively
protect the health of the public, and the environment, while ensuring the
sustainability of the livestock industry through the use of safe and efficient
means of dead animal carcass disposal during times of emergency.
Service Agencies - Verify licensing and inspection of services performed by
service agents for accuracy and integrity. Proctor State licensing exams for
local persons seeking a service agent or agency license, issued by the State.
2. Device Inspection - Assures equitable protection to all persons in the sale of
commodities (weighed, measured or counted) through enforcement of
prescribed device standards and specifications.
3. Quantity Control - Assures consumer protection against deception or
misrepresentation as to the quantity of products in package form, through
testing and undercover purchase programs; test purchases are made to
discern the accuracy of advertised price computations; investigations of all
consumer complaints relative to transactions utilizing units of weights and/or
measures.
4. Weighmaster Enforcement - Assures that all licensed weighmasters are
performing in accordance with established state laws and regulations.
5. Petroleum Enforcement - Provides assurance that petroleum products offered
for sale in Kings County meet Federal and State quality specifications while
ensuring sale conditions are accurately and lawfully conducted.
The Department of Agriculture [Department] projects the unreimbursed cost to the
County General Fund, in the current 2011-12 Fiscal Year (FY) to be $141,053 less
than was adopted, an estimated 22% savings. The cost savings projection is based
on revenue received and expected to be received by 2011-12 FY end coupled with
Salaries and Benefits expense reductions. Revenue for the current FY, 2011-12, is
projected to be $1,741,477 representing a $174,812 increase.
The Department requests an increase in total expenditure of $151,240 (6.86%)
more than was adopted in the current FY budget. The requested $2,355,428
expenditure represents a $45, 598 (2 .7%) increase in Salaries and Benefits and a
$105,642 (20%) increase in Services and Supplies. Significant factors contributing
to the expenditure increase in Salaries and Benefits are an 8.37% increase in
Health Insurance and a 3.1% increase in Regular Employees line items offset by
an -4 .6% decrease in Retirement costs. In the Services and Supplies category
Motor Pool (14%), Utilities (17.5%), Communications (30.36%), and Ag Services &
Supplies (30%) are the most significant contributors to increases in Services and
Supplies. Due to recent experience with demand for rodenticide materials, the
department is requesting to increase the line item by $75,000.
The department requests revenues for FY 2012-13 to be a total of $1,703,638
which is 8.7% or $136,973 more than the 2011-12 Adopted Budget. The requested
total revenues reflect receipt of an additional $75,000 from Other Sales to
correspond with the $75,000 requested increase in Ag Services & Supplies
expenditure and are also based on known funding agreements from federal and
state sources at the time of this Requested Budget submittal. State and federal
sources represent 61.8% of all revenues requested for FY 2012-13.
The Agriculture Department requests the Unreimbursed Net Cost to the county's
General Fund be $651,790. This Requested Budget represents an increased net
expenditure of $14,267 (2.2%) from the 2011-12 FY adopted budget.
1. Insure that the Building Official, a Building Inspector, or the Permit Technician is
available one-hundred percent of the time for office consultation with builders on
construction requirements, provide for responsive plan check turn-a-round, issue
building permits, and to keep up with the latest technology in the building
industry.
2. Provide monthly, quarterly, and fiscal year building activity reports for the
unincorporated area of Kings County.
3. Provide inspection services the next workday after the request for inspection is
received or the closest date and time available.
4. Carry out the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
5. Carry out the Water Well Ordinance.
6. Abate dangerous buildings.
7. Conduct Code Compliance programs including, but not limited to: vehicle
abatement, nuisance abatement, building compliance, and zoning compliance,
8. Insure that support staff is available to receive alleged code violations in the
office or over the phone during regular business hours.
9. Maintain and track active violation cases.
10. Provide monthly, quarterly, and fiscal year activity reports for the unincorporated
area of Kings County concerning resolutions of code violation cases and vehicle
and building abatements.
11 . Provide initial investigation services generally five days a week, however
depending on the threat to the public health and safety and the workload of the
Building Official it may take a few days for the initial investigation after a
complaint is received.
12. Carry out the Abandoned Vehicle Abatement Program.
13. Provide vehicle and building abatement to address health and safety issues.
14. Ensure new development meets the provisions of the Accessibility Standards
Compliance Act (SB 1608, Chapter 549 of the Statutes of 2008) and government
Code Section 4459.5, by retaining a Certified Access Specialist (CASp).
15. Ensure compliance with the California Code of Regulations Title 24 as adopted
January 1, 2011 .
1. Continue the implementation of the Kings County Subdivision Ordinance.
Ensure that both divisions of the Advisory Agency for Parcel Maps and
Subdivision complete action on tentative maps within 50 days of the application
being certified complete, or completion of the environmental review. This review
period includes a required 20-day public review period for comments on
proposed negative/mitigated negative declarations. Continue the implementation
of streamlined procedures for administrative processing of lot line adjustments,
parcel map waivers, and certain minor divisions of land.
2. Ensure Planning Commission completes action on conditional use permit
applications within two (2) months of the application being certified complete, or
completion of the environmental review.
3. Process applications for site plan reviews within three (3) weeks of application
being certified complete.
4. Conduct environmental reviews for all projects within required time intervals:
within 105 days after submittal of a complete application with approved
negative/mitigated negative declarations or within one year when an
environmental impact report (EIR) is required . This includes the requirement for
a 20-day public review (30 days for state agencies comments) for proposed
negative declarations.
5. Carry out grant application and management tasks assigned by the Board, for
the following programs: Community Development Block Grant (CDBG); HOME;
BEGIN, and CaiHome.
6. Manage the National Flood Insurance Program, Local Flood Plain Management
Program through building and zoning permit reviews and environmental review
processes.
7. Carry out the policies of the Kings County Hazardous Waste Management Plan
through zoning permit review and environmental assessment process.
8. Implement the Kings County General Plan in coordination with the cities and
unincorporated communities in Kings County.
9. Continue the Zoning Ordinance Updates to bring it into compliance with the 2035
Kings County General Plan.
10. Implement all of the elements of the General Plan.
BUDGET UNIT 270000-279000
11 . Develop and implement an unincorporated communities and agricultural
economy sustainability program that leverages the new enterprise zone and
other underutilized infill properties and economic development resources.
12. Implement the mandated Integrated Waste Management Plan, 0WMP) through
zoning permit review and environmental assessment process.
13. Continue the Countywide Regional implementation of the GIS system, and
automate the General Plan and Zoning maps, continue implementation of the
GIS System into the general plan, zoning, land division, and environmental
assessment procedures, and provide GIS information to the Board and
Commissions, other departments and agencies, and the public where and when
appropriate.
14. Implement and maintain the County's GIS web application to provide increased
accessibility to planning information, and support Kings EDC, Kings County
Emergency Services and First Responding Agencies, and other County
Departments.
15. Provide GIS Services to the City of Avenal, City of Hanford, and other Cities or
Districts that contract with the County for such services.
16. Coordinate effort to produce a new countywide aerial image for the GIS and
other computer applications.
17. Provide staff and administrative services for the Building Division (Budget Unit
279000) and LAFCO of Kings County (Budget Unit 280000).
18. Continue staff training and mentorship efforts to build and retain a strong
foundation of knowledgeable and experienced staff and decrease potential
attrition.
19. Continue to provide staff support to the Agricultural Advisory Committee and
conduct studies as necessary.
20. Continue to provide staff support to the Kings County Water Commission and
conduct research as necessary.
The Requested Budget for the Building Division for 2012-13 is $604,145 with $367,955
in revenue and $7,136 in Cost Applied Funds for services provided to the Planning
(270000) Division. This includes an un-reimbursed cost of $229,054. This is
approximately a 4.94% decrease from last year's un-reimbursed cost. The decrease in
cost for this division is due largely to decreased personnel related expenses as well as
increases in revenue due to a slight increase in development.
The Requested Budget for the Planning Division for 2012-13 is for a total of $1,150,355
down $56,046 from last year's approved budget. This includes an un-reimbursed cost
of $962,287. This is an approximate 6.92% decrease from last year's un-reimbursed
cost. Although there were many factors which would have increased the budget
including costs for increased publication charges, computer equipment leases, and
computer software updates; the overall budget is decreased mainly due to a 42.42%
decrease in the Cap Charge as well as other decreased charges for Administrative
Allocation, Communications, and KCAG Support.
Revenues are projected at $80,000, up $13,250 from 2011-12 due to the increase in
development activity. The Community Development Agency's annual dues payment to
KCAG is estimated at $7,275.
No Fixed Assets are requested.
1. Process all applications for reorganization, etc., within the prescribed time
limits.
2. Process all spheres of influence amendments for the cities, communities, and
special districts in Kings County and prepare resources for the next required
update.
3. Review and assist Cities and Districts with the preparation of detailed MSRs
for any Sphere of Influence Amendment application submitted to LAFCO to
ensure compliance with Government Code Section 56430.
4. Review and revise the County's Municipal Service Reviews and associated
Sphere of Influences.
5. Continued involvement in CALAFCO workshops and training events to keep
staff informed and knowledgeable of State Law changes and innovative
approaches to more effectively conducting LAFCO practices.
The 2012-13 Budget for LAFCO, which is proposed for adoption on May 23, 2012 ,
includes the day-to-day operations of LAFCO, including administration and
application processing activities. The General LAFCO Activities represents about
half of the overall effort in this budget.
The budget is for a total of $51,492, increased approximately $2,392 from last year's
approved budget due to increased postage and utility charges for LAFCO. There are
no additional salaries, benefits, or new staff costs in this budget. Revenues are
projected at $27,246, up $1 ,188 from the 2011-2012 Budget. This amount includes
the LAFCO Application Fees. The County's share, $24,246, up $1,204, is shown as
Unreimbursed Cost in the budget. The total budget estimate is $51,492.
The budget is funded equally between the cities and the County, except for
estimated LAFCO Fee activity projected for LAFCO application processing. The total
cost of the budget, less any revenue, is divided evenly and the Kings County
Department of Finance collects the money and accounts for it in separate accounts.
Any money remaining from the previous year's budget will be carried over and
applied to this budget. Next year's funding support will include any carryover funds,
but the amount will not be known until the books are closed for the year.
The County is the recipient of fines, fees and forfeiture and other revenues that were
previously included in the Court's budget exclusively. An agreement was reached with
the Court that established a mechanism of revenue sharing for a long list of specific
fines and fees. It is out of the proceeds of these revenues and State Trial Court realignment funds that the County makes its contribution to the State, which then
dispenses funding back to the Courts in Kings County.
In place of a Public Defender's office, Kings County contracts with independent
attorneys to represent indigent defendants. Contracts are issued to twenty
attorneys; eleven are assigned to represent felony defendants (three of those
attorneys handle prison cases), and five are assigned to represent misdemeanor
defendants, three are full-time juvenile contract defense attorneys, and there is one
misdemeanor contract conflict attorney. Also included in this budget is the contract
for the Coordinating Attorney who oversees the activites of these twenty attorneys'
between the Courts and the County.
For multiple defendant cases, or conflicts among the attorneys and/or defendants,
the Court appoints counsel from a separate list. These attorneys, generally referred
to as "conflict attorneys," are paid on an hourly basis.
 Maintain Annual Performance Indicators in the collection of current support and
collection on arrears.
 Maintain a zero net cost to the County of Kings.
 Remain in compliance.
 Provide quality customer service.
DISCUSSION:
In the requested 2012/13 budget a 1.3% budget reduction has been imposed to the
County Child Support budget. This budget cut results in a decrease of $52,337.00 to
the department's state administration budget allocation. This reduction was imposed as
a result of the overall state budget shortfall, in which the State Department of Child
Support Services program budget was reduced by 2% at the state level. The planning
allocation letter issued by the State on February 17, 2012 indicated funding of
$4, 133,667; however with the imposed budget reduction, this total was reduced to
$4,081 ,330. This amount does not include the EDP portion of the budget. The State
EDP budget was reduced from $119,301 .00 to $75,659.00 in FY 11/12. This reduction
was due to a change in personnel, in which we transitioned from housing (1) full time IT
(Information Technology) support person to utilizing the County IT help desk support
line.
Total anticipated revenue from the state is $4,156,989 contingent upon a state
approved budget. Additional revenue of $4,000 is anticipated from interest earnings
and $13,032 is anticipated from "disregard" revenues the department receives from
Human Services. If funding from the State does not come through as anticipated , or if
the method of funding is modified as a result of a pending State realignment proposal,
we will have to revise our budget request.
For FY 12/13 the Department is not requesting any fixed assets, vehicles or capital
improvements. The Department is requesting software license upgrades for Adobe
Acrobat Professional, WinZip, Dreamweaver, and Visio. Additionally the department is
requesting software maintenance renewals for Quest and Time Clock Plus for FY 12/13
-a total of $2,745.00.
On the expenditure side, the Department has requested an additional 2 FTE's for FY
12/13. The department is anticipating the need for an additional 2 FTE's to be utilized
in our call unit to assist with receiving any additional calls that we may receive as a
result of the proposed statewide call center project. It is also important to note that the
additional 2 FTE's would be supported within our current FY 12/13 budget allocation
and no additional funding would be required .
Some of the changes of note for FY 12/13 in salaries and employee benefits are as
follows:
 Extra Help-This category was reduced from 40,498.00 to zero. This reduction
was necessary based on the department's actual expenditures in this category
for FY 11/12 as well as the department's additional Personnel request for FY
12/13.
Some of the changes of note for FY 12/13 in services and supplies are as follows :
 Maintenance- Equipment- This category was decreased from 200 to zero. This
reduction is a result of having no equipment maintenance requests for the past 2
fiscal years. This category was previously utilized to support typewriter repairs
which are now obsolete.
 Rents/Leases Software- This category was reduced from 1,296.00 to zero. This
category was reduced due to the fact that CLETS software which was the only
leased software in this category is no longer utilized by the department.
 Utilities- This category was decreased from 44,000.00 to 29,000.00 to reflect the
FY 2011/2012 forecasted expenditures for this category. The 11/12 fiscal year
was a transitional year for this category as the department now occupies a new
building where most utility costs are now included in the department's triple net
fees. These triple net fees are paid as part of the department's lease agreement
and paid through the department's Rents & Leases- S.I.G. category.
 In Service Training- This category was decreased from 6,000.00 to 1 ,500.00.
In-Service Training costs for FY 12/13 are forecasted to be substantially less
than they have been in the past, based on FY 11/12 activity.
 Outreach- This category was reduced from 4,000.00 to 1 ,000.00. Outreach
costs in FY 12/13 are forecasted to be substantially less than they have been in
the past, based on FY 11/12 activity.
326000
 Communications- This category was decreased from 65,865.00 to 28,000.00 to
reflect the budget forecast for this category provided by Kings County Office of
Information Technology.
 Maintenance S.l. &G. - This category was reduced from 32,981 .00 to 16,000.00
to reflect the budget forecast for this category provided by Kings County Public
Works Department. Maintenance S.l. &G costs for FY 12/13 are forecasted to
be substantially less as a result of the department's new office space requiring
less maintenance requests.
 Information Technology- This category was reduced from 191,739.00 to
120,980.00 to reflect the budget forecast for this category provided by Kings
County Office of Information Technology. Information Technology cost for FY
12/13 are forecasted to be less due to change in both the IT pricing model as
well a change in personnel, in which the department transitioned from housing
(1) full time IT support person to utilizing the County IT help desk support line.
 Books & Periodicals- This category was increased from 250.00 to 1,000.00 to
reflect the increasing costs in this category for the department's legal publication
updates and annual subscriptions.
 Computer Software Expense -This category was increased from 186.00 to
2,745.00. This increase is due to a request for software license upgrades and
software maintenance requests for FY 12/13.
 Purchasing - This category was increased from 1,606.00 to 2,945.00 to reflect
the budget forecast for this category provided by Kings County Office of
Information Technology.
The Budget for Court Reporters is requested at $21,296. Costs include $21,296 for
Social Security & Retirement costs. Revenues of $21,296 are provided through Bail
Forfeiture funds.
The Requested and Recommended Budget have been prepared by the County
Administrative Office and reviewed with the assigned member of the Grand Jury.
Meeting reimbursement has traditionally been paid to Grand Jurors at the rate of $10
per meeting. In FY 01-02, an increase to $11 per meeting was adopted. Since FY
2002-03, the Requested Budget includes a $15/meeting day, State-mandated rate.
1. Maintain quality legal representation
2. Cooperate with Probation, Human Services and District Attorney's offices to
resolve issues whenever possible so as:
a. To better ensure the clients' best resolution to their case and/or
problems
b. To assist in judicial economy whenever possible
c. To participate and assist any organization whose purpose is to offer
services to aid in the protection of children and their family.
d. To assist in the gathering of information to provide for proper
recommendations pertaining to emotionally disturbed juveniles.
DISCUSSION:
There is continued need in the budget for psychological evaluations and an investigator
for the Minor's Advocates Department.
1. Contract for the professional services of a psychologist. Due to change in court
funding, it is necessary for the Minor's Advocates Department to provide for a
psychologist who will complete thorough psychological evaluations for juveniles
with serious emotional and mental health disorders. Such evaluations will
provide diagnosis and recommendations for treatment, which are necessary for
determining appropriate dispositions for juveniles before the court due to criminal
offenses, but who are also emotionally disturbed. This department is dedicated
to providing the best of legal representation, which includes aiding the court in
determining the best course towards rehabilitation for all juveniles; however, the
court must be made especially aware of the problems and recommendations for
those children suffering from emotional disorders. This appears to be an
ongoing problem with minors who have serious mental health problems. At this
time there is problem acquiring a clinical psychologist.
2. Adjustments in salary figures will continue due to the retirement of the full-time
supervising attorney. However, the supervisor will be accepting an extra help
position at 832 hours for FY 2012-2013. The basis for this is to address the
transition that will occur at some point and to maintain stability in the department
during the current economic times. Additionally, an extra help attorney will be
added to staff at 999 hours per FY 2012-2013, to assist on the 3 days a week,
the supervising attorney is out the office. The salary for the Supervising Attorney
is not included in the requested for the FY 2012-2013 budget.
3. The department is responsible for the billing of interpreting services for out-ofcourtroom
interviews. To maintain quality legal representation for Non-English
speaking clients, hearing impaired clients and their parents.
4. There is a continuing need for an experienced bilingual investigator due the
complexity of gang cases. This department in requesting an increase in FY
2012-2013 budget due to the number of cases going to trial.
Court Charges and Billing
1. The department's procedure for billing the courts for legal representation of
parties before the court on a dependency case, (Welfare and Institutions Code 300) continues to remain unchanged. Dependency case attorneys include
attorneys from this department, 3 juvenile contract attorneys and list of conflict
attorneys.
Billing to the courts include:
a) Services of the Minor's Advocates Department, including attorneys,
support staff, and investigator.
b) Services of the contract attorneys, also for dependency cases
c) Services of the conflict attorneys, on dependency cases
2. Conflict Attorneys billing to the County for legal representation on delinquency
and dependency cases is also processed through this department.
The requested 2012/2013 budget includes only $2,250 in expenses and revenues
awaiting specific projects to be approved by the Fish & Game Commission and the
Kings County Board of Supervisors.
The Proposed 2012/2013 Budget includes contributions (Other Charges) to the Road
budget (9251 00) from the Road Fund in the amount of $5,880,000. This is a
decrease of $4,567,019 from the Adopted 2011/2012 Budget of $10,447,019. The
decrease is due funds being in the Road Fund, fund balance so revenues are down
significantly, particularly State Aid - STIP which was budgeted at $1,800,000 in FY
2011/12, but is at $0 in this budget.
1. Provide input to the Board, the CAO, state agencies and local legislators on the
state budget, federal health care reform and other issues that could affect Health
Department programs as well as other health care services available to Kings
County residents.
2. Update the Kings County Community Health Status Report last issued in 2009 to
include current diabetes, asthma, maternal and infant health, coronary heart
disease, stroke, teen pregnancy and breastfeeding rates.
3. Explore opportunities to market our projects and services.
1. EHS staff will continue to market occupational health and safety programs.
2. The Nursing and Community Services Division will strive to improve and
increase marketing strategies for the other programs within the Health
Department.
4. Computerization.
A. Complete the move from paper to electronic health records utilizing the
eCiinicaiWorks software program and laptop computers. There are federal
financial incentives for health care providers and public health agencies to
transition to electronic health records.
5. Work with the Human Resources Department on recruiting plans and hiring of
potential employees and retention of current employees.
A. Continue the on-going assessment of department organization and staffing to
assure community effectiveness and operational efficiencies.
B. Continue to participate in the Central Valley Public Health Consortium with
the other San Joaquin Valley health departments and California State
University, Fresno, School of Health & Human Services, to-develop a regional
public health workforce that is culturally and linguistically appropriate,
dedicated, trained in core competencies of public health and accountable.
6. Emphasize health promotion and prevention services.
A. Participate in community health fairs and other outreach activities.
B. Work with community coalitions that address health issues.
DISCUSSION:
Salaries and Benefits expenses decreased approximately $69,984 from FY 2011/12 to
FY 2012/13. This is from a combination of merit increases, the elimination of two
Office Assistant positions as well as the mid-year personnel adjustment from a Fiscal
Manager to a Fiscal Analyst Ill. As of January 2012, Retirement pay reflects a 2%
reduced County contribution, while employees contribute 2% more to their retirement
with an offset of a 2% salary increase.
Department-wide, Services and Supplies expenses increased by $168,098 in the
Requested Budget for FY 2012/13. This is the result of a new grant, SNAP-Ed.
The Cost Applied line item includes services utilizing funds from the Alcohol and Other
Drug Program. A total of $39,863 is requested for FY 2012/13 the program covered is
the HIV Program. The Health Department will receive $34,607 from the Human
Services Agency for our nursing support of their Foster Care program. The remaining
$864,239 is related to the allocation of administrative costs and cost applied within the
department to other budget units within the department.
Department-wide, Health Revenues are down $120,387 from prior year. This is
attributed to the following:
 Realignment Revenue used increased approx. $124,347.
 Decrease in WIG funding approx. $230,000 due to Federal budget reductions.
 Decreases of various percentages in some of the State Aid Grants.
 Elimination of Tuberculosis funding, $1 ,800.
 Decrease in the Family Planning program of $5,000.
1. Continue to strengthen and prioritize services for children and their fam ilies;
meeting the demand for National and State-driven outcome measures. A
partnership with Kings County Office of Education to maximize services to
severely emotionally disturbed (SED) children and their families with braided
IDEA funding. With the suspension of AB3632 State mandate, this department
will continue to negotiate our role and responsibility to children impacted
academically by a mental health issue. Working with the new Central Valley
SELPA Directors and Mental Health Directors in a consortium on Behavioral
Support Plans will strengthen those services available to SED children in the
schools. Other services for expansion in the next two years are Parent-Child
Interactive Therapy (early-age mental health program), mental health
screenings for children up to the age of 17, and further outreach through the
PEl plan of the Mental Health Services Act and other evidenced-based pilots to
address early on-set behavioral problems that continue to impact the
developmental school years.
2. Work closely with California Forensic Medical Group (CFMG) in enhancing
protocol and policy training for Probation and Sheriff Department staff regarding
the mentally ill incarcerates. Continue to strengthen the collaborative efforts of
the QA Review Team to ensure a continuum of care for those individuals who
meet the Mental Health Services Act criteria who are transitioning from
incarceration. Specifically in the next year, address the issue of mandated
medications for mentally ill inmates who are in "holding pattern" from or to State
Mental Hospital placement.
3. Lead the 5150 Work Group Collaborative (with the assistance of the Hospital
Council facilitator) in the on-going implementing a 5150 County-Wide Protocol
that now includes Minors in an amendment to protocol between Behavioral
Health, Kings View Crisis Services, Kings County Schools, Adventist Health
Medical Center, Law Enforcement, and other community stakeholders that
ensures the safety, security, and minimization of county resources in dealing
with psychiatric emergencies.
4. Develop a Mental HealthNeteran's Court Model with Courts and other County
Agency partners. Continue to advocate for the least restrictive environment for
individuals suffering from substance abuse disorders, PTSD and mental
illnesses who are incarcerated or face incarceration, or face an eminent release
into the community without resources.
5. Completely convert and implement the protocols of all service related activities
into the department's new Data Management System; Anasazi. With this
automated system, reporting outcomes and creating performance based
measures with help the department track effectiveness, access to care and
service gap areas to be addressed.
6. Improve HIPAA practices, and structural and policy safeguards that ensure the
protection of all private health information for the department. Re-vamp and/or
improve encryption mechanisms and monitor ongoing risks to breaches in
security in partnership with Information Services.
7. Create goals. objectives. and strategies that serve to prevent Suicide in Kings
County. Through the Tulare/Kings Suicide Task Force, the department will seek
to lower the risks associated with suicide ideation and follow-through. As part of
the Prevention and Early Intervention Statewide programs, a suicide response
team will be implemented in Kings County to ensure any necessary postvention
services to family members.
8. Implement only new AOD Prevention. Treatment. or Mental Health Programs
which have been established as Evidenced-Based; remaining consistent with
the expectation that an evaluation and monitoring component accompany all
programs funded by the department. Continue to re-visit and adapt department
Strategic Plans and MHSA Plans to meet the State (CaiOMS) and Federal
(NOMS) performance expectations and accountability standards.
DISCUSSION
The expenditure budget for Behavioral Health Administration budget unit
#422500 is cost applied across four budget units (420000, 420100, 422100, and
422200) in the amount of $730,197; Budget Unit #420000 is $6,835,788; Budget
Unit #420100 is $1,155,737; Budget Unit #422100 is $1 ,203,018; Budget Unit
#422200 is $4,736,002; Budget Unit #422400 is currently $0. The combined
total expenditure budget for Behavioral Health Department is $13,930,545
for FY 2012/2013. Revenues for FY 2012/2013 are $13,895,994. In addition, the
department has a mandated MHSA prudent reserve at the County level in the
amount of $1 ,839,916. Net County Costs total is $34,551, which is the MOE total
for this department.
FY 2012/2013 will be a year of transition for the First 5 Kings County Children and
Families Commission. We will reduce our current staff from an allocation of 13 FTE to
4 FTE. This is based on the following :
 Program Cuts: During the realignment process, one of the programs identified
for termination in FY 12/13 was Raising a Reader. Being that First 5 Kings
County operated Raising a Reader directly, the termination of the program will
result in the reduction to our staffing by 2 FTE.
 Transfer or Operational Control of the Hanford and Lemoore Family
Connection: The Kings County Office of Education will take over the
operational control of the Hanford and Lemoore Family Connection programs in
FY 12/13. First 5 will move into a grantee/funder relationship with the Office of
Education in the funding and support of these programs but will not longer staff
the centers. This will result in the reduction of our staffing by 5 FTE.
 Administrative Cuts: As a component of the realignment process, the
operational functions of First 5 was cut by approximately $117,474. To absorb
this reduction, 2 FTE positions (a Program Officer and Department Specialist)
will be eliminated.
1. Monitor and assess the Family Drug Dependency Treatment Court's outcomes in
relation to the following: timely reunification of families; decreased substance abuse
recidivism; and decreased child welfare reentries.
2. Fully implement new policies and procedures to collect overpayments from In-Home
Supportive Services (IHSS) providers and recipients.
3. Hire and retain Licensed Clinical Social Workers (LCSWs) to adequately provide
comprehensive adoption services to Kings County's children and families, as well as
clinically supervise M.S.W. level staff in CPS.
4. Scan all hard files for soft storage and move to paperless open files across the
division, utilizing software to allow more flexible, user-friendly case management.
Moving from hard storage to this soft version will be a cost savings to the county, as
well as further protect confidential information within the building.
5. Identify and implement case management software for the Adult Protective Services
(APS) Division.
6. Prepare for the implementation of anticipated changes in the CaiWORKs program,
relative to periodic reporting, work participation, time limits and supportive services.
7. Continue our leadership role in the operation and maintenance of the C-IV automated
welfare system.
8. Within budgetary constraints, promote the expansion of services in our outlying
communities utilizing automated systems whenever possible and prudent within
community based service organizations.
9. Evaluate the appropriateness of a "call center-based" system for the improvement of
benefit services to our customers.
Funding Background:
The requested expense budget for the administration of Social Services, CaiWORKs, Cal
Fresh, Medi-Cal and CMSP is $27,112,148 for FY 12/13. This is a decrease of $907,304
from the FY 11/12 adopted budget. This decrease is primarily the result of a decrease in
services and supplies of $1,118,821 . The decrease in contractual services reflects the
termination of the TANF/ECF (Emergency Contingency Fund). The net County cost for
Administration is $75,929 and is the required match for senior services including nutrition
resulting from the contract with the Kings/Tulare Area Agency on Aging. The budgets for
departments 510000 and 520000 reflect the application of $16,370,814 in Realignment
revenue. This reflects the revenue from the 2011 Public Safety Realignment. This includes
$1 ,600,000 in realignment funds transferred from the Health Realignment Trust. The
510000 budget unit for Administration uses $5,060,529 of realignment. The remaining
$11 ,035,285 of realignment is applied to the 520000 budget unit for Categorical Aid. Social
Services realignment is heavily dependent on State sales tax collections. We are
anticipating continued sluggishness in the state economy for FY 12/13 and have budgeted
accordingly. The unreimbursed cost for 520000, after the application of available revenues
and realignment, is $2,613,215, a decrease in requested County General Fund
unreimbursed costs of $46,057 from FY 11/12. The requested FY 11/12 expense budget for
Dept. 520000 is $1 ,337,000 less than FY 11/12. The largest expenditure decrease is in
foster care. This expense decrease reflects the recent court decision granting a 30% rate
increase to foster homes, and group homes applies only to new cases. The expense
reduction in CaiWORKS cash assistance reflects the 8% grant reduction in FY11/12. We
are also anticipating a slight caseload increase in this program due to the continuing
recession. The expense budget request for department 540000 is $193,299, no change from
FY 11/12. No changes in service delivery are anticipated.
With the uncertainties surrounding FY 12/13 funding, particularly the Governor's proposals
for CaiWORKS, it is possible that Human Services might not receive funding necessary to
support this budget as requested . In the current atmosphere of change and uncertainty at the
State and Federal level, the Agency will proceed with extreme caution into the FY 12/13
budget year. Human Service Agencies in many counties have suffered large funding
shortages during the State budget crisis and have had to resort to serious layoffs to
compensate. Our Agency has, so far, weathered the storm without having to sacrifice
services or staff. This is because the Kings County Human Services Agency has always
operated conservatively. We did not build capacity unnecessarily simply because funding
was available; rather, the philosophy of this Agency has been to build staff and service
delivery capacity only to the levels necessary to adequately and reasonably meet the needs
of our residents and community.
1. Facilitate over 20,000 visits to the One-Stop Career Center. Provide case-managed
vocational training, On-the-Job Training, work experience and other employment,
training and placement services for 335 Kings County residents.
2. Meet or exceed performance standards set forth by the U.S. Department of Labor.
3. Effectively respond to business closures impacting Kings County employers and
employees, placing at least 65% of dislocated workers into jobs or vocational
training.
4. Serve as a primary point of contact for labor market and socio-economic data for
Kings County.
5. Manage the One-Stop Job Center, including the JTO/EDC offices, the Employment
Development Department, the State Department of Rehabilitation, Youth Services,
and other education, employment and training partners.
6. Administer the Kings County Enterprise Zone and other business incentive zones
for the benefit of local businesses.
DISCUSSION
Revenue for all Workforce Investment Act (WIA) funded programs is subject to the
receipt of federal funding. Funding for economic development marketing is provided
through a $290,000 contract with the Kings County Economic Development Corporation
(EDC).
JTO's role in coordinating economic development activities in Kings County has
resulted in strong relationships with existing businesses. Our involvement with the
California Central Valley Economic Development Corporation favorably positions Kings
County with real estate brokers and other decision makers across the U.S.
This Department will continue to oversee business incentive programs such as the
Enterprise Zone, Recycling Market Development Zone, Foreign Trade Zone and the
Federal HUB Zone through its association with the EDC.
JTO plans to operate a large work experience program in conjunction with the Kings
County Human Services Agency. Funding for this program is anticipated at $800,000
for the fiscal year, and has been included in anticipated revenues. The objective of this
strategy is to assist TANF public assistance recipients to gain work experience and
ultimately get hired and become self-sufficient.
Overall changes of note for the 2012-2013 budget include an elimination of three
approved positions (two Employment and Training Technicians and one Account Clerk).
These positions are curren.tly vacant, and are being eliminated to reflect declining
resources, both gradual decreases in formula allocated Workforce Investment Act
funds and the completion of federal stimulus grants. Line item changes of significance
from the previous budget include a reduction of $92,901 in Regular Employee Wages,
an increase of $12,632 in Extra-Help Wages, a reduction of approximately 15% in
services and support categories, an increase of $4,600 in Computer software Expense to purchase local and regional labor market data in order to more closely track
economic trends and opportunities. The final item proposed for this year is the
purchase of a card swipe system at a cost of $9,917, to automate and track customer
usage of the Career Center and to aid in the reporting of this activity. Other line item
increases are in Information Technology and CAP Charges, which are cost estimates
provided by other departments.
This budget shows a $272,849 (8%) reduction from anticipated 2011-2012 revenues.
The final revenues are likely to be positively affected by competitive grant awards.
 Administrative Services
 Work with the Friends of the Library to publish an Annual Report by
October, 2012.
 Conduct and complete Marketing Audit by December 2012.
 Review draft policies- Collection Development, Volunteer, Library Card,
Social Media, and Public Relations with the Library Advisory Board by
April2013 .
 Identify and analyze public/private grant funding opportunities for libraries
share with the Friends and Library Advisory Board by March 2013.
 Analyze and report results of the Library Community Survey by July 2012.
 Complete Library Facilities Master Plan by June 2013.
 Branch Services
 Purchase furniture for Hanford Branch Library mezzanine to become a
laptop/study lounge by October 2012.
 Hold month long Library Card Campaign in September 2012. Increase
Library holders by 15%.
 Hold 2nd Annual County Wide Open House, December 5, 2012.
 Promote Annual Summer Reading Program for Children, Teen, and
Adults June -July, 2012. With a completion rate 25%.
 By June 2012, increase attendance at library programs by 15%.
 Create Mural and Family Place Library at the Corcoran Branch by April
2013.
 Plan and redesign reference and circulation area at the Hanford branch to
incorporate self-check equipment and self-service book reserves.
 Materials Management
 Update Collection Development policy and procedures by September,
2012.
 Evaluate the feasibility of purchases eBooks and report the findings to the
Library Advisory Board by October 2012.
Work with Ingram on pre-processing of library materials by May 2013.
 Implement floating collections process with the fiction collection by March
2013.
 Information Technology
 Redesign the Library's website by December 2013.
 Expand laptop check-out at Lemoore and Corcoran to February 2013.
On March 23, 2010 the Kings County Library Advisory Board, during a study session,
presented to the Board of Supervisors a 15 Year Capital Improvement Plan to address
the future needs of the County's library facilities. The current plan is a descriptive
narrative form and is in need of a detailed analysis to assess the feasibility of our
facilities to serve the community, both now and into the future. For this fiscal year the
Kings County Library is requesting to expend approximately $50,000 in Professional
and Specialized Services to conduct a Library Facility Assessment and Master Plan.
The budget reflects a decrease of $25,000 from the SI&G account and an increase to
Professional and Specialized Services to accommodate this expenditure request. The
goal of the Library Facility Assessment and Master Plan is to develop pertinent facility
information and knowledge that will ensure the vitality of library services in Kings
County and set a direction for the future. Elements of the plan will include:
 Assessing current library services and identifying future services
 Studying the physical condition of existing library facilities
 Determine the adequacy of those facilities to serve the current population and
the projected population through the year 2020
 Devising library building program standards
 Making recommendations for all aspects of a library capital program
 Develop building program requirements and costs for the renovation of the
Hanford and Lemoore branch libraries
Significant Changes
 The Governor's 2012-2013 budget does not provide for any funding for public
libraries. This represents a decrease of General Fund assistance for public
libraries by $15.2 million eliminating the California Library Services Act, Public
Library Foundation and the California Library Literacy and English Acquisition
Services-that is, access, resource sharing and adult literacy.
 For 2011-2012 the Kings County Library did not include any funds from the
California State Library and will not include any fund for 2012-2013.
1. Continue agricultural research to provide local science based information that will
help sustain economic stability in Kings County's major industry.
2. Assist local clientele in the adoption of new technologies for improved production
practices.
3. Develop updated educational tools for use in the dairy and forage programs. The
new extension materials may be produced in multiple media formats and will focus
on various aspects of modern dairy management and production practices.
4. Grow and structure the county 4-H program to allow more middle management
opportunities for volunteers to be engaged.
5. Provide nutrition education training, materials and support to classroom teachers in
low-income schools.
DISCUSSION
The requested budget for FY 2012-13 is $188,890 Net County cost. This amount
represents a $14,090 increase from FY11-12, which was a greatly reduced budget from
FY 10-11 ($37,360, 17%) resulting in service related impacts. A fixed asset is being
requested, to replace an 8 year old printer ($3,094). The budget is based on the
elimination of the only department Ag Research Assistant position, and the reinstatement
of an OAII position to meet more critical clerical support continuity. Ag
research support will require non-departmental grant funding. The department's overall
requested budget is divided between 58% ($112,535) allocated to Salaries & Employee
Benefits and 42% ($80,355) to Services & Supplies and Other Charges. The requested
budget includes a $9,672 increase in Salaries and Employee Benefits, and a $863
decrease in Services and Supplies to support cross county program efforts and a
revenue line for reimbursable grant and operational expenses of $4,000.
The Proposed 2012/2013 Budget includes General Fund contributions (Other
Charges) to the Park Budget in the amount of $1,131 ,700, an increase of $182,576
from 2011/2012. This increase is due to the following factors: adding one Grounds
worker to oversee a work crew associated with AB 1 09 revenue (for a total of
$45,730), $30,000 increase in Maintenance S I & G for improvements to the Park
Caretakers House at Hickey Park, Other Charges increased by $35,289 associated
with CAP Charges and increases in the Administrative Allocation . The total increase in
unreimbursed costs for this budget unit went from $805,124 in FY 2011/12 to
$866,009 for the Recommended 2012/13 budget.
Phase I of the Jail Facility construction was completed in the summer of 2006. Also
in 2006/2007, the remaining budget was divided between the new Jail Facility and
the Branch Jail remodel. This project is complete and no further projects are
scheduled for this budget unit in FY 2012/2013.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
In FY 07/08, one project (with two components) was planned. The project involved
expanding the District Attorney's Office space to accommodate the growth in staff.
The expansion plan involved relocating the Minor's Advocate offices so that the District
Attorney could remodel and then take over the Minor's Advocate offices. In FY 07/08,
$50,000 on project# 82400222 was budgeted for the District Attorney to remodel the
existing Minor's Advocates offices. Also, $117,300 on project # 82400223 (Minor's
Advocate Remodel) was budgeted to move Minor's Advocate into a different location.
In FY 08/09, the remaining balances associated with these projects were rolled over
into FY 08/09. 82400222- District Attorney Remodel- $48,210; 82400223- Minor's
Advocate Remodel- $107,300
In FY 2010/11 this one budget unit was broken down into individual budget units that
are identified as follows:
187301 -Public Protection
187302 - Fire
187303- Library
187304- Sheriff Patrol and Investigations (this unit is no longer collecting fees)
187305- Animal Services (fees were suspended FY 11/12)
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
It was adopted in FY 2010/11 to fund a portion of the Morgue using $390,000 of these
impact fees. In FY 2011/12 the Board approved using $2,290,000 for the design of
the housing unit of the jail. A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held mid-2012, and an
updated construction schedule will be adopted. At this time, all funds are set-aside in
reserves. The balance in this fund for the Proposed Budget is $2,048,906.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held mid-2012, and an updated construction
schedule will be adopted. At this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The balance
in this fund was $721 ,847.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held mid-2012, and an updated construction
schedule will be adopted. At this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The
balance in this fund was $515,868.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
In FY 201 0/11 it was adopted that these impact fees will no longer be collected. The
funds in the reserve, $122,279, were adopted to be used on the Sheriffs Evidence
space expansion. Those funds were not used, therefore Administration will be
returning to your Board at a new Impact Fee Hearing to be held mid-2012, with an
updated construction schedule for adoption. Administration will be recommending
using $31 ,000 for a new (not replacement) investigator vehicle. At this time, all funds
are set-aside in reserves. The balance in this fund was $122,279.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
In FY 2011/12 the Board suspended collecting impact fees related animal control
facilities. A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held mid-2012, and an updated
construction schedule will be adopted. At this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves.
The balance in this fund was $5,095.
A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held mid-2012, and an updated construction
schedule will be adopted. At this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The
balance in this fund was $3,859.
In prior years, Administration recommended that your Board contribute the equivalent
amount of the Williamson Act ($2,413,014 in 08/09) to the Capital Projects budget unit
to help to pay for upcoming capital projects. However, due to the serious financial
difficulties at the state, Williamson Act revenues will not be budgeted in FY 09/10 or
10/11 . FY 09/10 did not show any Williamson Act revenues in the capital budget, due
to the state not appropriating them in FY 09/10, FY 10/11 . In FY 11/12, $650,000 was
budgeted due to new revenue generated by revisions to the term for newly renewed and new Williamson Act and Farmland Security Zone contracts related to Assembly
Bill1265. In FY 12/13$625,000 is projected.
Hazardous Waste Revenues have been budgeted in the capital projects budget in the
past because these revenues have historically been treated as one-time revenue. In
FY 11/12 it is estimated that we will receive only $288,000 of the $300,000 Budgeted
in Hazardous Waste funds, and all of that was recommended to be shown in the Fire
Fund revenues. No Hazardous Waste funds were included in the FY 11/12 capital
project budget. For FY 12/13 budget for Capital Projects, we are recommending that
this declining revenue source be moved out of the Fire Fund budget and back to
Capital Projects and once again treated as one-time revenue. The projection for FY
2012/13 is at $250,000.
Miscellaneous Revenue includes $25,593 related to the 1 01
h Ave Gateway Hanford
project.
NEW PROJECTS
For FY 2012/13, department requests for capital projects were reviewed by staff from
Public Works, Department of Finance and County Administration. All on-going projects
will be reviewed at year-end and will appear in the Final budget. The following are
projects which are recommended to be included in the FY 12/13 Capital Budget.
Project 82420020- Repair/Replace Roof $185,000
This is a project to replace the Probation Building's concrete shingle roof with a steel
shingle roof. This project is estimated at $130,000.
The southeast side of the roof at the Juvenile Academy will also be replaced. This
project is estimated to cost $55,000,
Project 82420051- 101
h Ave Gateway Hanford $25,593
This project was originally budgeted in 09/10 and is recommended to be rolled into
2012/2013.
Project 82420057- New Jail Construction $40,851,606
This project is to expand the jail to include a new housing unit, medical infirmary, offsite
central plant, and expanded laundry, kitchen, booking, and multi-purpose spaces.
Project 82420073- Morgue $1,886,122
The Kings County Morgue is currently located in the old Kings Building. This location
presents several safety issues, and it is necessary to relocate the morgue as soon as
possible. A total of $2,000,000 was budgeted for this project in FY 10/11, and was
originally budgeted in FY 09/10. The project was funded from existing fund balance in
the Capital Project Fund as well as some Impact Fees.
Project 82420085- Jail Tunnel $3,017,069
This project is needed to connect the new Jail to the proposed new Courthouse facility
and is intended to be part of the exchange with the State for the remaining Court
Buildings. This project was originally budgeted in FY 11/12 at $3,285,262 and the
remainder is recommended to be rolled to FY 12/13.
Project 82420087- Jail Housing Toilets $300,000
It is required that the jail dayrooms have one toilet for every 10 inmates. Due to the
public safety realignment the current configuration provides one toilet for every 20
inmates, therefore, the jail is out of compliance. This project will install additional
toilets into the dayrooms to accommodate the new configuration caused by
realignment. This project will be charged to the Public Safety Realignment fund.
Project 82440476- DVR System $387,000
The jail currently has 11 Divar classic Digital Video Recording (DVR) machines for
standard camera recording and one Bosch Dibos DVR machine for interview
recording. There are a total of 159 cameras plus and additional 35 future earners for a
total of 194 cameras. The Bosch Dibos DVR will stay, but the Divar classics will be
changed out. Thirteen 16-channel DVR's (Bosch 700) plus storage for up to a year of
video will be added with this project.
Project 82440477- Jail Camera Upgrade $20,000
Due to Realignment the Sheriffs Department has brought in temporary bunk beds into
the dayrooms of the jail. The bunk beds are causing an obstructed view of the current
camera configuration. This project is to install additional cameras into those dayroom
areas to accommodate the new configurations. The cost of this project will be charged
to the Public Safety Realignment fund.
Project 82450005 - Kings County Drive $953,804
This project was originally budgeted in FY 08/09 and has rolled for the last four years.
If this project is to go forward, a new construction estimate may be needed.
Project 82450007 - Success Dam Enlargement $35,267
This project was originally budgeted in FY 08/09 and has rolled for the last four years.
Revenues:
 STAID- AB900- Kings County was conditionally awarded a $33,000,000
lease-revenue bond on March 8, 2012 for the expansion of its jail facility.
The scheduled payments for 2012/2013 total $1,254,900 and there is an expense for
the Trustee fee of $5,000, and service fees totaling $3,700. Revenue is generated
through charges to the Retirement accounts for County departments and interest on
deposits totaling $1 ,234,900. This reflects anticipated lower costs of borrowing, when
compared to PERS charges applied to departments.
We are approaching the 8 year anniversary of the POB issuance. At the time, it was
novel to issue these bonds using a variable rate of One Month Libor plus .30 basis
points. The good news is that the risk so far has paid off handsomely! Analysis
completed by Treasury Staff shows the actual saving through May 2012 compared to
the fixed rate POBs the County issued is $1,901 ,551 .78. The current annualized
monthly rate charged in May 2012 was .54%. The rate for the June through August of
2011 was an all time low of .49%! We continue to borrow at less than 1.00%.
Based on estimates provided by the Department of Finance, the Budget for FY
2012/2013 totals $783,275, and includes the Debt Service for the Jail Lease Revenue
Bonds.
Based on estimates provided by the Department of Finance, the Budget for FY
2012/2013 totals $1,343,091 , and includes the Debt Service for three areas where
lease payments are involved.
 The Cogeneration facility lease is budgeted at $239,933.
 The 2008 Chevron Energy Project is budgeted at $477,804.
 Fire Truck/ Electric Retro Fit is budgeted at $212,117.
 New Covered Parking Solar Project (debt service payments begin in August of
2012) at $413,237
For these projects, revenue is generated by charging departments through their Utilities
account for the cost of making this annual payment.
1. Credit Card Clearing System
Currently the County restricts methods of public payment for departmental charges
(taxes, fees, fines, etc.) to check and cash. lTD will continue the process of adding
technology necessary to support credit cards, debit cards and electronic checks to the
list of available payment options.
2. eBenefits System
The employee management system in use by Human Resources and Finance lacks the
capability for employees to self-service their payroll and benefit needs. lTD will continue
installation of enhancements to the existing system necessary to provide this selfservice
capability.
3. HIPAA Data Tracking Compliance
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) requires specific
protections be maintained over all health information which is stored electronically. lTD
will continue deploying controlling technology, which monitors the location and use of
restricted information and helps ensure compliance with related HIPAA regulations.
4. IP Telephony Features
Migration of the telephony system from digital services to Voice-Over-Internet Protocol
(VoiP) technology is complete. During the Fiscal Year 2012 I 2013 ITO will be
deploying phase II and phase Ill advanced features which will allow the County to fully
realize the promise of advanced telephony services.
5. Time and Attendance System
County collection of time and attendance (payroll) information is currently performed in
a manual fashion. ITO will continue the automation process such that employees will be able to self-serve timecard information, managers will have the ability to electronically
approve timesheets and the resulting payroll data will be automatically uploaded into
the County's Payroll System.
6. Assessor/Clerk/Recorder Record Management System
The ITO is working closely with the Assessor, Tax Collector, Auditor, and
Clerk/Recorder Departments to replace current applications (Property and
Clerk/Recorder management systems) with new state-of-the-art systems.
The current systems, developed in-house on a mainframe platform, have become more
costly and time consuming to maintain. Replacement systems will support meeting
public demands more effectively while reducing the costs associated with system
operation and maintenance. Many new features will be added designed to increase
efficiency, improve processing accuracy while streamlining operation for users.
Additionally, the enhancements will simplify information search/retrieval, imaging,
indexing, redaction, and public inquiries. Lastly, they will increase flexibility for better
integration with other systems, thus improving ad hoc reporting and data extraction.
7. Network Backbone Upgrade
The core County network switch infrastructure, which supports all computer connectivity
between departments and the Data Center, will undergo an upgrade from one Gigabit
to ten Gigabit speed. The modification will greatly advantage computer users by
reducing system response times.
8. Wireless LAN Controller Replacement
The need for WIFI connectivity of handheld devices is growing rapidly. The wireless
infrastructure supporting these mobile devices is undergoing expansion, in both
availability (number of locations) and resiliency from failure.
9. Server Attached Network (SAN) Storage Expansion
The core of the County's data storage infrastructure is its SAN. As services expand,
data storage requirements expand as well. This project will increase the County's data
capacity by 200%.
10. Exchange Email System Upgrade
Managing email communication to and from County offices occurs through a Microsoft
Exchange system. The current 2003 version is undergoing upgrade to the most current
software release, version 2010. The enhancement will offer many new labor saving
capabilities while delivering far faster service.
11. Live Volume Data replication
The Storage Area Network (SAN) data repositories, in the Production Data Center and
Disaster Recovery Data Center, will undergo integration such that each becomes a
mirror of the other and can assume data delivery responsibilities should a system failure
occur.
12. Website Content Management System
The main County websites, both the public facing www.CountyofKings.com site and
employee supporting Intranet site, receive updates manually. A commercial content
management system is being implemented which will allow departments to control
published content without knowledge of HTML tools or assistance from lTD. The new
technology also allows rapid updates to site design, in terms of look and feel.
13. Miscellaneous Projects
In addition to the projects above lTD will support a C-IV and DTS Cisco router
replacement, relocation of the Gang Task Force office, a planned Sheriff's Office
Stratford Substation and upgrades to wireless links used by the Avenal Police
Department (among others).
SPECIAL DISCUSSION NOTE:
While the focus of effort is customer service, the Information Technology
Department must plan for keeping the County's technology infrastructure current
and secure. Ongoing Federal and State audits focused on data security will
continue intensifying over the next several of years. We expect the increased
attention to result in additional requirements that ultimately change how the County
leverages technology. The County, through efforts of the lTD, is currently ahead of
many other Central Valley counties - however, the new rules will result in even more
restrictions on how we protect technology assets and how they are used.
Another focus of Kings County is the migration and or replacement of applications
on the legacy mainframe system. We will continue working with departmental users
of the various systems involved to eliminate the County's dependency.
Kings County is in the process of replacing the Law Enforcement Public Safety System
(currently running on a legacy IBM iSeries platform). We will continue working with the
Sheriff's Office to find best of breed alternatives for each of the Public Safety System
Modules: Law Records Management, Computer Aided Dispatch, Mobile Units, CLETS,
Adult Jail and Juvenile Jail Management.
FY 2011/2012 Accomplishment Highlights:
Security and Compliance
 Implemented full disk and removable media encryption for the Human Services
Agency and the Health Department
 Implemented tracking of protected information for Pll (Human Services Agency) and
HIPAA (Health Department)
 Completed a major update of the County's antivirus software
 Added support for Smart Card authentication on County workstations
Software Development
 Implemented P-Card (Cal Card) Module for Finance Department
 AB1 09-Realignment Configuration and Reporting for Jails
 Implemented Jail SSA Reporting
 Upgraded SunGard Multi-Agency Public Safety System from Version 5 to Version 7
 Implemented SunGard CAD Interface to Firehouse
 Implemented Cashiering System (Child Support, County Counsel, Minor's Advocate)
 Budget Book Changes (Updated based on State Controller Requirements)
Data Center Operations
 Implemented a Countywide telephone system replacement
 Constructed and activated a Disaster Recovery Data Center
 Implemented a redundant fiber connectivity network design for the main County
office complex
 Installed a replacement for the County's Server Attached Network (SAN) data
storage system
 Migrated Microsoft Exchange (email system) and Mimosa (email archive system) to
a new hardware platform
 Upgraded over 50% of the County's network switch hardware with PoE (powered)
capable equipment
 Deployed uninterruptable power supply (UPS) devices for Voice-Over-Internet
Protocol (VoiP) telephony project
 Provided network connectivity support for the relocations of KART, NTF and WIC
 Replaced network media converter modules
 Upgraded the County's external network firewalls
 Completed the Navel Air Station Lemoore WIC network upgrade
 Added PDF generation capability on the mainframe to reduce printing costs
Customer Service
 Responded to over 7,200 computer requests for service from County computer
users
 Upgraded laptop computer systems in all Sheriff's Office patrol vehicles
Records Management
 Added document storage capacity equivalent to an additional 500 boxes
 Microfilmed and I or scanned over 950,000 document pages
Central Services
 Completed implementation of a new high-speed color copier capable of delivering
high quality and high volume output (full color brochures, maps, business cards, .
etc.)
 Processed over 1.1 million pieces of mail
 Produced over 3.3 million pages of printed material
Purchasing
 Bid a Countywide office supplies contract which ultimately saved the County
approximately $100,000 in office supplies, furnishings and technology related
supplies and equipment
 Coordinated over 45 formal purchasing request for proposals (RFPs)
Changes of Note:
 Department wide consolidation of revenue accounts to simplify department
revenue reporting.
 Department wide revision in labor allocation to fully recover costs.
Information Technology Services:
 $67,999 increase (13%) in IS SVCS- Finance Dept due to eFinance upgrade.
 $48,149 decrease (15%) in IS SVCS- Consolidated Courts due to revision in
MOU to not provide programming.
 $37,263 decrease (21 %) in IS SVCS- Child Support due to labor realloc~tion .
 $160,354 increase (23%) in IS SVCS - Sheriff/Coroner to due to information
sharing agreement between law enforcement agencies, reinstatement of PMDC
software, increased after hours support and labor reallocation .
 $55,422 increase (24%) in IS SVCS- Probation due to labor reallocation.
 $49,278 increase (18%) in IS SVCS- Health due to labor reallocation.
 $70,073 increase (8%) in IS SVCS- Human Services due to labor reallocation.
 $48,493 decrease (34%) in IS SVCS - City of Corcoran due to information
sharing agreement between law enforcement agencies.
 $34,757 decrease (35%) in IS SVCS - City of Lemoore due to information
sharing agreement between law enforcement agencies.
 $41,221 increase (2%) in Salaries due to flexible allocation promotions.
 $21 ,600 increase (771%) in Unemployment Insurance due to an outstanding
claim.
 $40,559 decrease (16%) in Maintenance- Equipment due to new Xerox Lease
(reported in Rents and Leases - Equipment) and transference of !Series
support from IBM to Chouinard & Myhre.
 $51,788 increase (89%) in Maintenance- Network Equipment due to IPS and
Passport maintenance coming off original warranty paid by H.S.A.
 $57,518 increase (1 00%) in Contractual Services - Special Projects due to
Campus Fiber upgrade project and eFinance upgrade project.
 $130,659 increase (19%) in Rents & Leases - Software due to eFinance
upgrade, new web software and new SQL monitoring software.
 $110,119 increase (45%) in Administrative Allocation due to Telco depreciation
overhead reallocation and Internal Administration health insurance increase.
 $23,398 increase (11 %) in Cost Applied due to Telco labor reallocation.
Purchasing:
 $49,702 overall increase (49%) in revenues due to addition of Buyer position
allocation.
 $50,285 overall increase (50%) in expenses due to addition of Buyer position.
Records Management:
 $27,828 increase (85%) in IS SVCS- Clerk/Recorder due to Recorder microfilm
scanning project.
 $25,000 increase (1 00%) in Extra Help due to Recorder microfilm scanning
project.
Central Services:
 $38,911 decrease (1 00%) in IS SVCS - Outside Agencies due to revenue
account reorganization.
 $28,321 increase (1 00%) In IS SVCS - KCOE due to revenue account
reorganization.
 $116,237 overall decrease (15%) in revenues due to elimination of Offset
Equipment Operator position allocation and reduced usage of postage.
 $33,357 decrease (23%) in Salaries due to elimination of Offset Equipment
Operator position allocation.
 $66,804 decrease (17%) in Postage and Freight due to reduced usage.
Telecommunications:
 $30,955 decrease (51%) in Maintenance - Equipment due to replacement of
phone switch.
 $20,000 decrease (1 00%) in Maintenance - Network Equipment due to
replacement of phone switch.
 $62,717 increase (2750%) in Rents & Leases - Software due to additional
services provided by new phone switch.
 $69,504 increase (155%) in Depreciation - Equipment due to replacement of
phone switch.
 $150,000 decrease ( 1 00%) in Telephone System due to completion of phone
switch replacement.
 $89,236 increase (560%) in Cost Applied due to repurposing old phone chassis.
The FY 2012-2013 Liability Self-Insurance Budget is requested at $1 ,259,239, an
increase of $429,650 from last year. This request includes funding of administrative
and claims costs as well as funding catastrophic reserves.
The Revenue Transfer In is from the General Fund, Budget Unit 141000, Insurance.
Effective July 1, 2004, the Board of Supervisors approved a self-funded health
insurance program for all medical benefits as opposed to only self-funding the vision
and dental components of the plan as in the past.
In December, 2005 a $900,000 loan from the General Fund was transferred to the
Health Insurance Fund for cash flow purposes. This loan was completely paid off in
the 2007/2008 Fiscal Year.
In July 2008, the County implemented a Wellness Program. There were a total of 481
participants in the blood draw portion of the Wellness Program in 2008. In 2009, there
were 462 participants, in 2010, there were 500 participants, and in 2011 there were
509 participants, which includes spouses and their over 18 year old dependents.
Currently the Health Insurance Fund is projecting a fully funded reserve. The costs for
Health Insurance are expected to increase 7.4% for the 2012/13 Plan Year. The
Health Insurance Advisory Committee voted to implement that increase.
The 2012/2013 Budget for the Self-Insured Insurance Plan is $11,617,916.
The Worker's Compensation Budget is recommended at $2,577,520 for FY
2012/2013. $2,500,000 in costs are zeroed out because they are cost applied to
individual department budgets to reflect those departments' Worker's Compensation
insurance premiums. The majority of the remaining costs are offset by insurance
proceeds on former employees whose costs are borne by an excess insurance policy.
This Budget Unit is a summary showing the total cost Countywide for Worker's
Compensation insurance coverage.
 Administration:
1. Assist all divisions in securing grants to address some services/equipment that
cannot be provided currently due to funding shortages.
2. Continued involvement in the San Joaquin Valley Clean Energy Organization as
a means of keeping up- to-date on available grants and energy saving programs
3. Have each division prioritize the tasks/services/projects that need to be done by
identifying those tasks or projects that cannot be completed with current
available funding.
4. Continue to monitor all maintenance operations to ensure courteous, prompt,
and professional response to requests and complaints . Respond quickly to
comments and/or inquiries by members of the public or members of the Board of
Supervisors.
5. Continue to assist County Administration in the implementation of policies to
ensure cost effective use of vehicles; and to establish the most cost effective
fleet size.
6. Assist County Administration and represent the County's needs with respect to
the construction of the new Kings County Superior Court and the addition to the
Jail.
7. Have divisions continue to work with the Human Resources department in the
preparation of evaluations and disciplinary procedures.
8. Continue to provide oversight on the various construction projects. Work closely
with other departments, Administration and outside agencies to ensure timely
and cost effective completion of each project.
9. Provide timely personnel, accounting, fiscal and administrative services to all
Public Works Divisions and County Departments.
 Building Maintenance:
1. Complete the Preventive Maintenance program for the last of the new equipment
installed and all the new equipment that will be installed during the next few months
from the current energy upgrade project Chevron.
2. Utilize internet trainings on our TMA software system for all supervisors, Facility
Manager and Office Assistant in an effort to complete the inventory program.
3. Continue scheduling webinar trainings in our training room as well as in-service
trainings for janitorial and building maintenance staff on a regular basis.
4. Continue the Preventative Maintenance program for the underground high voltage
system by replacing as much copper wiring as possible, based on the price of
copper.
5. Continue to perform preventive maintenance in all electrical rooms and on
transformers and switches.
 Engineering:
1. Work with the Association of Governments to implement the selected Pavement
Management System.
2. Continue to provide contract management services to other departments.
3. Continue to maintain the traffic collision database and provide analysis and
maps to the County staff and other agencies in an effort to increase traffic safety
throughout the County.
4. Pursue the abandonment of minor roads where appropriate.
5. Provide construction project management on major and minor projects.
6. Provide engineering design comments on development projects being processed
by the Community Development.
7. Work with Purchasing to acquire "on-call" contracts for surveying and material
testing work with consultants.
9. Continue to seek outside funding sources for major road construction and
maintenance projects.
 Fleet Management:
1. Continue adding alternative fuel vehicles into the fleet.
2. Continue to search out possible grant funding that can assist in the purchase of
alternate fueled vehicles.
3. Continue to monitor equipment usage and make suggestions to departments.
4. Continue conversion and monitoring of all diesel powered equipment.
5. Continue to prepare the fleet to meet California Air Resources Board
requirements for off-road diesel powered equipment by the 2018 deadlines.
 Parks:
1. Continue to provide safe and enjoyable parks that the public and schools may enjoy.
2. Continue to cooperate with the Burris Park Foundation with the goal of further
developing the Burris Park Outdoor learning center.
3. Encourage more special event use of the parks to generate revenue as well as
introduce the public to the Burris Park museum, wagon barn and the multi-purpose
room.
4. Continue performing quality maintenance while reducing quantity of services
wherever possible to match the staff levels of the Division. This may include a
transformation of turf areas into low-maintenance bedding, replacement of dying
landscape at the Government Center, renovate irrigation systems, replant trees and
dense groundcovers, install rubberized decorative bark, etc.
5. Continue to search for grants and other opportunities to assist in the goals of the
Division.
 Roads:
1. Continue to maintain the roads and bridges in a safe condition. The annual road
striping project will be performed by private contractor in 2012.
2. Continue to perform maintenance on major/minor roads. Examples of this work
are:
a. Patching and overlay of 6th Avenue- Racine to Utica Avenues.
b. Asphalt seal on Utica Avenue - 16th to 25th Avenues.
c. Asphalt seals on 50 miles of roadway.
3. Use road fund reserve to place asphalt overlay upon 25 miles of major roads.
4. Place chip seal or microsurfacing seals upon streets in:
a. El Rancho Park Subdivision.
b. Home Garden Area.
c. Stratford Area.
d. Kettleman City.
5. Acquire the right of way necessary for the Lacey and 13th Avenue traffic signal.
6. Construct asphalt concrete placement on Jersey between 18th and 1?'h and on 18th
from Jersey to Central Union School.
7. Construct permanent widening on 10 Y2 Avenue from Kansas to Nevada Avenues
using CMAQ funds.
8. Continue to use work-in-lieu laborers to perform road maintenance.
9. Construct two bridge replacement projects using HBRR funding .
DISCUSSION:
General Discussion:
The Department is maintaining the highest levels of service possible considering the
funds available. Since the new jail began operating there have been continuing
problems with some offices being overheated. These will continue to be addressed with
the designer and staff has been given some ideas to implement, which should resolve
the problem.
The added workload on Building Maintenance staff is due to the complex HVAC
systems and the need to continue to train staff in the operation and maintenance of
these systems. Building Maintenance has been able to handle all service requests and
preventive maintenance this past year however the operations specialists in the Central
plant are struggling to keep up on all the required preventive maintenance. The
Operations Specialist Trainee is being requested to keep up with this preventive
maintenance.
The Road Fund has built a large cash reserve which has allowed the County to
participate in Safe Route to School Projects, Bridge Replacement Projects and Traffic
Signal Projects at SR 43 at Lacey and at Excelsior Avenues. This reserve will be used
to balance expenditures versus revenues in 2012/2013. The Division will be spending
down this reserve in the form of asphalt overlays on major roads.
Fleet has continued to provide outstanding service in the care and maintenance of the
fleet. This division also has been very active in seeking grants for bringing our diesel
fleet into compliance with air quality regulations.
Administration:
The Administration Budget has increased from $369,516 to $414,003 due to small
increases by IT, Workers Compensation and miscellaneous charges. This year we will
not have a credit in the CAP charges. Our CAP charges will be $16,194 last year we
had a $12,805 credit. Administration is cost applied to the other divisions in the Public
Works Department so there will be a small increase to those divisions.
Roads and Bridges:
The 2011/2012 budget anticipated the Road Fund Revenue at $7,735,000. The
estimated actual end of year revenues will be $6.0 million. The proposed 2012/2013
Roads Division Revenue totals $7.22 million dollars. The division proposes to use $2.8
million from the road reserve to balance revenues with the proposed expenditure total
of $10,500,000.
The Governor's May revise includes a proposal to take funds from the Highway User
Tax Account for General Fund relief. Preliminary numbers indicate Kings County will
lose almost $250,000 collected in FYs 10-11 and 11-12 and $173,000 each year
through FY 14-15.
Parks and Grounds:
The Division has attempted to make ends meet by utilizing the Sheriff's Alternative
Sentencing workers (Work In-Lieu's), AB 109 workers, Welfare-to-Work employees,
JTO employees, and summer youth workers. The reduction in FTE's has put the Division at the tipping point for an inability to efficiently and safely perform its
responsibilities, objectives, and goals. The overtime line item has exceeded the
budgeted amount and may exceed the FY2012/2013 budgeted amount for the same
reasons. County Administration has budgeted $25,000 for Extra-help, which will assist
the Division during the Parks' open season.
Reliance on chemical herbicides and growth regulators is increasing. New landscape
technologies and modern equipment are assisting the Division, but funds will need to be
allocated in future budgets to fully acquire these benefits. The current budget affords
the Division with replacement of one small mower (<$5,000).
The SI&G line item has been increased by $30,000 to make necessary repairs to the
Hickey Caretaker home. All other budgetary line item increases are unavoidable, such
as CAP charges ($32,000) and Workers Comp Insurance ($42,000).
Fleet Management:
Fleet is requesting to spend $881,100 in fixed asset purchases versus $731 ,423 during
FY 11-12. We will continue to replace equipment that has met or exceeded its
cost effective life. In general, we will need to replace equipment that is over ten years
old and/or has over 120,000 miles.
The additional $65,000 for the striping machine is necessary to cover the difference
between the budgeted amount and the bid amount.
Building Maintenance:
Justification for Additional Staff
The operations specialists in the Central plant have a lot of new equipment and much
more preventive maintenance needed on the equipment. The County has a significant
investment in time and money on equipment and it is crucial that it be maintained properly and on a regular basis. Building Maintenance has developed a complete
preventive maintenance program for all equipment, including the new equipment
provided through grants and energy upgrade projects, and it was implemented this past
year. A significant amount of staff hours is being expended in an effort to keep up with
the preventive maintenance program. The Division also has an extensive automation
system that requires a substantial amount of staff hours and extensive training. The
Division will be sending someone for training in the next few months and once this
training is completed this position will be responsible for maintaining, programming and
the oversight of the complete automation system.
In conclusion, Public Works is requesting the addition of an Operations Trainee whose
main duty will be performing preventive maintenance county-wide. There currently
exists enough preventive maintenance tasks to justify this additional position.
Preventive maintenance is something that cannot be contracted out very easily or cost
effectively and if the work isn't performed correctly and thoroughly there will be costly
repairs due to mechanical breakdowns. Staff has reduced substantially the amount of
mechanical failures in building maintenance due to our extensive preventive
maintenance program. The HVAC and equipment failures have been reduced in central
plant operations but with the new equipment added during the past 2 years and the new
equipment from our current energy upgrade there is additional preventive maintenance
needed and it is crucial this maintenance occurs to minimize mechanical failures.
Engineering:
The Engineering Division has increased the Engineer II (Civil) Part-time to a Full-time
Engineer Ill (Civil). The cost applied to the Roads Department has increased to
$240,159 from the previous year of $191,04 7 to cover this increase. This will help keep
the cost down to the General Fund considering the Engineering Division spends a great
amount of time on Roads projects, particularly the Engineering class.
The Board of Supervisors was designated as the Successor Agency of the dissolved
Kings County Redevelopment Agency on January 31, 12012. On April 11, 2012 the first
meeting of the Oversight Board for the Successor Agency for the County of Kings was
held. This Oversight Board is made up of seven members, three Board of Supervisor appointments, two Superintendent of Schools appointments, one Community Service
District appointment and one Community College appointment.
The Redevelopment Fund was audited in FY 06/07, 07/08, and 09/10 and was included
as part of the budget process in FY 2009/2010. The Redevelopment Fund was
introduced in the FY 09/10 budget volumes on Schedule 16, as required by the County
Budget Act. Now, Health and Safety Code section 34170.5 requires that:
34170.5. (a) The successor agency shall create within its treasury
a Redevelopment Obligation Retirement Fund to be administered by the
successor agency.
(b) The county auditor-controller shall create within the county
treasury a Redevelopment Property Tax Trust Fund for the property tax
revenues related to each former redevelopment agency, for
administration by the county auditor-controller.
This budget unit is included in the County budget for historical purposes only. The
Redevelopment Obligation Retirement Fund is no longer included as a County Budget
Unit.
