The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects only prior year actuals as the Office of Affirmative Action Compliance was consolidated
within the Chief Executive Office, the Department of Human Resources, and the Internal Services Department in fiscal year
2011-12.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects an overall net
County cost increase of $168,000 primarily due to
Board-approved increases in employee benefits partially offset
by the deletion of one-time funding and revenue increases in
Unclaimed Gas Tax, Pesticide Mill Tax, and Scanner and Device
Registration fees.
¦ Pursue additional revenue source opportunities, through
proactive involvement in legislation development,
coordination with upper management of the California
Department of Food and Agriculture and Division of
Measurement Standards, and establishment of partnerships
with other agencies, to more effectively perform its mission.
¦ Implement the Department’s long-term strategies to improve
service and workforce excellence through ongoing employee
development and other outreach efforts to enhance public
awareness of the Department and its services, including the
development of the Department’s Internet website.
¦ Maintain focus of recruitment efforts to attract qualified and
skilled applicants to fill inspector positions to ensure
environmental and public safety, provide mandated and
increased protections to consumers and businesses, and
provide protection to the environment, native plant life and
the agricultural industry.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in net
County cost of $892,000 primarily attributable to Retirement
costs as well as the full restoration of the County’s matching
contribution towards its deferred compensation plans. This
increase is partially offset with the elimination of one-time
funding from FY 2011-12. The budget also reflects the addition
of 1.0 Division Chief position fully offset with the elimination of
2.0 Deputy Public Defender II items in order to provide more
effective supervision of the Department’s branch offices.
¦ Implement and refine its programs and initiatives to
correspond with the County’s Strategic Plan Goals;
¦ Work with justice partners to implement the Public Safety
State Realignment Program;
¦ Implement the Department’s Electronic Document
Management System (Case 360) program that allows for the
electronic storage of case files and a reduction in file storage
costs;
¦ Develop programs, resources and training in case conflict
identification, capital litigation, new lawyer training, mental
health and expert identification;
¦ Implement Desktop Video for attorney and management staff
to increase communication and reduce costs and travel time
for meetings and training; and
¦ Collaborate with the Public Defender to develop a plan for the
creation of a new Case Management System to replace aging
systems.
The Department requires funding for 5.0 Investigator positions as well as $500,000 for a shortage in services and supplies.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in net
County cost of $0.3 million primarily due to Board-approved
increases in employee benefits and funding to maintain
suspended Senate Bill (SB) 90 programs, partially offset by the
deletion of one-time funding from FY 2011-12 for the spay and
neuter program, staff relocation costs and a Volunteer
Coordinator position.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department is proceeding with plans to replace its existing
animal management application. The project involves the
documentation of current and ideal business processes, design
and testing of the new application, and an implementation
strategy that includes the acquisition and deployment of new
mobile accessibility hardware. The planned software and
hardware components will provide staff with mobile access to
the new application both in the field and within the housing
facilities of each animal care center. The implementation of
these strategies will afford the Department opportunities to
enhance the level of care provided to animals housed at the
care center, improve operational efficiencies in handling calls
for service, and ensure accuracy and accountability.Efforts continue to augment the availability of medical services
at the County’s six animal care centers. The workload increases
associated with additional impounded animals and spay and
neuter surgery requirements have not been addressed in terms
of providing adequate veterinary medical resources. Additional
Veterinarians and Registered Veterinary Technicians are
needed throughout the County’s animal care system.
The refurbishment of aged kennel buildings and other animal
housing facilities continues to be a primary focus of the
Department’s facility management strategy. Work is also
commencing on a long-term facility plan to address the need
to site and develop fully enclosed community animal care
centers in strategic locations within the Department’s service
areas.
The Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives outlined above identified several critical unmet needs. The Department’s immediate
staffing needs related to animal medical services and to provide mandated levels of care to stray, relinquished and abandoned
animals. Additional staffing in the medical service area is needed to address the increased workload resulting from additional
animals requiring shelter medical services.
Operationally, the Department continues to seek stable funding for strategic replacement of its aging vehicle fleet, annual shelter
repairs and improvements, information technology needs and upgrades, and security/video surveillance systems at the County’s
animal shelters.
The Department is also seeking one-time funding for emergency management equipment and ongoing funding for a full-time
safety officer. The one-time funding would provide acquisition of equipment haulers, remote rescue assets, and emergency
sheltering. A one-time funding augmentation is needed to acquire a new modular facility in the North County to house
Department operations management, special enforcement, field enforcement, and medical personnel in a centrally located facility
to more effectively serve the Agoura, Castaic, and Lancaster shelters. The safety officer position would be a part of the
Department’s Risk Management program and would be responsible for developing and implementing ongoing training for all staff
and volunteers and managing safety issues associated with the Department’s facilities.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a net County cost
increase of $56,000 primarily due to Board-approved increases
in salaries and employee benefits, partially offset by the
deletion of one-time funding for Free Concerts.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Continue a multi-year initiative to implement the
Board-adopted Arts for All, a comprehensive strategic plan for
systemic, sequential K-12 arts education in all 81 school
districts in the County encompassing 1.7 million students.
¦ Institute a number of new systems to improve grants and
professional development programs, including implementing
an online grant application system to streamline the
application process for constituents and administration.
¦ Begin implementation of the Master Plan for the current and
future facilities of the John Anson Ford Theatres to improve
parking, traffic flow, and visibility; and upgrade the outdoor
amphitheatre while preserving the historic elements of the
theatre and surrounding buildings and incorporating
environmentally sustainable technology.
¦ Continue the integration of civic art into more than
40 ongoing capital projects, with a continuing emphasis on
the development of Los Angeles County-based artists,
community engagement, and creative placemaking.
The Arts Commission’s critical unmet needs include restoration of funding curtailed for Arts for All, the regional plan for arts
education, the Arts Internship Program, Organizational Grants, Free Concerts, unavoidable increases in the Holiday Celebration
labor costs and support for eliminated staff positions in the Ford Theatre and Civic Art divisions. Additional funding is needed to
cover legal costs from County Counsel which were not previously included in the budget and for increased program costs
associated with Civic Art.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in net
County cost of $554,000 primarily due to Board-approved
increases in salaries and employee benefits, partially offset by
the elimination of one-time funding for the Property Tax
Administration Program (PTAP) and 32.0 vacant funded
Intermediate Clerk positions to address the Department’s
projected shortfall in revenue.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Assessor’s Office will continue to:
¦ Introduce operational efficiencies to improve work activities
and public services;
¦ Pursue enhancements to appraisal tools to assist in the
determination of market value for properties affected by the
declining housing market and to address the additional
demands resulting from an increased volume in Assessment
Appeals cases;
¦ Develop the capturing of critical assessment documents and
forms electronically, and creating various electronic workflows
to increase productivity by allowing staff to better manage,
process, store, and retrieve these documents; and
¦ Pursue shorter duration multi-year re-engineering projects
that automate and improve the assessment process.
The Assessor’s critical needs include an upgrade to the County’s Property Tax System to keep pace with increasing workload,
expanding the electronic content management system to move towards a paperless environment, acquisition of integration
software to combine the Department’s primary disparate work process into one system, replacement of the Unsecured Property
Database, and the antiquated and troublesome telephone system.
The Department also has critical needs for the restoration of significant curtailments in overtime and services and supplies taken
since FY 2009-10 to deal with the unprecedented workload backlogs resulting from a declining real estate market, as well as
funding for County Counsel to represent the County in high-valued appeals cases, proposed legislation, and other critical needs.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in net
County cost (NCC) of $179,000 primarily due to
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits
and funding for the suspended Senate Bill (SB) 90 program,
partially offset by deletion of one-time funding for Utility User
Tax Measure U related audits.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Auditor-Controller advocates for fiscal responsibility and
service excellence through several key initiatives, including:
¦ Ensuring public trust in County government by implementing
the Board-approved annual audit plan and conducting
investigations of fraud and malfeasance;
¦ Working with the Chief Executive Office (CEO) to resolve the
structural deficit for Shared Services in order to properly fund
the program that supports 18 client departments’ needs for
fiscal and payroll services;
¦ Implementing and maintaining eCAPS (financial system
upgrades, vendor self-service, content management) and the
Advantage eHR suite of applications to centralize and
consolidate the County’s financial management, reporting,
human resources, and talent management functions;
¦ Improving the fiscal accountability of social services
contractors by resolving issues related to federal recovery of
questioned costs, ensuring auditor access to contractor
records and continuing to enhance the Contractor’s Manual to
ensure compliance with contract terms and conditions;
¦ Promoting use of direct deposit to pay vendors, thereby
reducing the County’s reliance on check disbursements;
¦ Advocating for development of an integrated enterprise
Property Tax System to replace aging, obsolete, and inefficient
legacy applications that require high levels of staff and
technical support; and
¦ Promoting efficiency initiatives such as electronic paystubs.
The Auditor-Controller’s unmet needs include staff to address the increased workloads in both the Shared Services Division for
client departments and for the implementation of the 2011 Realignment Bill (Assembly Bill 118); expansion of the direct deposit
program in order to serve more vendors; and central funding for an integrated, enterprise Property Tax System.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a $5.0 million
increase in NCC primarily due to maintenance costs associated
with the eCAPS/eHR Project, offset by the elimination of
one-time funding for contract and development.
The Transportation Clearing Account is a central receiving point for charges for transportation costs incurred by departments. All
charges are then distributed to the appropriate departments leaving this budget unit with no net appropriation. The 2012-13
Recommended Budget reflects no change from the 2011-12 Adopted Budget.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a $0.8 million net
decrease in net County cost (NCC) primarily attributable to the
deletion of one-time funding, partially offset with increases in
Retirement, Retiree Health Insurance, Deferred Compensation,
and Countywide Cost Allocation Adjustment. The
Recommended Budget also includes restoration of the Fourth
of July Fireworks Show, Summer Concerts and Water Bus
programs, and increases in unavoidable employee benefits at
no additional NCC increase. Beginning with the 2012-13
Recommended Budget, the Department of Beaches and
Harbors’ budget will be reported and controlled at the overall
departmental level.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Implementation of the County’s and Department’s Strategic
Plans will accomplish the following outcomes: 1) visitors to the
beaches and Marina del Rey will experience world renowned
recreational opportunities and quality customer service
through accessible, clean, attractive and safe facilities; and
2) Marina boaters, visitors and residents will enjoy
experiencing the County’s “Crown Jewel” through redeveloped
leasehold properties and beautiful and well maintained public
amenities.
The Department’s 2012-13 Official Budget Request reflects an increase of $1.4 million in appropriation from the 2012-13
Recommended Budget. Included is 1.0 Electrician position to perform electrical repairs to facilities throughout the beaches and in
the Marina; 1.0 Senior Departmental Personnel Technician position to coordinate the Department’s training and wellness
programs; 1.0 Supervising Parking Control Officer position to supervise eight Parking Control Officers; and 1.0 General
Maintenance Worker position for the parking unit to maintain and service parking lots meters, complete painting projects and
address other ongoing maintenance needs within the parking operation.
2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects an overall increase
in net County cost of $4.9 million, primarily due to the reversal
of one-time funding related to various community programs,
additional funding to support the departmental information
technology operation, and Board-approved increases in
salaries and employee benefits, partially off-set by additional
funding for community programs, deletion of one-time
funding, and carryovers for various programs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Executive Office is in the process of implementing its
strategic plan, in alignment with the County’s Strategic Plan,
with multiple goals for FY 2012-13. Resources are needed to
achieve those goals which continue to focus on the use of
technology-driven services.
The Department’s unmet needs request includes restoration of various programmatic costs and services and supplies curtailed to
address the County’s projected structural deficit.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects the Board’s
continuing commitment to allocate a significant amount of
available one-time funding to expand, replace, or refurbish the
County’s capital assets and infrastructure. The Recommended
Budget appropriates $1.14 billion for 285 active projects that
address high priority health, public safety, recreation, and
infrastructure needs.
Of the total recommended 2012-13 appropriation,
$748.2 million is allocated to General Fund projects that
encompass a broad range of recreational, cultural, law
enforcement, health, and general government functions
funded by $195.3 million in one-time revenue from grants and
other sources, and $552.9 million in local discretionary monies.
The General Fund appropriation represents the
2012-13 budgetary requirements of 170 projects that are
currently under development, design, or construction.
The total appropriation for the 2012-13 Recommended Budget
represents a decrease of $50.1 million from the 2011-12 Final
Adopted Budget. The net decrease reflects the completion of
17 projects in 2011-12 and continuing progress on 170 other
projects that are currently under development, design, or
construction.

In addition to those projects appropriated in the General Fund,
the capital program includes certain critical projects which are
financed with special district revenue, commercial paper
proceeds, and are appropriated in certain special funds,
summarized in Volume II. These projects address capital needs
in the areas of infrastructure repair and development, health
services, public safety, and general government, and include,
but are not limited to, the Martin Luther King Jr. Inpatient
Tower and Multi-Service Ambulatory Care Center Replacement
Projects, the Harbor-UCLA Surgery and Emergency Room
Replacement Project, the High Desert Multi-Service
Ambulatory Care Center Project, and various Fire District
projects. There are 57 projects in development, design, or
construction with a total construction value of $1.7 billion.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget does not reflect projects
that have been financed through the issuance of long-term
bonds. Such projects include the Hall of Justice Rehabilitation
Project, the Harbor-UCLA Surgery and Emergency Room
Replacement Project, the Patriotic Hall Refurbishment Project,
the Coroner Annex Building Project, and the Harbor-UCLA
SB 1953 Seismic Retrofit Project. In the aggregate, these
projects are valued at $682.8 million. Bond financed funds are
held and administered by independent bond trustees.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects the deletion of
$6.9 million in carryover funds and $2.8 million in one-time
program funding; the reduction of funding related to the
transfer of the Office of Affirmative Action Compliance (OAAC)
operations in 2011-12 as well as the deletion of 1.0 position
due to an appropriation transfer to the Department of Public
Works (DPW); the addition of $1.7 million in countywide
allocation adjustments in benefits and rent charges; at no
additional net County cost, the expansion of Steps to
Excellence Program and the creation of a Return-to-Work strike
team; and the realignment of operating requirements to meet
projected operating expenditures.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The last County Strategic Plan update was approved by the
Board on March 20, 2012 which included updated Strategies
Initiatives under Goal 1 (Operational Effectiveness), and the
replacement of four previous Programmatic Goals (Children,
Family and Adult Well-Being; Community and Municipal
Services; Health and Mental Health; and Public Safety) with
two new Goals of Fiscal Sustainability (Goal 2) and Integrated
Services Delivery (Goal 3). Each Goal includes a number of key,
high impact strategic initiatives that reflect some of the
County’s current pressing challenges. Under Goal 1, each
Strategic Initiative has several Priority Focus areas, and each
Priority Focus area contains a three-to-five-year long-term
outcome statement as well as detailed annual action plans,
which reflect a year of activities toward achievement of the
long-term outcome. Goals 2 and 3 have a similar structure to
Goal 1, but do not include Focus Areas since the Strategic
Initiatives of these two goals are more defined than Goal 1.
The purpose of this structural approach is to:
¦ Make the County’s Strategic Plan more responsive to the
dynamic environment in which the County operates;
¦ Clearly identify and focus on the highest-impact strategic
priorities, reflecting a limited set of priority issues and
opportunities; and
¦ Recognize the uniqueness of individual department goals and
ensure that these equally important priorities are addressed
effectively and timely through department strategic planning
and operations.
The Department continues its ongoing efforts to promote
collaboration between operating units along with identifying
and implementing efficiency measures and initiatives
throughout the County.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a net County cost
increase of $89,000 primarily due to the full restoration of the
County’s matching contribution toward its deferred
compensation plans and Board-approved increases in salaries
and employee benefits.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to:
¦ Support the County’s Strategic Plan by participating actively
as both owner and supporter of many County strategies and
objectives;
¦ Maintain a countywide strategic IT planning program
including an IT governance structure, which ensures
alignment of IT initiatives with County strategies and
objectives;
¦ Review Board-approved IT contracts and department business
automation plans to ensure alignment with departmental and
countywide goals; and
¦ Foster better management of County IT resources to improve
service delivery and increase organizational effectiveness.
The Department’s unmet needs include additional funding for 2.0 Senior Information Technology Consultant, CIO positions to
support the County’s Information Security Program and address increasing responsibilities attributable to State and federal
security and privacy regulatory compliance.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects $166.6 million in
gross appropriation and the deletion of 42.0 budgeted
positions. This budget reflects a decrease of $1.2 million in
gross appropriation to help offset unavoidable employee
increases and various reductions in one-time funding. This is
the tenth consecutive year that CSSD receives a flat baseline
administrative cost allocation from the California Department
of Child Support Services (DCSS). The budget also assumes a
flat funding allocation from the State for the Electronic Data
Processing Maintenance and Operation budget and eliminates
supplemental funding received from the State for information
technology support services provided by CSSD. The budget
eliminates one-time dollars received from the County for the
multi-year pilot to image and archive documents for child
support cases. The budget eliminates funding for the use of
Citrix software maintained by the Department of Public Social
Services (DPSS). DPSS will no longer charge CSSD for use of the
software. It also eliminates the one-time incentive funding
from the State for the “Back File Project” to complete the
imaging of child support case files. The budget eliminates the
Department’s reliance on the remaining one-time trust fund
dollars.
The Department continues the pilot project started in
FY 2010-11 with the Department of Community and Senior
Services involving clients shared by both departments. The
objective is to increase opportunities for gainful employment
for CSSD unemployed non-custodial parents, while
simultaneously preventing the accrual of large child support
arrearages. Efforts to provide coordinated, streamlined, and
comprehensive services to shared clients are ongoing. Another
collaboration in the early stage of a pilot prompted in part by
the recent enactment of Assembly Bill 109, which places with
the County Probation Department responsibility for
supervising offenders released from State prison after having
served a sentence for a non-violent, non-serious, and
non-sexual offense. This pilot will focus on re-entry efforts by members of this population who also have child support cases
and may be hindered unless child support enforcement
remedies are tempered for a short period of time. Probation
will provide CSSD with certain information for recently
released offenders and CSSD will contact those with open child
support cases in order to work with them to temporarily
suspend enforcement remedies that may prevent them from
obtaining employment or securing job readiness skills.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to engage senior, mid-level and line
staff to strategize and redesign business practices to optimize
resources and improve performance. It also remains
committed to measures that ensure effective and professional
service delivery and support the County’s Strategic Plan goals.
The Department continues to align performance measures
with the County’s Strategic Plan and the federal and State
performance measures for local child support agencies.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget for Administration reflects
a $46.3 million increase in gross appropriation and a
$17.6 million increase in net County cost (NCC). The increase in
NCC is due primarily to a $22.0 million increase consisting of:
1) $16.7 million due to employee benefits; 2) $3.0 million due
to the Board-approved Title IV-E Child Welfare Waiver
Demonstration Capped Allocation Project (Waiver)
Enhancements; 3) $1.8 million due to Tier II of the Board
approved Katie A. Strategic Plan; and 4) $0.5 million due to
unavoidable cost increases. The NCC increase was partially
offset by an NCC decrease of $4.4 million cosisting of:
1) $4.0 million due to the elimination of one-time funding
associated with the transfer of the Department’s Information
Technology (IT) function to the Internal Services Department
(ISD); 2) $0.2 million due to the continuation of the Second
Sequence Waiver Initiatives; and 3) $0.2 million due to the
Countywide Cost Allocation Plan.
The Recommended Budget also reflects: 1) 39.0 additional
positions for the Board-approved Enhanced and Expanded
Waiver Strategies, fully offset by Waiver revenue and
Provisional Financing Uses (PFU) Waiver reinvestment funds;
and 2) 17.0 additional positions for critically needed program
services and administrative support, fully offset by Waiver
revenue growth.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The mission of DCFS is to support and strengthen families and
communities to keep children and youth safe and help them
thrive. DCFS continues its collaborative initiatives with the
Chief Executive Office (CEO), other County departments and
community partners to increase child safety, decrease
timelines to permanence, reduce reliance on the use of out-ofhome
care, improve self-sufficiency of youth when they reach
adulthood, improve child and family well-being, and increase
organizational excellence. As evidenced in its Waiver strategy
indicators below, DCFS continues to make improvement in
these overarching goals:
Since July 1, 2010, DCFS has made improvements in the
following key performance indicators:
¦ Timely Response to Emergency Response (ER) Referrals
(Immediate Response) increased from 97.2 percent to
98.6 percent;
¦ Timely Response to ER Referrals (5-day) increased from
94.2 percent to 96.4 percent;
¦ Reentry following Reunification decreased from 12.4 percent
to 11.9 percent; and
¦ Placement Stability (children in out-of-home care from 8 days
to 12 months) increased from 85.6 percent to 86.2 percent; the
National Standard is 86.0 percent.)
In addition, the Board has approved the County’s Katie A.
lawsuit exit conditions after a series of presentations in
October 2011. Subsequently, on December 1, 2011, the Federal
Court approved and adopted the County’s Exit Conditions
which provide concrete programmatic and statistical markers
or targets by which exit from the lawsuit can be measured.
DCFS has aligned its overarching goals, strategic plan, and
initiatives in support of the County’s 2011 Updated Strategic
Plan. Despite the financial constraints placed on public services
due to the economic downturn, DCFS has continued to
demonstrate improvement in the quality of service delivery
and outcomes. DCFS has implemented strategies and
initiatives developed to maximize operational effectiveness,
utilizing creative and innovative practices, to facilitate the
timely application of client-centered supportive services, as
follows:
¦ Data-Driven Decision Making Practice: The Department
officially launched the new Data-Driven Decision Making
practice on November 9, 2011, which uses data and the stories
behind the data for the office, bureau, and at the executive
level to provide an arena for discussion about strengths,
challenges, strategies and best practices. The process includes
a review of data, engaging staff in conversations about the key
performance indicators and focusing collective attention on
what really matters in our work. In addition, a data dashboard
posted on the departmental website provides data and
performance trend information on key performance
indicators related safety, performance, and well-being for
managers to monitor progress performance.
¦ ER Referral over 60 Days Reduction: DCFS redesigned its ER
business process with a seamless partnership of management
and caseworkers by focusing on streamlining the activities
needed for ER (over and under 60 days), referral disposition,
and closure. The goal is to improve quality without
compromising child safety. The result of this effort was a
reduction of over 60 days’ referrals from 6,200 in July 2010, to
approximately 850 as of December 2011.
¦ Strategic Plan 2012-2016: DCFS has restarted the
development and deployment phases of this 4-year plan. A
survey was distributed to all departmental employees to
integrate their feedback in the development of this plan. The
plan will set priorities for initiatives to achieve the overarching
goals of improving child safety, decreasing timelines to permanency, safely reducing reliance on out-of-home-care,
self-sufficiency, increasing child and family well-being, and
enhancing organizational excellence.
¦ California Fostering Connections to Success Act (formerly
known as Assembly Bill 12): Effective January 1, 2012, DCFS
Department has successfully implemented this new law
which extends foster care benefits to foster youth beyond age
18. The objective of this law is for foster youth and the adults
in their lives to work in new and different ways to help youth
achieve their goals in many areas, such as, education, work,
and health in order to transition to adulthood in the
community. The design and implementation of this program
required collaboration and integration of public and private
entities, stakeholders, and legislative bodies to identify focus
areas including placement and program, eligibility rate and
payments, training and information sharing, automation
changes, fiscal and administration, and rules of court.
¦ IV-E Waiver Reinvestment Plan: On December 13, 2011, the
Board approved the IV-E Waiver Reinvestment Plan which
enables DCFS and Probation to implement strategies that
address outcomes in safety, permanency, and self-sufficiency;
and provide a wide-range of community-based services to
children and families throughout the County. The
collaboration between social workers, probation officers,
service providers, and the community are key factors in
improving outcomes. The reinvestment strategies focused on
expanding co-location of staff from other agencies partnering
in child protection and well-being; enhancing the
community-based networking system to prevent child
neglect and abuse; improving quality of care and services to
children and their families to ensure permanency; expanding
the foster youth education project to connect students to local
resources; providing valuable support to families in the
pre-and post-adoption process to increase permanency; and
expanding Academic Remediation Counseling services to
resolve educational issues throughout the County.
DCFS has continued to work collaboratively with the
Departments of Mental Health (DMH) and Health Services to
develop new programs, initiatives, policies and guidelines to
ensure that the mental health and medical needs of each child
are met to promote the safety, permanence, and well-being of
all children served. Some of the new initiatives and reviews
include the following:
¦ Quality Service Review (QSR): One key component of the
Katie A. lawsuit settlement is the QSR process that has been
conducted in seven offices with over 1,000 interviews held
with parents, teachers, and other individuals. QSR is an
organizational intervention and system change process used
for teaching, measuring, and improving frontline practice in
child-serving agencies. The QSR protocol uses an in-depth
case review method and practice appraisal process to
determine how well children and their caregivers are
benefiting from services received and how well locally
coordinated services are assisting them to achieve necessary
levels of well-being, daily functioning, and support needed to
gain safety, well-being, and permanency for achieving safe
case closure.
¦ Core Practice Model (CPM): In November 2011, a letter from
the Directors of DCFS, DMH and Probation was distributed to
all staff and providers articulating a joint commitment to the
CPM. The CPM is focused on the relationships, approaches,
and techniques used at the practitioner level to enable youth
and families to achieve the goals of safety, stability,
permanence, and well-being. It emphasizes the effective
engagement and teaming approaches with staff and families
to help decipher children’s underlying needs and develop
interventions which will address these needs. In-depth
coaching began with the kick-off of the Compton Coaching
Pilot in February 2012.
The Department’s critical unmet needs include additional funding to: 1) reduce social worker caseloads to 15 for Generic workers
and 12 for Emergency Response workers in accordance with the Senate Bill 2030 Workload Study in order to ensure maximum
services to children and families; 2) increase staffing for administrative support; and 3) ensure adequate funding is available to
accommodate space needs.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget for Assistance Payments
reflects an overall $26.5 million reduction in net County cost
(NCC) due primarily to a decrease of $38.3 million consisting of:
1) additional State Realignment Sales Tax which resulted in
NCC savings of $27.1 million; 2) $4.4 million due to Foster Care
(FC) caseload reductions; 3) $2.5 million due to Emergency
Assistance (EA) caseload reductions; 4) $1.6 million due to
Adoptions Assistance Payment (AAP) Program caseload
reductions; and, 5) $2.7 million due to Kinship Guardianship
Assistance Payment (Kin-GAP) Program caseload reductions.
The NCC decrease is partially offset by an NCC increase of
$11.8 million consisting of: 1) $7.0 million to fund the Tier II
case costs included in the Board approved Katie A. Strategic
Plan; 2) $0.8 million due to FC-General Relief Ineligible (GRI)
caseload increases; 3) $3.3 million for the second year of
Extended Foster Care (AB12); and, 4) $0.7 million for the Child
Abuse and Neglect Prevention, Intervention and Treatment
(CAPIT) Program and Promoting Safe and Stable Families
(PSSF) enhancements. In addition, the 2012-13 Recommended
Budget reflects the transfer of the Seriously Emotionally
Disturbed (SED) Program to the school districts.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department is currently implementing a number of
strategies under the Title IV-E Child Welfare Waiver Capped
Allocation Demonstration Project (Waiver) to ensure safety,
stability and permanency for children under its care. The
strategic changes are projected to reduce Foster Care costs. The
three key areas that are projected to affect the assistance costs
include: 1) ensuring that only those children and families who
would be appropriately served by the child welfare system
enter the system; 2) reducing the time children spend in
out-of-home care; and 3) providing services to children and
families to enable the children to remain in their home or
achieve timely permanency.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease of
$0.8 million in gross appropriation and a $1.2 million decrease
in net County cost (NCC) due primarily to the loss of one-time
funding for security guard services at community and senior
centers; funding for the Los Angeles County Regional Gang
Violence Reduction Initiative; reduction in anticipated revenue
for the Dispute Resolution Program; and the elimination of the
Utility User Tax (UUT) Cy Pres funding for the Community
Development Commission’s Whittier Resource Center. These
decreases are partially offset by increases in various employee
benefits and health insurance subsidies. The budget also
includes funding from the First Supervisorial District to cover
staff and operating expenses for the new Potrero Heights
service center in the City of Montebello and to purchase
identification bracelets for Alzheimer patients through the
Family Caregiver Support Program.
The Department continues to explore efficiencies through
various information technology initiatives. The Contract
Management System implemented FY 2011-12 provides for
the electronic creation of new contracts and contract
amendments for over 400 non-profit and community agencies
that contract with the County. The automation of standardized
contract language makes formatting, editing and finalizing
contract documents a much less resource intensive process.
CSS plans to extend the use of the system to other key
stakeholders in the contracting process during the upcoming
fiscal year. CSS also plans to infuse self-service technology at all
public access CSS facilities where information about the
Department’s programs and services can be easily accessed by
the community and clients it serves.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Promote sound, prudent, and transparent fiscal policies and
processes that help ensure maintenance of critical programs
and services.
¦ Enhance economic and social outcomes through integrated
services and best practices.
¦ Implement human capital best practices to enhance the
recruitment, development, retention and well-being of
qualified County employees.
¦ Develop and implement client-centered approaches through
integrated services and best practices.
¦ Maximize the effectiveness of processes, structures and
operations to support timely delivery of customer-oriented
and efficient public services.
The Department is requesting $0.6 million for security guards at the Antelope Valley Senior Center, East Los Angeles Service Center,
Centro Maravilla Service Center, and the San Pedro Service Center; $0.5 million to cover cost increases in employee benefits and
health insurance; $0.5 million for administration of the Summer Youth Employment Program; $0.3 million to add 4.0 additional
community center specialists positions to sufficiently staff the centers and ensure they remain open to serve the public; and
$5.0 million for critical repairs to the 14 service centers.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease of
$13.6 million resulting from the Department maximizing
FY 2010-11 Workforce Investment Act funding and the
elimination of one-time funding for the senior nutrition
program. The elimination of the $0.2 million in one-time NCC
funding reduces the number of home-delivered meals by
about 40,000 impacting approximately 1,800 seniors
(unduplicated clients) served by the nutrition program.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Continue to work collaboratively with County departments
and the network of non-profit and community agencies to
provide the best possible services.
¦ Leverage and maximize funding to enhance opportunities to
create subsidized employment opportunities for County
residents and businesses.
The Department is requesting $3.0 million for the Summer Youth Employment Program to provide paid work experience to at-risk,
foster youth and youth residing in low-income households. Last summer, this program was able to employ over 3,200 youth. This
success was achieved in collaboration with over 100 private sector employers, 80 non-profit agencies, and over 180 public sector
employers. Each youth received exposure to the job market, possible career choices leading to self-sufficiency, and valuable life
lessons.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a net County cost
increase of $67,000 primarily due to Board-approved increases
in employee benefits. The Recommended Budget also reflects
the discontinuance of Federal Homelessness and Rapid
Re-housing Program funding, and enhancement of the
eComplaint Intake and Case Management System designed to
increase customer access to departmental services and reduce
manual data input. Also includes funding for a new
Consolidated Consumer Counseling Section to provide
standardization of departmental responses and to increase the
reliability and accuracy of information.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Implementing Senate Bill 62 to enhance the Real Estate Fraud
and Information Program to reduce the number of homes lost
to foreclosure, loan modification, and real estate fraud;
¦ Developing and launching a new mobile application to allow
consumers to file and access complaints with the Department
in real time; and
¦ Enhancing the Consumer Protection Services Program to
better assist unemployed and indebted consumers being
targeted by job scams and fraudulent debt collectors.
The Department needs assistance in securing ongoing funding for: the new mobile application to allow consumers to file and
access complaints with the Department in real time; enhancement of the Consumer Protection Services Program to better assist
unemployed and indebted consumers being targeted by job scams and fraudulent debt collectors; and stabilization of the
Department’s budget due to declining revenues to continue providing quality, responsive and efficient consumer protection
services to the residents of the County.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a net County cost
increase of $0.4 million, primarily due to Board-approved
increases in employee benefits. The budget also reflects an
increase in services and supplies fully offset by savings in other
charges due to a decrease in lease telecommunications
equipment costs. Additionally, the Department will convert
1.0 Physician Post Graduate – 5th year to a 7th year position
which will allow the Department to retain post graduates for a
longer period of time. This position change is fully offset by an
increase in reimbursable revenue from the Department of
Children and Family Services.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Coroner’s primary goal for 2012-13 is the successful
re-accreditation of the Forensic Laboratories. The Coroner’s
strategic plan also continues to focus on the delivery of
effective and compassionate services to the public.
Construction of the new 500 body capacity crypt facility is
complete which dramatically expands decedent storage and
improves health and safety. The renovation phase of the
existing 1104 North Mission Road is underway which
addresses critical needs and improves the efficiency of the
biological building. This effort also creates additional doctor
and autopsy space, and improves the health and safety of
employees. The Department continues its efforts toward
implementation of a DNA Laboratory designed to provide DNA
services to the public and outside agencies. Sorenson Forensics
will be overseeing the DNA Lab implementation as well as
assisting the Coroner in preparation for American Society of
Crime Laboratory Directors/Laboratory Accreditation Board
(ASCLD/LAB) ISO re-accreditation. The Department continues
its ongoing effort in the Homeland Security acquisitions. The
Department has also successfully implemented efficiencies,
and its efficiency committee continues to meet to explore
additional cost saving measures.
The Coroner requests a Senior Criminalist position in order to successfully pass re-accreditation for the Forensic Laboratories as well
as the DNA lab. The Coroner continues its efforts to replace the dilapidated case tracking Coroner’s Medical Examiner (CME) System.
This system is designed as the backbone for tracking and documenting all Coroner cases handled by the department and is a
critical tool/component to accomplishing the Department’s mission. CME was last updated in 2000, is not web-based and is no
longer supported by the vendor or any other entity. Replacement of the outdated and security compromised system is a
management audit recommendation and there is a serious concern that the unsupported system will not continue to function
much longer. The Coroner also seeks restoration of the Public Information Officer position lost in previous curtailments. The need
for professional and effective delivery of information particularly in handling high profile cases has increased significantly. The
Coroner also requests an allocation for the replacement of field response vehicles which have not been budgeted over the last
4 years. The Coroner requests the replacement of the 9.0 positions deleted in FY 2010-11. These positions are critical to the efficient
delivery of service and play a significant role in maintaining the Department’s valued accreditations. As a result of negotiated
changes to the physician pay plan, Coroner pathologist employee benefits have increased. The Coroner is requesting additional
funding to appropriately adjust its employee benefits.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in net
County cost of $105,000 primarily due to funding for
negotiated increases in salaries and employee benefits such as
retirement costs, health insurance, and the restoration of
deferred compensation saving plans. These increases are
partially offset by an adjustment in rent charges to comply
with Federal Office of Management and Budget claiming
guidelines.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
County Counsel will continue ongoing strategic plan initiatives
in support of the County's Strategic Plan including:
¦ Develop and implement new initiatives, strengthen current
practices, and enhance our client relations through
communication and training.
¦ Manage resources more effectively by promoting prudent
fiscal policies and practices and exploring innovative methods
that help ensure fiscal stability. Implemented the e-Billing
System in FY 2011-12. The system standardizes the process of
invoices and integrates with the existing Risk Management
Information System (RMIS), to provide a streamlined and
efficient invoice management workflow.
¦ Implement environmentally-responsible practices in daily
operations such as refreshing the network infrastructure by
installing efficient and green file servers and related
technologies to improve the capabilities and reliability of the
IT office systems while reducing energy demands.
¦ Develop and implement a strategic framework to protect and
secure the County's technology assets and information.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a net County cost
increase of $0.2 million primarily due to an increase in salaries
and employee benefits, anticipated increase in public safety
sales tax receipts and a reduction in State and federal revenue.
The Recommended Budget also reflects a decrease of
14.0 positions primarily as a result of State budget cuts that
eliminated Vertical Prosecution Block Grant funding for Major
Narcotics and Elder Abuse programs as well as funding for the
In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Anit-Fraud Program.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The District Attorney’s strategic planning efforts are focused on
maximizing resources to ensure that core mission prosecution
services are provided according to State law. Expanded use of
technology remains a critical aspect of organizational
effectiveness and as such, the Office continues to expand
electronic subpoenas and use of video conferencing as well as
work on information and document exchanges with other
criminal justice agencies.
The District Attorney is requesting restoration of specific curtailments taken in FYs 2008-09, 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12.
Therefore, the Department’s FY 2012-13 Official Budget includes restoration of 97.0 permanent and 56.0 part-time positions as
follows: 65.0 Attorney positions curtailed from both General and Specialized Prosecution; 16.0 Investigative positions curtailed
from Prosecution Support and Special Investigative Units; 56.0 part-time Legal Support positions (Law Clerks, Senior Law Clerks
and Student Professional Workers; 10.0 Paralegals curtailed from Central Trials and Specialized Prosecutions such as Major Crimes,
Hardcore Gangs, etc.; and 6.0 Hearing Officer positions from the Abolish Chronic Truancy (ACT), Juvenile Offender Intervention
Network (JOIN) and Adult Hearing Officer Programs.
In addition, the Department is requesting restoration of 8.0 Attorney positions eliminated as a result of the loss of Vertical
Prosecution Block Grant funding. This cut will significantly impact the Major Narcotics and Elder Abuse prosecution efforts. The
Major Narcotics Division works closely with law enforcement at the federal, State and local levels by prosecuting narcotics dealers
and traffickers with ties to large scale drug trafficking organizations. The Division’s cases routinely involve complex wiretap
investigations with multiple suspects. The Elder Abuse Section specializes in the vertical prosecution of complex physical, sexual,
neglect and financial elder and dependent adult abuse cases. In addition, they participate on several prevention and investigation
multidisciplinary teams and provide extensive training, community outreach and resource referrals.
The EPR budget provides funding for the County Office of
Emergency Management (OEM) and acts as the pass-through
for federal and State grant funding.
OEM primarily focuses on the preparation and implementation
of plans and policies for the protection of life and property
within the County and operational area in the event of an
emergency or disaster; the operation and maintenance of the
County Emergency Operations Center, including the
Emergency Management Information System computer
network; the coordination of the training of personnel from
various jurisdictions on County-endorsed emergency
management policies and procedures; the creation and
distribution of emergency and disaster related educational
materials for the residents of the County; and on conducting
countywide disaster exercises to test emergency preparedness.
The EPR budget also incorporates funds for federal and State
grants that include the State Homeland Security Grant
Program; Urban Area Security Initiative; Law Enforcement
Terrorism Prevention Program; Citizens Corps Program; Buffer
Zone Protection Program; and the Emergency Management
Performance Grant for County departments, unincorporated
areas, special districts, and municipalities within the
operational area.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects funding for the
continued oversight and coordination of countywide
emergency preparedness and response efforts. The
Recommended Budget reflects equivalent decreases in both
appropriation and revenue for various grants, the deletion of
$2.1 million in carryover funding, and the transfer of $95,000 to
the Department of Public Works (DPW).
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects:
¦ Anticipated increases in workers’ compensation and
long-term disability appropriation offset with expenditure
distribution to County departments.
¦ The termination of the COBRA Continuation Coverage
Assistance under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act (ARRA) in July 2010.
The County’s infrastructure requires ongoing investment to
meet continuous performance requirements. The 2011-12
budget appropriated funds for critical repairs at County
beaches, parks, probation facilities and various roof repairs
throughout the County. On September 28, 2010, the Board
approved $59.9 million for a Deferred Maintenance Program to
address critical repairs and maintenance at public health
centers, community and senior centers, County cultural
institutions, and County waste water treatment facilities. The
2012-13 Recommended Budget appropriates $111.9 million
for these and other high priority repairs, maintenance and
accessibility modification needs at County facilities, including
juvenile halls, health centers, and animal shelters.
During 2011-12, departments identified additional deferred maintenance needs with an estimated total cost of $98.7 million.
These unfunded needs include various general facility repairs; replacement of outdated building systems such as boilers, chillers,
heating, ventilating and air conditioning units; roofs; and elevator upgrades to obtain building operational efficiencies.
The Federal and State Disaster Aid budget provides economic recovery assistance following major emergencies and disasters, such
as the Winter Storms of 2005, 2007 Southern California Wildfires, 2008 California Wildfires (Marek, Sesnon and Sayre), 2009 Fires
(Station, Palos Verdes, Morris), and the 2010 Severe Winter Storms. It also includes contingency appropriation for emergency and
post-emergency responses, in the addition to restoration of buildings and property, pending reimbursement from appropriate
governmental agencies and insurance companies.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects the potential need for appropriate revenues from federal and State agencies in the
event of a major disaster. In addition, this budget reflects the anticipated expenditures for the County to continue the permanent
repair, restoration, and replacement of facilities damaged during the aforementioned disasters.
In compliance with Governmental Accounting Standards Board
Statement 54 (GASB 54), the County implemented “Fund
Balance Reporting and Government Fund Type Definitions”.
This change introduced new fund balance terminology. New
fund balance terminology classifies a reserve or designation as
nonspendable, restricted, committed or assigned. Definitions
of the new terms can be found in the Glossary.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget includes financing sources
and financing uses as follows:
Financing Sources
For budgetary planning purposes, the Chief Executive Office
considers total financing sources the difference generated in
FY 2011-12 from County revenues exceeding expenditures
(available fund balance), the cancellation of prior year reserves
and designations, and property taxes. Any decrease in
available fund balance from the budgeted amount will require
expenditure reductions or the identification of additional
financing. The recommended fund balance of $1,225.0 million
is comprised of the following:
¦ $187.9 million from General Fund operations;
¦ $542.9 million of FY 2011-12 Capital Projects funds being
carried over for the completion of various projects and
refurbishment needs;
¦ $85.1 million of FY 2011-12 Extraordinary Maintenance funds
being carried over for major repairs and maintenance of
County facilities and assets;
¦ $45.8 million of FY 2011-12 Project and Facility Development
funds being carried over for consultant and specialized
services related to projects that are under development, as
well as improvements to County facilities;
¦ $239.3 million of FY 2011-12 Provisional Financing Uses funds
being carried over primarily for the Departments of Children
and Family Services, Probation, Health Services for
Community Partners (formerly Public/Private Partnerships),
Auditor-Controller, Agricultural Commissioner/Weights and
Measures for a database upgrade and Beaches and Harbors
for the Electrical Vault Replacement; Board of Supervisors,
Office of Public Safety/Sheriff merger, the eProperty Tax
Project, Long Beach Courthouse Tenant Improvements,
Information Technology Shared Services, 2-1-1 Information
Line and potential State budget impacts.
¦ $54.2 million of FY 2011-12 Board of Supervisors funds being
carried over for various community programs;
¦ $36.2 million of FY 2011-12 Homeless and Housing Program
funds being carried over for Homeless Prevention Initiative
projects;
¦ $20.3 million of FY 2011-12 Children and Family Services funds
being carried over for Title IV-E Waiver and the Katie A.
Settlement Agreement;
¦ $8.6 million of FY 2011-12 Department of Public Social
Services funds being carried over primarily for General Relief
program enhancements;
¦ $4.0 million of FY 2011-12 Department of Public Health funds
being carried over to mitigate the structural deficit;
¦ $0.4 million of FY 2011-12 Internal Services Department funds
being carried over for eMail migration costs for the
Departments of Parks and Recreation, Registrar-Recorder/
County Clerk and Regional Planning; and
¦ $0.3 million of FY 2011-12 Regional Planning funds being
carried over to mitigate a revenue shortfall.
The cancellation of prior year reserves and designations of
$137.6 million includes the following:
¦ $102.3 million in Designation for Health Services Tobacco
Settlement for health-related costs;
¦ $18.2 million in Designation for Local Taxes to provide funding
for the Sheriff Department primarily for patrol operations in
the unincorporated areas;
¦ $14.9 million in Designation for Interoperability and
Countywide Communications to fund the Los Angeles
Regional Interoperable Communications System (LA-RICS)
ongoing operations, services provided through the Deltawrx
contract and local funding for a matching federal grant for
broadband radio infrastructure equipment; and
¦ $2.2 million in Designation for Capital Projects and
Extraordinary Maintenance to fund energy efficiency projects
that should generate ongoing energy savings.
Property Tax revenues reflect a net increase of $80.0 million
from the FY 2011-12 Final Adopted Budget. The increase is
primarily due to the increase in the assessed valuation estimate
for the Los Angeles County property tax roll, partially offset by
a $0.005 million decrease related to the sales tax (Triple Flip)
revenue resulting from the calculation of Educational Revenue
Augmentation Fund (ERAF) sales tax for the County. Property
Tax revenues include in-lieu of Vehicle License Fee revenue as
part of the State’s Local Government Agreement (2004 Budget
Act).
The recommended Property Tax revenue changes are
comprised of the following:
¦ $82.0 million increase in the Regular Roll;
¦ $2.0 million decrease in the Supplemental Roll; and
¦ $0.005 million decrease related to the taxable sales in the
County and the dollar for dollar swap of sales tax revenue with
ERAF property tax revenue (Triple Flip).
The Fire Department, as a Special District, is funded
independent of the County General Fund, and relies primarily
on property taxes and a special tax approved by the voters in
1997 to provide essential fire protection and emergency
medical services. The Department continues to experience an
imbalance between revenue and costs, primarily due to a
decline in property taxes. With the continuation of cost
containments, increased efficiencies, use of one-time funds,
and the recently approved special tax increase by the Board of
Supervisors, the Department will sustain the current level of
emergency staffing and essential support services, and meet
increases in retirement, retiree health insurance, workers’
compensation and other employee benefit costs in FY 2012-13.
In addition, the FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget also reflects
the addition of 30.0 positions as a result of the reorganization
of the Department’s Construction and Maintenance Division.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Fire Department provides 24-hour, emergency services to
over four million people living and working in 57 of the
County’s 88 cities, the unincorporated communities and the
City of La Habra, in neighboring Orange County. The Department’s vast 2,300 square mile jurisdiction also includes
158 lifeguard towers spanning 72 miles of coastline, to protect
millions of annual beach visitors, and over one million housing
units. The Fire Department is one of the largest emergency
service organizations in the country, and enjoys a
world-renowned reputation for its adeptness and innovation in
managing large-scale wildfires, earthquakes, and other natural
and manmade disasters in Southern California.
The Department has launched a major strategic planning
effort. This effort focuses on using information technology to
improve its organizational effectiveness, best practices in
performance management, and risk-reduction, innovation,
and communication strategies, while continuing to provide
exemplary services to the Department’s diverse communities.
The Department’s 2012-13 Recommended Budget includes
funding for initiatives in-line with the following strategic
planning efforts: Preventing Injury and Illness; Delivering
Exemplary Emergency Services; Innovating New Delivery
Systems; Fostering Workforce Excellence; Ensuring Financial
Stability and Accountability; Developing Leaders;
Strengthening the Department’s Infrastructure; Automating
Systems; Containing Risks; Mitigating Disaster; Preparing and
Engaging the Community; and Communicating the
Department’s Value.
The Department’s critical needs are financed in the Budget Request. The Department utilizes multi-year fiscal forecast planning to
ensure that adequate funding is available to sustain departmental operations. With the economic downturn, the primary source of
funding, property tax revenue, has declined while costs beyond its control have increased. The Department continues to address
the loss of property tax revenue and ongoing cost increases by continuing the freeze on non-emergency positions, firm restrictions
on non-emergency overtime, curtailments in discretionary expenditures, efficiencies and the use of one-time reserve funds, as it
has since FY 2008-09. Continued cost curtailments and use of one-time reserve funds are only a stop-gap measure to address this
financial imbalance and not sustainable for the long-term. The Department’s Strategic Planning efforts will address current fiscal
challenges and will provide strategies to ensure fiscal sustainability.
The Fire Department - Lifeguard Budget provides funding for
lifeguard services at County-operated beaches that are the
responsibility of the General Fund. The budget unit establishes
an appropriation for a General Fund transfer to the Fire
Department’s budget, which includes a percentage of all costs
and budgeted positions for ocean lifeguard services. The
2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in net
County cost (NCC) of $353,000 primarily due to various
employee benefits adjustments.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Fire Department provides 24-hour, emergency services to
over four million people living and working in 57 of the
County’s 88 cities, the unincorporated communities and the
City of La Habra, in neighboring Orange County. The
Department’s vast 2,300 square mile jurisdiction also includes
158 lifeguard towers spanning 72 miles of coastline, to protect
millions of annual beach visitors, and over one million housing
units. The Department is one of the largest emergency service
organizations in the country, and enjoys a world-renowned
reputation for its adeptness and innovation in managing
large-scale wildfilres, earthquakes, and other natural and
manmade disasters in Southern California.
The Department has launched a major strategic planning
effort. This effort focuses on using information technology to
improve the Department’s organizational effectiveness, best
practices in performance management, and risk-reduction,
innovation, and communication strategies, while continuing to
provide exemplary services to the Department’s diverse
communities.
The Department’s 2012-13 Recommended Budget includes
funding for initiatives in-line with the following strategic
planning efforts: Preventing Injury and Illness; Delivering
Exemplary Emergency Services; Innovating New Delivery
Systems; Fostering Workforce Excellence; Ensuring Financial
Stability and Accountability; Developing Leaders;
Strengthening the Department’s Infrastructure; Automating
Systems; Containing Risks; Mitigating Disaster; Preparing and
Engaging the Community; and Communicating the
Department’s Value.
The Lifeguard Official Budget Request includes NCC funding for medical examination costs associated with the Fitness-for-Life
bonuses of $114,000, and restoration of FYs 2009-10 and 2010-11 countywide curtailments of $1.5 million and $1.6 million,
respectively. It also includes $630,000 for the General Fund’s share of a rescue boat and rescue boat headquarters dock house boat
included in the Fire Department’s 2012-13 Budget Request. In addition, $224,000 is included for unfunded County employee
benefits and $133,000 for overhead. This results in a total unmet need of $4.2 million and an Official Budget Request of
$30.2 million.
The 2012-2013 Recommended Budget reflects a net County
cost decrease of $19,000 due to the deletion of one-time
funding, partially offset by Board-approved increases in
employee benefits.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Grand Jury continues to:
¦ Increase recruitment of Civil Grand Jurors to better represent
the varied population of Los Angeles County;
¦ Safeguard valuable Grand Jury original records and develop
long-term storage solutions; and
¦ Plan for a third Grand Jury to be used for Criminal Grand Jury
matters when needed.
The Los Angeles County Grand Jury still faces increased recruiting and selection workloads without additional staffing. In order to
meet the expectations of the Board of Supervisors and the law, recruitment of all segments of the County’s population is required.
One full-time position at the level of Administrative Assistant II (estimated cost of $75,000) would permit the department to devote
this position to increased recruitment and selection efforts.
The authorized second Criminal Grand Jury (Senate Bill 796 added Section 904.8 to the Penal Code), if and when impaneled, will
require additional staff, grand juror expense, space, and infrastructure which is estimated to cost approximately $900,000.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects full-year funding
for building and grounds maintenance, custodial, security, and
programming requirements for Grand Park. Consistent with
established contractual obligations, and demonstrating a
commitment to public-private partnerships, the 2012-13
Recommended Budget provides County funds to maintain and
operate Grand Park.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Consistent with the County’s vision to improve the quality of
life in Los Angeles County, Grand Park exists to serve the
people of Los Angeles by assuring open spaces for special
events, casual sitting, leisurely strolling and civic gatherings.
Grand Park serves the community by providing access to
community groups, neighbors, schoolchildren, and sponsored
performing events.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget is fully funded with
available resources, and reflects the minimum amount of local
resources required by law ($124.2 million and Vehicle License
Fees (VLF)-Realignment revenue of $249.4 million), plus an
additional $272.3 million in County funding. The additional
County funding components include $211.3 million from the
General Fund and $92.5 million in Tobacco Settlement funds;
partially offset by $24.0 million in County resources allocated
to the Department of Public Social Services (DPSS) for the
In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Provider Health Care Plan
and $7.5 million allocated to the Capital Projects/
Refurbishments budget for health-related capital projects.
The Recommended Budget reflects $195.9 million in Measure
B Special Tax revenue, of which $194.1 million is allocated for
County hospital emergency and trauma care costs at LAC+USC
Medical Center (LAC+USC) and Harbor-UCLA Medical Center
(H-UCLA), and for County hospital emergency care costs at
Olive View-UCLA Medical Center (OV-UCLA). The remaining
$1.8 million is allocated for services related to trauma centers
and emergency medical services in Health Services
Administration-Emergency Medical Services.
The Recommended Budget reflects a net County cost (NCC)
decrease of $31.6 million. This consists primarily of a
$21.3 million decrease in VLF-Realignment revenue; the
reversal of $7.7 million in one-time Tobacco Settlement funds
for CP carryover claims from FY 2010-11; a decrease of
$3.1 million in one-time funding for the third year of the Clinic
Capacity Expansion Program (CCEP); a decrease of $2.3 million
in Tobacco Settlement funds for the Managed Care Rate
Supplement (MCRS) intergovernmental transfer; and the
transfer of $32,000 to the Department of Public Health (DPH)
to support their eCAPS data warehouse costs. The
Recommended Budget also reflects a decrease of NCC
transferred to the capital projects budget of $5.1 million and
an increase to DPSS for the IHSS Provider Health Care Plan of
$2.3 million.
The Recommended Budget provides funding for increased
operational costs, primarily due to a net cost increase of
$51.6 million in employee benefits, an increase of $13.1 million
for a Consumer Price Index (CPI) adjustment for pharmacy and
services and supplies, an increase of $12.6 million for
equipment purchases for H-UCLA’s surgery/emergency room
(ER) building, an increase of $7.9 million for equipment
purchases for the replacement Martin Luther King, Jr. (MLK)
MACC facility, and an increase of $1.3 million to annualize
funding for the OV-UCLA ER Immediate Jeopardy (IJ) staffing.
The Department’s Enterprise Fund designation was used in
prior years to fund departmental expenses; however, it is
anticipated to be depleted in FY 2011-12 and the Department
is evaluating if a surplus will be generated for FY 2011-12. For
now, the designation is estimated to remain depleted and will
be updated, if necessary, in a later budget phase. Therefore,
there is no balance available to fund the FY 2012-13
Recommended Budget.
The Recommended Budget also includes a net increase of
94.0 budgeted positions, primarily attributed to an increase in
positions for staffing to fully address the IJ at OV-UCLA;
positions to address psychiatric ER (PER) overflow citations at
OV-UCLA; positions for the establishment of the Medical
Village at LAC+USC; a net increase in positions for utilization
review (UR) staffing to meet State requirements; and
maximizes Medi-Cal revenue additional positions to meet
staffing ratios in the tuberculosis (TB) unit at OV-UCLA.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
There are major changes taking place in the Department's
operations and Medi-Cal revenue streams as a result of the
1115 Waiver, particularly the Healthy Way LA (HWLA) matched
program, the transition of Seniors and Persons with Disabilities
(SPDs) into Medi-Cal managed care, the transfer of the Office of
Managed Care Community Health Plan's lines of business to
L.A. Care, and the State's transfer of various programs to the
County, including additional health care for inmates previously
in the State prison system, etc. There are also major changes
related to national health care reform in the future, including
changes associated with the proposed health insurance
exchange.
These significant program and system changes are complex
and require the Department to develop new methods of
projecting revenue based on new types of patient and payer
mixes and different utilization patterns. The historical data
previously used as the basis for the Department's annual
revenue projections are no longer applicable. The Department
is working on improvements in data collection at the facilities
and the development of various revenue projection models.
These models include enrollment projections for the different
programs, changes in overall payer mix, and revised revenue
methodologies and timetables. The Department believes that
these new revenue forecasting models will provide more
reliable revenue projections for future years as more
experience is gained with the new programs and the other
changes taking place throughout the system.
The Recommended Budget includes a revenue placeholder of
$132.0 million while the Department continues to work
diligently to develop the models described above, and will
revise its revenue estimates in a future budget phase.
The Department’s continual funding challenges have resulted in directing funding to cover the increased demand of patient care
and delaying investments in areas such as training, medical equipment purchases and facility maintenance. The Department has
identified $99.6 million in unmet needs as follows: $23.0 million for additional staffing to meet outpatient program needs for the
LAC+USC Healthcare Network (LAC+USC HCN); $9.0 million for the replacement of radiology equipment; $8.8 million in equipment
for the replacement High Desert MACC facility; $8.6 million for various information technology needs; $8.2 million for clinical
program needs for the LAC+USC HCN; $2.1 million for additional staffing for the conversion of 12 medical/surgical acute beds to
step-down beds at H-UCLA; $1.3 million for additional staffing to comply with the Accreditation Council of Graduate Medical
Education - Common Program / Duty Hour Requirements; and numerous, various other unmet needs across DHS, which are
primarily patient care related, totaling $38.6 million.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects an overall net
County cost decrease of $1.5 million in one-time funding used
for the provision of various homeless and housing program
services such as: Access to Housing for Health; Respite Center
for Homeless Families; Benefits Entitlement Services Team for
the Homeless (BEST) project; and numerous emergency,
transitional, or permanent supportive housing program
services for individuals, families or youth. Some of these
programs were provided by County departments and others by
contract agencies. The budget also provides $59.1 million in
one-time and ongoing funding to continue homeless
assistance programs including the Long Beach Homeless
Veteran’s Initiative; Prototype Court program for defendants
who are homeless and have co-occurring illnesses (mental
health and substance abuse); Department of Public Social
Services (DPSS) applications at County jails and County
medical centers; and others that provide supportive services
for homeless families, individuals, and veterans. The budget
also includes one-time funding to cover 50 percent of the cost
of the 2013 Homeless Count which is mandated by the federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development. The total
cost for the 2013 Homeless Count will be shared equally by the
City of Los Angeles and the County of Los Angeles.
On January 24, 2012, the Board approved a motion
establishing the Los Angeles Interagency Council on
Homelessness (LAICH) which will be co-chaired by the Chair of
the Board and Vice-Chaired by the CEO. It is anticipated that
the HHP will be central in facilitating all LAICH activities.
While the ongoing economic downturn has had a significant
impact on many in the County, it has had a disproportionate
impact on those who are most vulnerable among us – the
homeless population. It is important that the County help the
most vulnerable homeless individuals and families regain
sustainable housing.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The HHP has overseen at least 64 programs funded in part by
HPI. In FY 2010-11, these programs have served approximately
19,342 individuals, families and/or youth. Some of the
highlights include the following:
¦ Secured emergency, transitional, or permanent supportive
housing for approximately 4,598 individuals, families or youth.
¦ Oversaw the Center for Community Health (CCH) Downtown
Los Angeles, a state-of-the-art, 21,000 square foot medical
facility, in partnership with JWCH Institute, Inc., the Weingart
Center Association, Department of Mental Health,
Department of Health Services, Department of Public Health,
and funded in part by HPI and a coalition of private
foundations. In FY 2010-11, CCH had 36,008 visits from
homeless and low-income persons in and around Skid Row for
medical, dental, mental health, and substance abuse services.
¦ Assisted in the implementation of a $12.0 million dollar
Homeless Prevention and Rapid Re-Housing Program (HPRP)
funded by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
(ARRA) in collaboration with the Community Development
Commission, other County departments and LAHSA. This
program has served 1,871 households since its inception in
October 2010 through December 31, 2011.
¦ Implemented a Homeless Encampment Protocol, a
collaboration among the CEO, Sheriff’s Department, and
LAHSA which responds to homeless encampments
throughout the County. This collaborative program has
addressed over 25 homeless encampments throughout the
County since its inception in February 2011.
The HHP and the community continue to have less supply than there is demand for affordable housing, with rental subsidies and
supportive services to prevent and end homelessness in the County.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in net
County cost of $204,000 primarily for Board-approved
increases in employee benefits, partially offset by the deletion
of one-time funding. Also includes funding to further
implement the County’s broad-based testing initiative that will
replace and/or substitute the Appraisal of Promotability
process and be utilized to identify the highest potential
candidates for external hiring and internal promotion.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department of Human Resources (DHR) has taken
significant strides in transforming human resources (HR)
services countywide and the Department continues
discussions with the Human Resources Executive Advisory
Committee regarding HR challenges in the County, the best HR
practices, and potential business models to enhance HR service
delivery countywide.
Other HR initiatives include: succession planning;
enhancement of the DHR website; enhancements for the
Learning Management System to improve end-user
experience; retiring the County’s legacy systems for online job
applications; implementation of the Discipline Management
System and the Absence Management System; revising Civil
Service procedural rules; publishing the Countywide Discipline
Guidelines; improving examination processes; performing
computerized testing; and improving customer service on the
benefits hotline.
The Department’s unmet needs include funding for a workforce reduction system and a human resource data repository. They also
include additional positions for online testing, job analysis, broad-based testing, appeals, personnel investigations, the Learning
Academy, the Interpretive Manual, and the Joint Labor Management Committee.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects only prior year actuals as the Information Systems Advisory Body was consolidated
within the Board of Supervisors in FY 2011-12.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a net County cost
(NCC) reduction of $3.7 million, primarily due to the deletion of
funding associated with the building maintenance services at
Court facilities, which have transitioned to the State pursuant
to Senate Bill (SB) 1732; deletion of 2011-12 one-time funding
for the e-mail migration costs of two County departments; and
a reduction in funding specified by the Countywide Cost
Allocation Adjustment. This reduction is partially offset by an
augmentation of funding for the Living Wage Program, an
increase in funding for various centrally planned employee
benefits, and one-time funding for the e-mail migration costs
of three County departments. Also reflected is a net reduction
in gross appropriation of $15.2 million and 112.0 positions in
various reimbursable services provided to County departments
and other agencies, such as computing services,
telecommunication services, customer applications services,
information technology shared services, facilities operations
services, purchasing and contracting services, and the Office of
Sustainability. In addition, reflected is the addition of
6.0 ordinance only (non-budgeted) positions to improve the
timeliness of the countywide contracting protest process by
using retired County managers and staff with contracting
expertise to serve as County Review Panel members.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
ISD’s Strategic Plan for 2011-12 identified steps for improving
service delivery, developing new initiatives to better support
customer departments and the County as a whole, and
developing “green initiatives” in support of the County’s
Energy and Environmental Policy. The FY 2012-13 plan includes
the following new or continuing strategic objectives:
¦ Develop Quality Assurance plans for each of ISD’s lines of
business;
¦ Review selected ISD lines of business to include a detailed
analysis of County customer demand, cost structure, potential
growth, etc., to control costs and meet County needs over the
next two to five years;
¦ Expand energy efficiency and sustainability initiatives,
including programs for existing County buildings and
expanding the County’s role in community programs;
¦ Develop a new County data center business model, including
developing enhanced “private cloud” (internal to the County)
computing services; clarifying disaster recovery infrastructure
requirements for critical County data center applications;
expanding centralized email and other services; and working
with the Chief Executive Office (CEO) and other stakeholders
on data center and disaster recovery consolidation and
construction;
¦ Enhance ISD and County departments’ capability to monitor
purchases and acquisition activities from requisition to
payment via the eCAPS Procurement module;
¦ Replace legacy systems that support vendors who do business
with the County, as part of the eCAPS Vendor Self-Service
module, to include vendor registration, bid solicitations from
eCAPS Procurement module, online solicitation responses and
invoices, and financial inquires by vendors for information that
includes purchase orders and payments; and
¦ Continue to provide management and technical support to
build the Los Angeles Regional Interoperable
Communications Systems (new public safety radio system).
Major accomplishments from last year included:
implementation of the Los Angeles County Energy Program to
promote energy efficiency in County private residences and
creation of the Environmental Service Centers as
one-stop-shops for County residents; and achievement of a
Silver certification for the Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design at the ISD administration building.
Deferred maintenance remains a critical County unmet need. Additional funding has been requested in prior years, but not
provided before last year due to the County’s financial condition. Unfunded deferred maintenance requirements for facilities
maintained by ISD are currently estimated at $99.0 million. This level of deferred maintenance can cause operational problems
(e.g., roof leaks, elevator malfunctions, etc.) and ultimately higher repair costs and should be addressed as soon as feasible.
The Customer Direct Services and Supplies is a “pass through”
budget to account for various services and supplies that the
Internal Services Department purchases directly from outside
vendors on behalf of customer departments.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects no change in
anticipated requirements from customer departments and a
ministerial realignment from Revenue to Expenditure
Distribution for departmental billings.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects funding for
anticipated judgments and/or settlements, attorney fees and
litigation costs, service contracts, and various commercial
insurance policies. The budget also includes a central
appropriation to fund large, unanticipated losses and losses of
a countywide nature.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects full-year funding
and support for buildings and grounds maintenance, utilities,
and other anticipated operational costs of LA Plaza de Cultura y
Artes.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Consistent with the County’s vision to improve the quality of
life in the County, LA Plaza de Cultura y Artes exists to serve the
people of Los Angeles, particularly children and families, by
educating them about Los Angeles history and
Mexican-American culture.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget provides for the collection
of lease payments due on LAC-CAL equipment leases from
County departments and the transfer of such payments to the
Corporation. Also reflected is the payment of insurance
premiums for which expenditures will be distributed to
affected departments.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects additional
funding for the cash match portion of the federal Broadband
Technology and Opportunities Program, offset by a reduction
in funding for administrative costs related to the operation of
the LA-RICS.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget presents a complex
picture as certain departmental programs continue to expand
while other programs are being reduced. The Recommended
Budget reflects an overall appropriation increase of
$19.0 million primarily due to the continued implementation
of the Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) programs and Katie
A. Settlement Agreement Strategic Plan (Katie A. Strategic
Plan). In addition, the overall appropriation increase reflects
cost increases for beds at Institutions for Mental Disease (IMD)
facilities, the restructuring of the General Relief (GR) program,
increases for employee benefits, and the restoration of revenue
and appropriation eliminated in the FY 2011-12 Final Budget
commensurate with revised estimates of Realignment Sales
Tax revenue. These increases in appropriation are partially
offset by decreases in several programs due to actions at the
State level, including termination of the Assembly Bill (AB)
3632 program for children with serious emotional disabilities
and the reduction of certain grant-funded programs in
accordance with decreased funding or scheduled termination
at the end of FY 2011-12.In FY 2012-13, DMH anticipates completion of a pending State
Plan Amendment (SPA) that will enable the Department to
claim an additional $13.0 million in federal revenue for actual
costs that are above the currently allowable Schedule of
Maximum Allowance, but below the federal cap on Medicaid
reimbursement. Additional funding solutions include an
estimated $4.2 million in lower expenditures than previously
budgeted for programs funded by the State managed care
allocation, and an estimated $2.0 million in anticipated
additional revenue for prior-years’ Medi-Cal cost settlements.
The Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease of
51.0 positions. The net decrease is comprised of: 1) the
elimination of 63.0 positions associated with the AB 3632
program; 2) 3.0 additional positions for clinical staff
conducting disability assessments as part of the GR
restructuring process; 3) 8.0 additional positions to address the
needs of returning veterans from Iraq and Afghanistan and
their families; and 4) the addition of 1.0 position for facility
maintenance activities.
The Recommended Budget will allow the Department to
continue collaborating with other County departments, its
stakeholders, and community partners to implement MHSA
programs, Board priorities, and other mandates that ensure the
provision of highest quality and most cost-effective services to
children, adolescents, adults and older adults with serious
mental illnesses or disorders. These include, but are not limited
to, the following: 1) the ongoing delivery and assessment of
services provided by MHSA funded programs to children,
transition age youth, adults and older adults to ensure they
reflect the Department’s commitment to a wellness and
recovery-oriented system of care; 2) the continued
collaboration with the Department of Children and Family
Services on the implementation of the Katie A. Strategic Plan;
3) active participation in the restructuring of the GR Program in
association with the Department of Public Social Services;
4) continued implementation of the Collaborative Care
Integration program with the Department of Health Services
(DHS) to deliver Prevention and Early Intervention (PEI) mental
health services at DHS facilities; 5) services to chronically
homeless individuals with serious mental illness and
co-occurring substance abuse disorders; and 6) the execution
of the County Action Plan to address the needs of youth in
probation halls and camps in conjunction with the Probation
Department.
The Recommended Budget also reflects continued cost saving
efforts for the Department’s pharmacy program by requiring
all mental health directly operated clinics to participate in the
Patients Assistance Program to increase the number of clients
eligible for benefits. Additional efficiencies, such as reduction
of printer costs, implementation of telepsychiatry, and video
conferencing will be realized throughout FY 2012-13 enabling
the Department to offset other cost increases without
impacting the delivery of mental health services.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to identify and implement
strategic approaches to ensure the provision of high quality
and cost-effective care to individuals with serious mental
illness/disorders. In FY 2012-13 these will include:
¦ Continued implementation of the 1115 Waiver as a transition
to Health Care Reform.
¦ Implementation of integrated mental health-primary care
services in School-Based Health Centers.
¦ Initiation of mental health prevention services delivered by
community-based organizations responsive to the unique
issues encountered by communities throughout the County.
¦ Expansion of evidence-based or promising practices through
the rollout of MHSA – PEI programs.
¦ Expansion of services to families of veterans returning from
Iraq and Afghanistan that will reduce the stress commonly
encountered during family reunification.
¦ Collaboration with other County departments such as
Children and Family Services (Katie A. Strategic Plan),
Probation (Juvenile Justice), and Public Social Services (GR).
¦ Inclusion of stakeholders and community partners in efforts to
transform the entire mental health system.
¦ Continuation of focus on outcomes and increasing services for
underserved ethnic populations.
The Department’s unmet needs include: 1) additional funding and positions for the Lanterman-Petris-Short Act within the Office of
the Public Guardian to address the significant caseload issues within the operation; 2) funding to address services for uninsured
consumers, including homeless, dually diagnosed and the underserved ethnic populations; 3) positions for the Department’s
ACCESS Call Center to enhance the provision of timely services, crisis intervention, linkage/referrals, language translation assistance
and to avoid dropped calls; 4) program and central administrative infrastructure to support the growth in mental health services’
programs and revenue sources; and 5) positions to establish a Risk Management and Loss Prevention Unit to deal with significant
risk management issues related to General Liability and Title II Americans with Disabilities Act requirements.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a net County cost
increase of $22,000 primarily due to Board-approved increases
in employee benefits partially offset by a decrease in rent
charges.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
As part of the County’s Strategic Plan, the Department
continues to focus on maintaining adequate service levels
emphasizing quality and efficiency, and will continue to
explore and utilize technology, improve performance, increase
productivity, and engage in interdepartmental initiatives.
Specific areas of focus are:
¦ Expand web page data to promote public information and
departmental services;
¦ Expand outreach services to elderly veterans and widows
confined to nursing homes and convalescent hospitals, and to
senior homeless veterans;
¦ Collaborate with Southern California County Veterans Service
Offices to conduct quarterly regional training sessions
pertaining to legal decisions, new veterans’ benefits, and
changes in the United States Department of Veterans Affairs
(DVA) policies and procedures;
¦ Streamline intra-department process with the Department of
Public Social Services to identify unemployable General Relief
veterans to pursue compensation claims with the United
States DVA;
¦ Partner with the Department of Community and Senior
Services to assist homeless senior citizens;
¦ Work with the County of Los Angeles Housing Authority on a
homeless veterans voucher system to expand the number of
homeless veterans obtaining low income housing;
¦ Work with the Department of Mental Health to provide claims
assistance to veterans to determine the veterans’ eligibility for
federal services, and also, the availability of mental health
services provided by the United States DVA or other federal
health care providers;¦ Integrate the in-house Veterans Program computer system
with the United States Veterans Administration’s Benefits
Delivery Network (BDN) system to improve staff access to
information;
¦ Increase subvention funding from the California Veterans
College Tuition Fee Waiver Program for dependents of
veterans disabled or deceased while in service by expanding
distribution of flyers to places of worship and the State
Employment Development Department; and
¦ Increase revenue from veterans’ license plate sales through
targeted advertising.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
$601,000 due to an increase in the Consumer Price Index based
cost-of-living adjustment pursuant to the 1994 operating
agreement amended on May 20, 2008, partially offset by the
deletion of 2.0 vacant positions.
The Recommended Budget continues support for a full
exhibition schedule, including a retrospective on film producer
Stanley Kubrick; photography by Katy Grannan and Charlie
White; and exhibitions of works by Caravaggio, Sharon
Lockhart, James Turrell, Walter de Maria, Ken Price, Hans
Richter, and Michael Heizer.
The permanent collection will be highlighted with special
rotations of Old Masters, the Russian Avant Garde, German
woodcuts, Japanese calligraphers, the Ranieri pre-Columbian
collection, Panamanian vessels and textiles, and the Boone
collection of French faience and porcelains.
Art Programs with the Community (APWC) continues its
multi-year partnership with schools, libraries, and other
organizations throughout the Los Angeles Unified School
Districts 4 and 7 schools. APWC includes artist-led workshops
in classrooms, libraries, and community centers; curriculum
materials; professional development for teachers; and free
youth memberships to LACMA.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Museum of Art will continue implementation of its
long-range strategic objectives:
¦ Improve the quality and presentation of the collections;
¦ Attract and engage a broader audience through expanded
international recognition of LACMA as a quality art institution
and continued commitment to educational programs and
overall scholarship;
¦ Improve the museum campus; and
¦ Develop a stable and sustainable financial and organizational
plan.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget is based on the 1994
operating agreement, amended on September 26, 2006,
between the County and the Museum of Natural History
Foundation (Foundation), which established each entity’s
operational and financial responsibilities. This public-private
partnership enables the Museum to maintain educational and
research programs and basic operations at the Museum of
Natural History located in Exposition Park, the George C. Page
Museum at the La Brea Tar Pits, and the William S. Hart
Museum in Newhall. The Recommended Budget reflects a net
County cost decrease of $574,000 primarily attributed to the
deletion of one-time carryover funding, partially offset by an
increase in the Consumer Price Index based cost-of-living
adjustment.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Museum continues to implement its strategic plan, which
is consistent with the County’s Strategic Plan. Through the
strategic planning process, the Museum will identify and
prioritize programs for funding in FY 2012-13 that further its
mission.
In recognition of the economic crisis that is impacting the County, the only critical need included in the FY 2012-13 Capital Budget
request is related to the Museum’s auditorium. This project requires significant investment which cannot be covered from the
operating budget.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a net County cost
increase of $310,000 primarily due to a cost-of-living
adjustment, partially offset by an anticipated decrease in
capital lease costs. Consistent with established contractual
obligations, and demonstrating a commitment to maintaining
public-private partnerships, the Recommended Budget
continues to provide County funds to maintain and operate the
facility.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Consistent with the County vision to improve the quality of life
in the County, the Center exists to serve the people of
Los Angeles by assuring the presentation of the very best of
the performing arts in its theaters and concert hall. The Center
serves the community by providing access to the performing
arts to families and children on the Center’s campus and by
providing educational services in the region’s schools.
The Center continues to identify unmet needs for numerous deferred maintenance projects and the implementation of various
best practices approaches.
Nondepartmental revenues are derived largely from
revenue-generating activities not related to any specific
County department.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget primarily reflects:
¦ An increase of $1.3 million in Deed Transfer Tax revenue based
on actual trend and an anticipated growth in the County’s
housing market;
¦ An increase of $0.5 million in Sales and Use Tax revenue
associated with an anticipated growth in collections primarily
due to high gasoline prices;
¦ An additional $3.0 million in Community Redevelopment
Agencies pass-through revenue due to changes in
redevelopment laws; and
¦ The deletion of $8.0 million associated with the one-time
transfer of revenue from forfeited employee healthcare
spending accounts.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects:
¦ A Board-approved increase in salaries and employee benefits.
¦ A decrease in services and supplies due to the elimination of
one-time Los Angeles Regional Interoperable
Communications System (LA-RICS) project funding and the
elimination of redistricting related expenses. The decrease is
partially offset by a net increase in membership fees, services
of countywide benefit and special contracts.
¦ A decrease in other charges due to a projected decrease in Tax
and Revenue Anticipation Notes (TRANS) interest expense
and a scheduled decrease in the La Alameda Project debt
service payment. The decrease is partially offset by an increase
in allocation of funding for the Local Agency Formation
Commission charges.
¦ A decrease in other financing uses due to the deletion of
one-time funding for various Public Library projects, the
reduction of the Public Library General County overhead as
determined by the Auditor-Controller, and the elimination of a
one-time transfer from the General Fund to the Productivity
Investment Fund. The decrease is partially offset by an
increase in funding to cover operating costs for the Topanga
Library.
¦ A decrease in revenue due to a projected decrease in interest
earnings from treasury pool and the deletion of a one-time
transfer of funds from the Motor Vehicle ACO Fund to the
General Fund.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects only prior year actuals as the Office of Public Safety was consolidated with the Sheriff’s
Department in fiscal year 2010-11. The Sheriff’s Department is now responsible for all budgetary and operating requirements in
providing protection for patrons, employees, and properties of County departments which contract for such services, and in
providing a safe environment for those who use County parks and recreation areas.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a $7.1 million
decrease in net County cost primarily attributable to the
deletion of one-time funding, partially offset by increases in
centrally funded employee benefits and the reversal of the
premium reserves credit used as a one-time budget solution in
FY 2011-12. The Recommended Budget also reflects the
Department’s effort to realign the budget to actual service
levels and to offset non-centrally funded employee benefits
cost increases and revenue shortfalls.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department remains committed to maintaining the
County’s Strategic Plan Goals and Strategies and furthering
them where possible. However, several consecutive years of
appropriation reductions due to the economic downturn has
greatly impaired the Department’s ability to maintain
enhanced service levels. Continued and enhanced efforts
found in efficiencies, exploring new possibilities to augment
revenue, and discovering creative methods to sustain service
levels with minimum funding will all be necessary for the
Department to support its operations and the County Stragetic
Plan Goals.
The Department’s critical needs consist of one-time and ongoing obligations arising from opening new park facilities and
amenities; compliance with air quality regulatory agencies regarding diesel powered vehicles and equipment; aging vehicle fleet;
information technology (IT) projects; and the restoration of a recreation program previously reduced from a prior year curtailment.
Funding augmentation for these needs will allow the Department to perform asset preservation, as well as conduct facility
operations and management, for new facilities and park amenities; replace diesel powered equipment and machinery for
compliance with California Air Resource Board and Southern California Air Quality Management District regulations; replace aging
vehicles which are significantly beyond their useful life; resolve IT shortages in key projects and staffing; and restore the regional
swim beach lifeguard staffing to pre-curtailment status.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a net County cost
(NCC) increase of $16.7 million primarily due to $14.8 million
for Board-approved increases in health insurance subsidies and
changes to salaries; $2.7 million from the Provisional Financing
Uses (PFU) budget for Education Reform ($2.1 million) and
Medical Discharge process ($0.6 million) for youths released
from the Juvenile Halls; partially offset by the deletion of
one-time carryovers ($0.7 million) and other adjustments
($0.1 million). The budget also reflects $0.3 million for the
federal Title II grant program and $3.0 million in federal
revenue for the Title IV-E Reinvestment program.
Probation has developed a strategic plan to transform from a
custodial and supervision model to an evidence-based
practices treatment and rehabilitation model. The goals are to
implement evidence-based practices; develop and expand
collaborative efforts and community capacity; and maintain a
commitment to organizational development.
The top priorities of the Department are:
¦ Continue efforts to implement Department of Justice
recommendations;
¦ Continue to adopt the ‘Sheriff’s Model’ of Return-To-Work
enhanced activities; and
¦ Continue the roll out AB 109 Realignment.
The Department’s most critical unmet needs include the following: 1) $1.6 million for 12.0 Assistant Probation Director positions to
enhance management, oversight, and operation direction at the camps; 2) $2.0 million to establish two Juvenile Day Reporting
Centers for the intervention of moderate and high-risk youth; 3) $1.7 million for 19.0 positions to enhance the Return-to-Work and
Risk Management units to address workload issues; 4) $15.0 million in additional vehicle license fees revenue; 5) $1.0 million to
enhance the Supervising Detention Services Officer ratio; and 6) $1.4 million for 15.0 Transportation Deputy positions to expand
the Transportation section.
The Community-Based Contracts budget funds private contracts, administered by the Probation Department, to reduce juvenile
crime and provide juvenile delinquency prevention services.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget appropriates $26.4 million
in services and supplies to fund consultant studies that
quantify departmental space needs, provide technical,
structural, master plans, and environmental impact
assessments; and assist in the development of facility
programs and capital planning efforts.
The Recommended Budget also incorporates $18.5 million in
other charges to fund County contributions for improvements
to County facilities provided by other agencies or jurisdictions;
$0.3 million in capital assets – equipment to fund the
acquisition of trailers to mitigate operational impacts to
recreation and public-oriented programs that are displaced
during construction; and $6.8 million in other financing uses
which represents transfers from various previously approved
capital projects to be reallocated to department operating
budgets for furniture and equipment and the Civic Art Special
Fund per Board policy.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ The Project and Facility Development Budget provides a
funding mechanism for departmental and countywide capital
development and planning activities. The activities funded
from this budget contribute to the multi-year planning efforts
of departments, and the County as a whole, by ensuring that
capital programs appropriately reflect operational and
programmatic requirements and departmental strategic
plans.
The Provisional Financing Uses budget unit serves as a
temporary budget for program funding that has yet to be
allocated to a specific budget unit. Once funding needs have
been determined, funds are transferred to the affected budget
unit by Board order.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a $52.2 million
reduction in funding. The following is a description of each
budget category change.
Department Children and Family Services
Reflects a net decrease of $24.5 million due to the transfer of
$19.7 million for Title IV-E Waiver programs and $5.9 million for
Katie A. Settlement programs, partially offset by $1.1 million in
ongoing funding for the Psychiatric Mobile Response Team.
Health Services
Reflects the transfer of $13.5 million to the Department of
Health Services for the Community Partners Program.
Parks and Recreation
Reflects a $0.2 million increase for unanticipated operational
costs associated with newly constructed or refurbished park
facilities.
Probation Department
Reflects the transfer of $4.5 million to the Probation
Department for the Education Reform program and the
medical discharge process of youths.
Provisional Financing Uses - Various
Reflects a net decrease of $9.9 million due to the elimination of
one-time funding transferred to various budget units in
FY 2011-12 ($4.8 million), as well as decreases in funding for
budget gap solutions ($30.7 million), SB90 Suspended
Mandates ($5.9 million), Grand Park maintenance costs
($2.8 million) and various community programs ($0.7 million).
These decreases are partially offset by increases in carryover
savings from the prior year ($14.5 million), funding for the eHR
“G” grid schedule ($2.2 million), tenant improvements at the
Long Beach Courthouse ($16.0 million), Office of Emergency
Management services ($2.0 million), and Patriotic Hall
($0.3 million).
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a net County cost
increase of $5.3 million primarily due to Board-approved
increases in employee benefits, funding to expand Wi-Fi and
videoconferencing capabilities, maintain suspended Senate
Bill (SB) 90 programs, and continue the countywide archives
and retention project. The Recommended Budget also reflects
the addition of 1.0 position to implement the Supplemental
Security Income Advocacy grant program and the net addition
of 1.0 position due to realignment of staff.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ State Realignment Contingency Plans - Collaborate with and
provide timely input to the Board , Chief Executive Officer, and
all other members of the Community Corrections Partnership
(CCP), to ensure the efficient implementation of Assembly
Bill 109/117.
¦ Efficiencies Through Technology - Improve and increase
departmental efficiency, productivity and quality using
selected and focused Information Technology development
over the next two fiscal years.
¦ Risk Management - Augment existing risk management
efforts through training and a review of departmental
Protocols. The Public Defender will expand its current formal
orientation and training program for staff at all levels to
include new or additional topics related to legal requirements,
and County and departmental policy and operations. Topics
will vary for each identified group (e.g., attorney managers,
support staff, administrative staff, etc.). The Department will
also conduct a review of its Protocols and update them to
ensure consistency with present legal requirements and
County and departmental policy; and, implement related
training.
¦ Communications - Improve departmental communication of
values, goals, strategies, and policies through internal
resources, to include reviewing and revising communications
technology and protocols to reflect current needs; and,
promoting the goals and principles of effective
communication and transparency and better use of evolving
communications means and technology.
The Public Defender continues to have unmet needs to correct budgetary structural deficiencies including: 1) additional funding
for unfunded salary and employee benefit increases; 2) shortfalls in services and supplies, and other charges for increased service
costs from County departments; and 3) additional resources for information technology. The Department also continues to have
unmet needs for direct support and information technology staff.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects the fifth
consecutive year of budgetary challenges facing DPH and a
projected $8.9 million financing shortfall, primarily attributable
to the expiration of one-time budget solutions provided in
FY 2011-12 to preserve critical public health programs and
services. Since FY 2005-06, DPH has incurred over $92.0 million
in State, federal and net County cost (NCC) reductions,
resulting in the elimination of 290.0 budgeted positions and a
decline of more than 260 staff related to attrition and the
countywide hiring freeze. The loss of staff not only negatively
impacts DPH’s capacity to protect the health and safety of all
County residents and fulfill core public health responsibilities,
but also diminishes DPH’s ability to prepare for and respond to
emergencies such as disease outbreak investigations, natural
disasters, and acts of bioterrorism. In addition to losses in
directly operated public health services, diminished funding
levels have resulted in reduced or eliminated services provided
via contracted community-based organizations. The State and
federal reductions have affected the areas of Human
Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome (HIV/AIDS), Children’s Medical Services (CMS), Black
Infant Health, immunization, and substance abuse services.
The NCC reductions, principally attributable to the decline in
State Vehicle License Fees – Realignment revenues, have
affected DPH programs and services across-the-board with the
exception of HIV/AIDS, which has a Maintenance of Effort
requirement and Environmental Health which is primarily
fee-supported.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget includes a NCC increase of
$2.6 million primarily attributable to costs related to various
employee benefit increases, the transfer of funds from the
Department of Health Services (DHS) to DPH related to the
eCAPS Data Warehouse, and the use of one-time carryover of
projected FY 2011-12 departmental year-end fund balance as
one of several financing solutions to address the 2012-13
projected shortfall, partially offset by the elimination of prior
year carryover and one-time funds provided for various public
health programs and/or projects, as further described below,
and the reversal of one-time funding to help address the
2011-12 financing shortfall.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects financing
solutions to fully address the projected $8.9 million financing
shortfall. In addition to the $4.0 million in one-time carryover
of FY 2011-12 fund balance, the financing solutions include:
¦ $2.9 million in new one-time HIV and substance abuse
revenue/grant savings;
¦ $1.2 million in one-time Mental Health Services Act –
Prevention and Early Intervention funds for the provision of
new co-occurring disorder treatment services; and
¦ $0.8 million in ongoing additional efficiency savings.
The Recommended Budget also reflects a net increase of
42.0 budgeted positions attributable to the addition of
43.0 budgeted positions across various departmental
programs funded by local, State and federal funding, including
the Community Transformation Grant, Drug Medi-Cal and First
5 Los Angeles, as further detailed below; offset by the
elimination of 1.0 budgeted position in DPH’s Community
Health Services Division.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Public Health’s Strategic Plan adopted the County’s plan, with
departmental goals for Health Protection, Health
Improvement, Organizational Effectiveness, Workforce
Excellence, and Fiscal Sustainability. To the extent possible,
given the Department’s efforts to address its projected
structural deficit, the Department’s Recommended Budget
supports efforts to preserve an organizational infrastructure
focused on maximizing organizational effectiveness and
meeting service excellence goals. A strong organizational
infrastructure enables all public health programs to better
serve their clients, address the public health needs of all
County residents, and meet program goals more effectively.
The Recommended Budget supports programmatic areas such
as chronic disease, emergency preparedness and response,
HIV/AIDS, and substance abuse prevention and treatment, all
of which support the Department’s Strategic Plan Goal of
improving and increasing years of healthy life among County
residents and reducing current and future health risks, while
also reducing health disparities.
The Department has an unmet need of $1.64 million to fund 16.0 positions. The Department’s unmet need is comprised of:
$0.54 million and 7.0 positions for contract monitoring needs; $0.34 million and 4.0 positions for the Communicable Disease
Control and Prevention Division’s Immunization and Tuberculosis Control Programs; $0.34 million for vaccine needs at STD clinics
administered within the Department’s health clinics; $0.31 million and 4.0 positions for information technology support needs;
$0.09 million and 1.0 position for administrative and operational needs in the Department’s Office of Health Assessment and
Epidemiology; and $0.03 million for organizational development and training needs within the Department.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a reduction of
$20.1 million and the addition of 2.0 budgeted positions. The
Department’s budget reflects a 1.77 percent anticipated
property tax growth rate based on the Assessor’s forecast. The
budget also reflects deletion of one-time funding, restoration
of the deferred maintenance fund and increases in utilities and
employee benefit costs.
As a result of the County’s efforts to comply with State
guidelines in regards to the County budget book format, the
Public Library Accumulated Capital Outlay (ACO) fund will no
longer be summarized with the Public Library operating
budget. The ACO fund can be found in Volume II of the
Recommended Budget book.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
In FY 2012-13, the Public Library will implement strategies
developed under a new department-wide strategic plan. This
plan will delineate a variety of strategic priorities to maintain
the Department’s position as a premier library system offering
innovative services and programs that meet the rapidly
increasing demand of the residents of the unincorporated
areas and 50 cities in the County. The Public Library will focus
on enhancing its print and electronic materials collection (including expansion of the eBooks collection); implementing
the use of information technology projects to improve service
delivery; investigating the use of emerging automated systems
(e.g. materials handling) to improve operation efficiencies;
developing inter/intra-agency partnerships that are focused
on cultural, educational, and youth-oriented programs;
developing creative and innovative marketing strategies that
highlights library services; and developing strategies to
improve library facilities and address deferred maintenance
issues.
In the forthcoming fiscal year, the Public Library will:
¦ Continue with its multi-year phased implementation of the
self-service model at community libraries.
¦ Implement the second-year phase of the web-based
eCommerce application to provide a more convenient
method of paying fines and fees while streamlining
department-wide internal processes.
¦ Pilot and deploy new technologies to meet customer
demands (e.g. eBook Loan, iPad Learning Lab, Laptop Anytime
Vending).
¦ Continue to focus on short-range and long-range facilities
planning efforts to ensure library planning standards are
continually evaluated to ensure optimal space designs, review
routine and preventive maintenance requirements, and safety
measures in community libraries.
The Public Library’s Official Budget request includes $1.5 million to augment the Department’s facilities and maintenance budget
to address structural or other building maintenance issues due to extended deferred maintenance at various library facilities.
The Budget Request for the Department of Public Social
Services (DPSS) – Administration reflects an $8.0 million
increase in gross appropriation and a $0.4 million decrease in
net County cost (NCC). The NCC reduction is primarily due to
the elimination of $7.4 million in one-time funding and the
transfer of $0.1 million to the Assistance budget to fund
General Relief (GR) Restructuring, partially offset by the
carryover of $5.0 million in new one-time funding, $0.2 million
of ongoing funding to support the Domestic Violence Council,
and $1.9 million due to employee benefit increases. In prior
years, the Department’s base NCC was reduced by
$21.3 million, from FY 2008-09 to FY 2011-12, due to
curtailments needed to address the County’s structural deficit.
The Recommended Budget includes an increase of four
positions including one Information Technology (IT) Specialist I
position for the Los Angeles Eligibility, Automated
Determination, Evaluation and Reporting (LEADER)
Replacement System (LRS) project, one Staff Assistant, PSS
position for the Civic Center District, one Staff Assistant II
position for the Welfare Fraud Prevention & Investigation
(WFP&I) Section, and one Administrative Assistant II position
for the Budget Management Branch. The costs for these new
positions will be fully offset with the elimination of three
budgeted positions and the reduction of IT costs not needed in
FY 2012-13.
During the economic downturn of the last four years, the
unemployment rate increased steadily, as did the demand for
DPSS services. Economic projections have improved, becoming
more optimistic and signaling a slow recovery process. For the
first time in recent years, the caseloads for most of the
programs administered by the Department have begun to
decrease. Unfortunately, State and local revenues continue to
decrease as well. Consequently, the Department has to meet
high demands for vital services with significantly reduced
funding and resources. Despite the harsh budget and
economic realities, the Department remains committed to
developing efficiencies that allow the provision of essential
services with diminishing resources.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department remains committed to measures that ensure
effective and professional service delivery and support the
County's Strategic Plan goals. DPSS staff has continued to
perform well despite the financial hardship imposed on the
delivery of public services during these difficult budget times.
DPSS continues to move forward with the FY 2012-13 DPSS
Strategic Plan, "The Leading Edge", which consists of five goals,
25 strategies, and 110 objectives. The Plan is in the second half
of its four-year span, with most objectives targeted for
completion by the end of the current fiscal year. In addition,
DPSS Total Accountability, Total Success (DPSSTATS) continues
to generate measurable impacts on work performance and
management accountability.
¦ Service Excellence: The Customer Service Center (CSC)
expanded to a second location in September 2010 and will
expand to Northridge in April 2012 with the goal of improved
service delivery and timeliness of case actions. The total
service population of CSC reached 400,000 cases last year, and
CSC received over one million calls, enabling expedited service
and reducing unneeded walk-in traffic at district offices.
The newly-implemented Outbound Dialing System
improves communication and customer service by making
reminder telephone calls in ten different threshold
languages. The system received an LA County STARS! Award
in the category of Service Excellence and Organizational
Effectiveness from the Board in November 2010.
DPSS launched the Mobile Health and Nutrition Office, a
34-foot mobile unit equipped with wireless technology and
a self-contained power generator to support the use of
laptops and Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) equipment. The
unit is functioning as a one-stop CalFresh/Medi-Cal office to
allow walk-in applicants to conveniently apply for CalFresh
and/or Medi-Cal without visiting the District Offices. The
mobile office will also serve as an emergency response unit
during any type of natural disaster. The Department has
increased the number of persons receiving CalFresh Only
benefits from 169,000 in July 2010 to 188,000 in April 2011,
an increase of 11 percent.
The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) work
participation rate increased from 21 to 43 percent in Federal
Fiscal Year (FFY) 2011 and the Department has
placed thousands of individuals in employment and other
Welfare-to-Work (WtW) activities. The CalFresh payment
error rate of 3.69 percent is the lowest in the Department's
history and lower than the National average rate of
3.81 percent. As a result, California and the County are once
again sanction free for maintaining the error rate.
The Department received the Los Angeles Productivity and
Quality Award (PQA) Top Ten award for its General Relief to
Supplemental Security Income (GR-to-SSI) collaborative
project. The project goal was to assist 1,000 GR recipients,
who had been receiving GR benefits for the longest
consecutive period of time, transition to SSI. By
November 30, 2011, the project secured 632 SSI approvals
resulting in a total projected net County savings of $14.3 million. This pilot has become part of the larger GR
Restructuring effort that will redefine the program.
In the In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) assistance
program, DPSS successfully assumed responsibility for all
IHSS provider enrollment, saving over $500,000 in cost. The
Department also processed over 140,000 IHSS providers
through rigorous orientation and criminal background check
to meet the December 2010 State deadline.
¦ Workforce Excellence: The Department's Succession Plan is
designed to provide opportunities for training and guidance
to create a qualified pool of highly educated, well trained, and
success oriented successors. The Mentorship Program is
expanding into its second phase for Human Services
Administrator and Administrative Services Manager positions.
The DPSS Academy launched in 2005 in partnership with
California State University, Northridge (CSUN), initiated a
unique Master's of Public Administration (MPA) Program. In
September 2010, a new Masters in Social Work (MSW)
program was launched with a beginning class of 28 DPSS
employees/students.
In FY 2010-11, the Department received over
23,000 requests for State hearings appealing a County action
or inaction. 73 percent of hearing requests were resolved
without a need for a State hearing, which saved thousands
of dollars and staff time. Department staff completed over
22,000 fraud investigations and detected over $11.0 million
in overpayments and over issuances.
¦ Organizational Effectiveness: The Electronic Document
Management System (EDMS) Committee has been working to
bring DPSS to a paperless office environment. The Committee
has started working with the Eligibility Workers, Case Folder
Management, and LEADER to incorporate all relevant program
related documents into a single electronic case file that is
stored, managed, and accessed through LEADER. The pilot
EDMS project successfully scanned 84,000 cases with
1.2million documents, thus, moving the Department forward
toward a paperless office concept.
The Department's leading edge automation efforts received
a number of PQA for several projects, including the Citrix
Expansion Project that allows other departments to access
the LEADER system, the LEADER Network Refresh, the
Interactive Voice Response (IVR) expansion, and the
Outbound Dialing System. IVR is a 24-hour automated
system that allows participants to "self-serve" and meet
basic needs (case status, benefits amount, quarterly
reporting questions, etc.) without the need to walk into the
district offices. The Information Technology Division
migrated computer software programs from Unisys
mainframe to the Windows server environment that resulted
in savings of over $1.2 million annually.
¦ Fiscal Responsibility: The Department automated the
recording and posting of 1,000 weekly overpayment
collections by Treasurer-Tax Collector totaling more than
$7.2million. An automated interface for the Payment
Verification System abstracts was established to eliminate
hard copy printing and delivery of documents saving over
$120,000 annually in printing costs and reduced case time
processing.
The Department implemented an on-line invoice program
for 26 Community-Based Domestic Violence service
providers to replace a paper intensive invoicing system to
save time and improve billing accuracy. The Department's
Human Resources Division implemented an automated
system to track over 4,000 staff bilingual bonuses to help
manage and track program needs. DPSS implemented an
Internal Control Certification Program (ICCP) system to track
and manage ICCP audits which eliminated double entry of
data. Overall, the Department conducted over 70 ICCP audits
to ensure program integrity and compliance with County
fiscal and programmatic requirements. An automated Office
Profile system was implemented to allow the public view of
program specific data and help provide customer access to
services which are used over 4,000 times daily by the public.
In addition, the Department continues its efforts to identify
new funding opportunities to maximize revenue as
evidenced in generating close to $200.0 million in ARRA
revenue during FFYs 2009 and 2010.
¦ Children and Family Well-Being: DPSS administers programs
that provide a vast array of services to families, children, single
adults, and the elderly, and are designed to alleviate financial
hardship and promote family health, personal responsibility,
and economic self-sufficiency. Over 2.3 million participants
are served monthly. DPSS operates 79 facilities and parking
lots, in over 3.5million square feet of space. The Department
also serves as the Los Angeles County Operational Area
Coordinator for care and shelter and the Operational Area
Liaison with the grocery industry and not for-profit human
services organizations. In this capacity, the Department has
the lead responsibility for coordinating shelter support in the
event of a disaster or emergency.
The Department continues its leadership in providing
quality services as evidenced in its continued efforts in the
Linkages Program. It has partnered with the Department of
Children and Family Services (DCFS) to provide integrated
services for mutual families and resources for other needy
DCFS families and caretaker relatives. As a result,
20,000 families have benefited from this service
coordination. In addition, the Department was instrumental
in designing and launching ARRA projects to strengthen
needy families by providing services for homeless
prevention, job training and employment, and housing
relocation.
Funding for programs the Department administers depends largely on State and federal subvention. The 2012-13 Recommended
Budget assumes sufficient funding to support the current operational level. The final State funding allocations will not be known
until after the State’s 2012-13 Budget is enacted. Therefore, the Department has committed to continue providing leadership in
advocacy efforts focused on adequate funding levels to effectively administer its programs.
The Department’s unmet needs for FY 2012-13 are primarily focused on additional staffing to meet the increased demand. Over the
past several years, State and County funding has decreased while caseloads and program demands have increased. Case workers
for the approved caseload in the Department’s core programs are staffed well below the calculated full need. In fact, with the
exception of CalWORKs, all other eligibility determination programs including CalFresh, Medi-Cal, and General Relief have been
consistently staffed below the need level. Increasing staffing to the calculated full need level would require an additional
3,939 caseworkers.
The unmet needs are especially critical in the General Relief program. Over the past four years, GR caseloads and Assistance costs
have increased dramatically. However, the NCC needed to maintain GR staffing levels at FY 2007-08 levels has actually decreased.
The Public Social Services Assistance Budget funds mandated
and discretionary public assistance and social services
programs by the federal, State, and County governments.
These programs include: California Work Opportunities and
Responsibility to Kids (CalWORKs); Indigent Aid General Relief
(GR); In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS); Refugee
Resettlement Program/Refugee Cash Assistance (RCA); Cash
Assistance Program for Immigrants (CAPI); Refugee
Employment Program (REP), Community Services Block Grant
(CSBG), and GR Anti-Homelessness.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects decreased net
County cost (NCC) in GR, IHSS, and CalWORKs primarily due to
lower than budgeted caseloads and increased realignment
revenue. This decrease is partially offset by a slight increase in
NCC in the GR Anti-Homelessness budget. In addition, the
2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects decreased
appropriation in RCA and REP and increased appropriation in
CAPI and CSBG, offset by State and federal revenue.
The estimated $53.2 million decrease in NCC is comprised of
the following:
¦ GR: The aided caseload is projected to decrease by 9.8 percent
from the 2011-12 budgeted level. The NCC is projected to
decrease by $27.4 million.
¦ GR Anti-Homelessness: Funds GR-Restructuring programs and
rental subsidies through prospective savings reinvestment,
Interim Assistance Reimbursement (IAR), and carryover funds.
Overall NCC is projected to increase by $0.2 million.
¦ IHSS: A 3.2 percent decrease in the approved caseload, a
$0.03 decrease in the cost per hour, and a 0.5 percent
reduction in the paid-to-approved ratio are partially offset by
a two hour increase in the hours per paid case due to the
expiration of the 3.6 percent across-the-board reduction,
resulting in a $5.6 million decrease in NCC. Realignment
revenue is projected to increase by $13.0 million which results
in a direct decrease of NCC by the same amount. These
decreases in NCC are offset by a projected increase in Health
Care Plan enrollments of 10.8 percent which increases NCC by
$2.3 million. Total NCC is projected to decrease by
$16.2million.
¦ CalWORKs: The aided caseload is projected to decrease by
4.4 percent. This is offset by an increase of $17.05 in the cost
per case from the budgeted level, resulting in corresponding
changes in State and federal revenue. Realignment revenue is
projected to increase by $9.6 million. The NCC is projected to
decrease by $9.8 million.
The majority of services provided through the Public
Works - General Fund are required by federal, State, and local
mandates and are funded by fees for services. Crossing guard,
landslide mitigation, graffiti abatement, pre-County
improvement district studies, property rehabilitation and
nuisance abatement, and unincorporated area services
programs continue to rely on funding from net County cost
(NCC).
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a $31.7 million
NCC decrease primarily attributable to the elimination of
$40.3 million in one-time funding for First and Fifth Districts’
road and waterworks projects ($32.0 million), Unincorporated
Stormwater Urban Runoff Quality Program ($7.5 million), and
the Coyote Creek Pedestrian Bridge Removal project
($0.4 million). This decrease is partially offset by an $8.2 million
one-time NCC allocation for the Unincorporated Stormwater
Urban Runoff Quality Program.
¦ To maximize public safety, ongoing training is provided to the
employees to enhance employee and technical growth.
Specialized training is provided in mandated subjects such as
the California Building Code and provides for a higher
standard of compliance.
¦ The Public Works - General Fund budget relies on NCC to fund
various activities in the Department. Public Works projects the
available NCC from the previous year to determine the
funding level required for the activities in the coming year and
will adjust each activity accordingly so that NCC does not
exceed from the adjusted allowance approved by the Board.
¦ The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
programs and services. The four main components of the
Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process include program,
financial and staffing plans, and the budget request. Program
plans strategically establish management objectives for
outcomes/results, situation analyses, comprehensive needs
assessments, results-based work plans, and funding requests.
Financial plans project revenue sources and financing uses for
each operating fund and set preliminary budget allocations
for individual programs. Based on these funding allocations,
staffing plans are then developed as part of divisional
operational plans. The budget request is then prepared based
upon the program, financial, and staffing plans.

The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a $9.3 million
increase from the 2011-12 Final Adopted Budget. The increase
is primarily attributable to anticipated cost increases related to
the repair and rehabilitation of runoff regulation and debris
control facilities and repair and cleanup work due to the
aftermath of the Station Fire and 2010-11 winter storms;
increases in projects with incorporation of multi-use benefits
such as water quality enhancement, water conservation, and
passive recreation; and planning efforts related to the Water
Quality Funding Initiative which seeks new funding through
legislation and election to levee a per parcel water quality fee.
The increase is financed by an increase in the cancellation of
Designation for Sediment Removal Projects, partially offset by
decreases in fund balance, property taxes, interest earnings,
and community redevelopment agency revenue.
The primary sources of revenue are property taxes and benefit
assessments. The objectives of the District are outlined within
the Flood Control Act, which mandates the District to carry out
flood protection and water conservation programs. These
objectives include to keep the existing flood protection system
in safe and effective condition, to respond to emergencies, to
perform maintenance and repair, and to conserve water.The District proactively seeks grants for construction and
rehabilitation projects; however, with aging infrastructure and
new and evolving regulations, the District will be challenged to
meet these needs without developing new ongoing funding
sources.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
public works programs and services. The four main
components of the Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process
include program, financial and staffing plans, and the budget
request. Program plans strategically establish management
objectives for outcomes/results, situation analyses,
comprehensive needs assessments, results-based work plans,
and funding requests. Financial plans project revenue sources
and financing requirements for each operating fund and set
preliminary budget allocations for individual programs. Based
on these funding allocations, staffing plans are then developed
as part of divisional operational plans. The budget request is
then prepared based upon the program, financial, and staffing
plans.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a $77.3 million
decrease from the 2011-12 Final Adopted Budget. The
decrease is primarily due to the deletion of one-time funding
for unincorporated area road projects and road construction
and maintenance activities, including the construction of
roads, highways, and bridges/tunnels; a decrease in
requirements for public agency maintenance/storage facilities
and retrofit of drainage systems; a decrease in roadway
maintenance activities and administration of road projects
within the jurisdictional boundaries of incorporated cities or
other agencies funded by cities, developers, and federal and
Metropolitan Transportation Authority grants; and a decrease
in contingencies. These decreases are partially offset by an
increase in requirements for the construction of traffic volume
capacity enhancement projects on roads and highways, and
traffic studies and maintenance of the Master Plan of
Highways. The decrease is reflected in reductions in fund
balance and canceled reserves and designations, partially
offset by a net increase in gas tax revenue due to the approval
and enactment of the fuel tax swap proposal under the
FY 2010-11 State Budget Act.
¦ The Recommended Budget was assembled with an emphasis
on optimizing the use of new gas tax (formerly Proposition 42)
funds for maintenance and preservation of the existing
roadway system. This strategy meets the County Strategic
Plan goals of Operational Effectiveness and Community and
Municipal Services by maximizing the use of available limited
revenues while providing residents in unincorporated County
areas with safe roads that provide them with the necessary
mobility options for work, education, and recreation.
¦ The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
public works programs and services. The four main
components of the Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process
include program, financial and staffing plans, and the budget
request. Program plans strategically establish management
objectives for outcomes/results, situation analyses,
comprehensive needs assessments, results-based work plans,
and funding requests. Financial plans project revenue sources
and financing requirements for each operating fund and set
preliminary budget allocations for individual programs. Based
on these funding allocations, staffing plans are then
developed as part of divisional operational plans. The budget
request is then prepared based upon the program, financial,
and staffing plans.
The Internal Service Fund is designed to simplify billings for
services provided between the multiple funds that finance
Public Works operations. This fund allows for salaries and
employee benefits, materials and supplies, and equipment
charges for Public Works to be paid through the fund and the
appropriate amounts recovered from each special fund.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a $12.1 million
increase from the 2011-12 Final Adopted Budget. The increase
is primarily due to the full restoration of the County’s matching
contribution along with a corresponding increase in the
County’s total annual contribution limit towards its deferred
compensation plans; an increase in County retirement costs
due to prior year losses in the Los Angeles County Employees
Retirement Association's investment portfolio and revised
investment return assumptions; the reversal of the retiree
health premium reserves credit used as a one-time budget
solution to help close the County’s projected budget gap in
FY2011-12; Board-approved increases in health insurance
subsidies; and an increase in business automation plan and IT
enhancement upgrade costs. The increases are partially offset
by a decrease in contingencies to meet operational needs.
¦ The Recommended Budget presents Public Works with a
challenge in projecting future budgetary requirements for
services that will be rendered to other Public Works funds, for
the construction management of capital projects, and for
services to other County departments. The Capital Building
Projects Program relies heavily on the Board’s approval of
funding for County capital projects. A work plan is prepared
for the coming budget year to detail the capital project work
that will be funded. Rates and fees are analyzed each year and
adjusted to ensure that the Internal Service Fund recovers all
costs for services performed.
¦ The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
public works programs and services. The four main
components of the Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process
include program, financial and staffing plans, and the budget
request. Program plans strategically establish management
objectives for outcomes/results, situation analyses,
comprehensive needs assessments, results-based work plans,
and funding requests. Financial plans project revenue sources
and financing requirements for each operating fund and set
preliminary budget allocations for individual programs. Based
on these funding allocations, staffing plans are then
developed as part of divisional operational plans. The budget
request is then prepared based upon the program, financial,
and staffing plans.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget provides for the
maintenance of essential core mission activities including
planning processes, public service, and business retention
efforts. Regional Planning will maintain its Land Development
Coordinating Center, one-stop counseling, field office
counseling services in nine different locations, concurrent case
processing, concentrated zoning enforcement activities, and
review of major development and affordable housing projects.
Environmental Impact Review and the activities of the
Environmental Review Board and the Significant Ecological
Area Technical Advisory Committee will continue as well as
specifically funded programs, including public hearings and
workshops on the countywide General Plan update and Santa
Monica Mountains Local Coastal Program.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a $523,000
increase in funding primarily attributable to the full restoration
of the County’s matching contribution along with a
corresponding increase in the County’s total annual
contribution limit towards its deferred compensation plans,
increase in County retirement costs and the reversal of the
retiree health premium reserves credit. The Recommended
Budget also includes adjustments in employee benefits based
on historical experience and charges from other County
departments, partially offset by decreases in salaries and
wages, and decreases in judgments and damages and capital
assets purchases.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to:
¦ Implement the County’s Strategic Plan;
¦ Continue proactive code enforcement of land development,
zoning and subdivision regulations in unincorporated areas.
Enhance resources for the Nuisance Abatement Team (NAT)
and Neighborhood Enhancement Team (NET);¦ Enhance public service through improved development of the
permit process and web-based environmental and case
processing materials, as well as new Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) based aerial imagery on the internet;
¦ Enhance communication with the landowners, neighbors,
constituents, and other governmental agencies by carefully
allocating resources to incorporate local area network
enhancements and other web-based technologies;
¦ Support the County’s vision statement through its
development of land use, circulation, open space, noise, safety
and housing elements of the countywide General Plan
update; and
¦ Secure Regional Planning Commission and Board approval of
community standards districts and zone changes for
unincorporated areas.
The Department’s critical needs consist of funding for mandated programs including the Marina Del Rey Local Costal Program,
Santa Monica Mountains North Area Community Standards District, and the Climate Action Plan. Other items for consideration
include funding for a security system, efficiency improvements in the zoning enforcement area, implementation of a policy to
accept credit card payments and restoration of an Information Systems Analyst II position.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget includes resources
necessary to conduct the November 2012 Presidential General
Election and perform basic Recorder/County Clerk operations.
The budget reflects ongoing issues such as the downturn in
the real estate market and the volatility within the election
environment.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects an increase of
$4.6 million primarily due to the increase in funding associated
with the suspended Senate Bill (SB) 90 program as well as
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department’s Critical/Strategic Plan will continue to
implement automated and enhanced processes to improve
public service and employee workforce in the elections, voter
registration, Recorder, and County Clerk services.
¦ Continue to modernize the County’s voting process through
the Voting Systems Assessment Project (VSAP).
¦ Develop the maintenance and support for multi-county
eRecording system (SECURE), contingent upon Board
approval.
¦ Continue the enhancement of the Campaign Finance
Disclosure tracking system by implementing capabilities that
provide comprehensive management of campaign finance
forms related to Proposition B.
¦ Develop a strategy and plan for consolidating data center
servers utilizing virtualization technology.
¦ Initiate a multi-year project to upgrade desktop and portable
computers to Windows 7 for the entire Department.¦ Develop an Election Contest and Ballot Management System
to replace existing Automated Ballot Layout System and
incorporate candidate filing and reporting capabilities.
¦ Implement the final phase of the County’s redistricting plan in
preparation of districts conducting elections in 2013.
¦ Continue the development of the Business Filings
Replacement System to improve services related to all filed
documents, including oaths, bond filings and fictitious
business names.
¦ Continue the post implementation phase to expand approved
submitter participation in the multi-County e-Recording
System.
¦ Continue the post implementation phase of the Social
Security Number Truncation Program associated with
Assembly Bill (AB) 1168 to protect personal information
contained in recorded documents.
¦ Develop strategy and plan for implementing new language
requirements as released by the U.S. Census Bureau.
¦ Continue to expand efficiency initiative strategies to further
streamline processes to improve operations and reduce costs,
maximize program efficiencies, improve public service
delivery, and expand green energy conservation programs.
The Department’s official budget request includes $877,000 in unmet needs which includes maintenance and repairs to support
proper working conditions of employees and the 3,000 customers that visit the Norwalk facility on a daily basis.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a $3.4 million
increase in net County cost due primarily to the debt service of
the High Desert Solar project and centrally financed common
area charges from the Administrative Office of the Courts offset
by other debt service reductions and capital leases charges.The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a net County cost
(NCC) decrease of $37.7 million primarily due to the
elimination of $74.4 million in one-time funding comprised of:
$7.2 million to complete Phases II and III of the installation of
closed-circuit television (CCTV) at Men’s Central Jail (MCJ);
$18.2 million in Utility User Tax (UUT) funds for unincorporated
area patrol; $3.6 million for Summer Gang Suppression
activities; $12.0 million for unincorporated patrol from the
Designation for Unincorporated Patrol; and $33.4 million in
FY 2010-11 fund balance savings carried over to mitigate
FY 2011-12 curtailments. Also reflected is a $30.3 million
reduction in NCC due to anticipated increases in public safety
sales tax receipts.
The above decreases are partially offset by $45.0 million for
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits,
including full restoration of the County’s matching
contribution to its deferred compensation plans. Also reflected
is an increase of $0.2 million to continue suspended
Senate Bill (SB) 90 programs; $18.2 million in one-time UUT
funding; and $3.6 million in one-time funding to continue the
Summer Gang Suppression program.The Recommended Budget also reflects an increase of
157.0 positions due to the addition of 110.0 positions for
contract law enforcement services fully funded by
contract agencies; 25.0 grant funded positions for Community
Oriented Policing Services approved by the Board on
November 29, 2011; 20.0 positions for the Department’s Civil
Management Unit fully offset by revenue from the Processing
Fee Fund; and 2.0 positions needed to address increased
workload associated with various programs fully offset by State
revenue.The Department’s most critical needs, in addition to offsetting any proposed reductions in funding, are the following:
1) $43.8 million to restore the loss of one-time funding to aid the Department in maintaining its current funding level; 2) $25.0 and
130.0 positions to provide additional supervisory staff to timely review use of force incidents or allegations and to improve Custody
training and Title 15 compliance; 3) $1.5 million and 6.0 positions for the enhancement of the Jail Mental Evaluation Team to
provide around-the-clock intervention services; 4) $2.9 million and 4.0 positions to continue the accelerated installation of
the CCTV system in the Twin Towers Correctional Facility (TTCF) and to provide ongoing maintenance and technical support;
5) $8.0 million for the installation of CCTVs in all County jail facilities other than MCJ and TTCF; 6) $96.0 million to restore
FY 2010-11 budget curtailments, which included cuts of overtime ($26.0 million), 300.0 Deputy Sheriff positions ($45.0 million),
and 203.0 positions in Custody Operations ($25.0 million); 7) $6.3 million to backfill the loss of federal State Criminal Alien
Assistance Program funding; 8) $2.5 million for network infrastructure and Voice Over Internet Protocol communication systems;
9) $0.8 million for the Parks and Recreation Summer Pool Program; 10) $11.4 million for facilities maintenance requirements,
including roofing and paving; 11) $116.0 million to address the Department’s structural budget shortfall relative to Peace
Officer Standards and Training (POST) bonus ($41.7 million), leaves of absence ($33.8 million), and salary savings ($40.5 million);
12) $34.0 million for unavoidable cost increases in employee benefits ($24.0m) and services and supplies ($10.0 million);
13) $81.2 million for IT needs; and 14) $73.5 million to address deferred facilities maintenance necessities.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects: 1) $4.0 million net
decrease in telephone utilities; 2) $0.3 million net increase for
ENIA costs; 3) $0.1 million net decrease for Criminal Justice
Information Systems projects; and 4) $38,000 net increase due
to increased Voice-over Internet Protocol (VoIP) maintenance
costs, partially offset by reduced telephone system equipment
lease costs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
ISD will continue to:
¦ Work with other County departments to achieve savings by
identifying and disconnecting unused phone lines; and
¦ Maximize the performance of the County’s
telecommunications systems which would minimize costs.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in net
County cost (NCC) of $4.0 million primarily due to the
elimination of one-time funding for security cameras and the
Client and Asset Management System (CAMS), partially offset
by Board-approved increases in salaries and employee
benefits.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The following are examples of the Department’s continuing
efforts to create efficiencies, work collaboratively with other
departments, and maximize revenue:
¦ Implemented e-Collections, which is a credit card and
electronic check payment option for general debts owed to
the County;
¦ Partnered with the Department of Public Health to support
the restructuring of Environmental Health fees;
¦ Continued with the Defaulted Property Tax Reduction
Program, which requires County vendors to be current on
property taxes before entering into a contract with the
County. Since its inception in October 2009, this program has
recovered approximately $1.9 million in delinquent property
taxes for the County; and
¦ In a collaborative effort with support from the Chief Executive
Office, the CAMS went live and replaced the 20 year-old
legacy Los Angeles Public Administrator/Public Guardian
Information System (LAPIS). This system supports TTC’s Public
Administrator Operations.
TTC is requesting NCC to restore 2.0 positions that were curtailed in the FY 2010-11 Adopted Budget. Restoration of these positions
will address unresolved issues associated with the curtailment of these positions and the retention of employees on unlike
positions/classifications.

The Lockyer-Isenberg Trial Court Funding Act of 1997,
Assembly Bill (AB) 233, Chapter 850, Statutes of 1997 requires
counties to make an annual Maintenance of Effort (MOE)
payment to the State for support of trial courts and to continue
to fund certain court-related expenditures such as indigent
defense, collections enhancement, and local judicial benefits.
The Trial Court Facilities, Act Senate Bill 1732, Chapter 1082,
Statutes of 2002 authorized the transfer of responsibility for
court facilities from the counties to the State and requires that
counties make County Facilities Payment (CFP). Revenue from
court fines and fees is used to partially finance the MOE
obligation to the State and other court-related expenditures.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects funding for the
County’s $292.6 million MOE payment to the State, which is
comprised of $245.9 million base MOE, $37.6 million CFP, and
$9.1 million representing 50 percent of any excess above the
AB 233 fines and forfeitures MOE, and $107.6 million for
court-related expenditures that are the County’s responsibility.
The Recommended Budget also reflects Board-approved
increases in salaries and employee benefits and increases in
retirement cost.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a net County cost
(NCC) increase of $2.2 million primarily attributable to
one-time funding to establish a revolving fund for energy
efficiency projects throughout the County, partially offset by
decreases to utilities for NCC funded facilities. The budget also
reflects a decrease in funding for electricity, natural gas, Energy
Efficiency Conservation Block Grants (EECBG), Southern
California Edison (SCE) funding for Local Government Technical
Resources Program, and Productivity Investment Fund (PIF)
Grant and Loan, partially offset by an increase in funding for
water, other utilities, power plant operations, energy
management programs, and California Public Utility
Commission (CPUC) Partnership Program.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Continues to complete energy retrofit projects and centrally
administer utilities costs throughout the County.
On November 4, 2008, unincorporated County voters approved the passage of the Utility User Tax - Measure U. The revenues are
generated from user taxes on gas, electricity, and communication. These revenues are fully offset with appropriations in the
Departments of Board of Supervisors, District Attorney, Health Services, Parks and Recreation, Public Library, Public Works, and
Sheriff for various programs within the unincorporated areas.
Vehicle License Fees – Realignment revenues are derived from the County’s share of statewide motor vehicle license fees. These
revenues are fully offset with appropriation in the Departments of Health Services, Mental Health and Public Social Services for
various health and social services programs.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease of $114.3 million from the 2011-12 Final Adopted Budget due to an
$88.0 million reduction in Mental Health revenue, resulting from the 2011 Realignment law, as well as reductions of $25.1 million
and $1.2 million for Health and Social Services respectively, due to current trends and economic conditions.
