The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an overall net
County cost (NCC) decrease of $0.3 million primarily due to the
deletion of one-time funding for various projects, partially
offset by Board-approved increases in salaries and employee
benefits. The Recommended Budget also reflects a net increase
of 8.0 revenue-offset positions including 3.0 positions in Pest
Exclusion/Produce Quality Bureau, 3.0 positions in Weed
Hazard/Integrated Pest Management Bureau, and 2.0 positions
in Administration.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to:
¦ Investigate and pursue increased revenue source
opportunities through proactive involvement in legislation
and regulation development, coordination with
administrators and management of California Department of
Food and Agriculture (CDFA) and California Department of
Pesticide Regulation to influence program funding and levels
of local support, and active collaboration with statewide
partners to secure enhancements in federal funds.
¦ Improve Service Excellence and Workforce Excellence through
ongoing employee development, continuing enhancement of
the Agricultural Commissioner/Weight and Measures (ACWM)
Internet website, and other outreach efforts to maximize
public awareness of the Department and its services.
¦ Maintain focus of recruitment efforts to attract qualified and
skilled applicants to fill inspector positions to ensure
environmental and public safety, provide mandated and
increased protections to consumers and businesses, and
provide protection to the environment, native plant life and
the agricultural industry.
¦ Utilize its $250,000 Productivity Investment Fund (PIF) grant
from the County Quality and Productivity Commission to
support development of a geographic information
system (GIS)-mapping and data management system for the
Exotic Pest Detection Program and to coordinate efforts with
CDFA to establish the system as a statewide standard.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease in
NCC of $0.4 million primarily due to the deletion of one-time
carryover funding and a decrease in retirement contributions.
The Recommended Budget also includes funding for
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to:
¦ Work with the Superior Court, Public Defender, District
Attorney, and Probation Department to implement
Proposition 47;
¦ Collaborate with the Internal Services Department to
implement Microsoft Office 365 cloud based services; and
¦ Develop, in association with the District Attorney, Public
Defender, Superior Court, Countywide Criminal Justice
Coordination Committee, and the Departments of Mental
Health, Sheriff, Public Health, and Public Social Services, an
integrated program for pre-filing and post-arrest mental
health diversion.
The Department requires 2.0 Psychiatric Social Worker II positions to provide mental health evaluations and referrals to mental
health facilities.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an overall
decrease in NCC of $2.2 million primarily due to the deletion of
one-time funding for a voice recorder system, mobile
connectivity, dead animal pick-up services, and vehicles. The
Recommended Budget also includes funding for
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department is finalizing its strategic plan which
incorporates five Key Focus Areas that align with the County
Strategic Goals and Initiatives:
¦ Improved Financial Planning and Decision Making: Develop a
plan to improve the Department’s ability to make strategic
decisions based on revenue, available resources and needs
that are measured using a decision matrix that considers
various factors including safety, the Department’s areas of key
focus, and prudent financial management.
¦ Improved Training, Staff Development and Succession
Planning: Develop a plan to implement programs to respond
to the Department’s need for succession planning, entry level
training, promotional training, and annual recertification.
¦ Revisit Contract Methodology and Practices: Develop a plan to
improve establishment of contract city rates, not limited to the
request for proposals (RFP) for a consultant to recommend
and implement new rate setting methodologies, including
assessment of organizational barriers to obtaining accurate
data and development of recommendations to establish
methods that improve accuracy.
¦ Strategic Implementation of Information Technology
Priorities: Develop a plan to respond to IT project
requirements and operational data base improvements with a
focus on the Department’s key focus areas, recommend
priorities and establish a methodology to track and measure
implementation.
¦ Actualization of Shelter Vision: Develop a plan to move the
organization toward its vision for animal care centers. The
shelter vision is: “Clean, open, current, well-equipped,
organized animal care centers and clinics filled with healthy
living things thriving under the care of professional engaged
employees, volunteers, and adoption partners in a
harmonious environment that is enriched for our animals and
welcoming to our happy, satisfied community families.”
The Department’s unmet needs cover a wide array of requirements. The Department is requesting funding for facilities
improvement and deferred maintenance projects to repair and improve the Department’s animal care infrastructure, as well as to
mitigate safety risks to the public, its employees, and the animals in its care. Further, the Department requires funding for critically
needed positions to augment staffing in field, kennel, and clerical services.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget sets aside a total of $3.6 million in the Provisional Financing Uses budget unit for the Palmdale
Animal Care Center which is scheduled to open during fiscal year (FY) 2015-16. This amount includes both one-time start up costs
and ongoing operational costs.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a net NCC
decrease of $190,000 primarily due to the deletion of one-time
funding and a reduction in retirement contributions, partially
offset by funding for Board-approved increases in salaries and
employee benefits, additional funding for 1.0 position for the
John Anson Ford Theatres and unavoidable cost increases.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Continue a multi-year initiative to implement the
Board-adopted Arts for All strategic plan to make the arts core
in K-12 for 1.7 million students in the County by launching a
partnership with the County Office of Education to expand the
reach of teacher professional development offerings through
online support systems.
¦ Continue construction and planning for the current and future
facilities of the Ford Theatres, including upgrades such as
amphitheatre stage reconstruction, creation of a new picnic
terrace with concessions and office space. Reopen the theatre
in spring 2016 with a full slate of programming and
re-branding campaign.
¦ Implement, through LA County Open Spaces District grant
funds, a new Civic Art Graffiti Abatement Project which will
create innovative arts based projects designed to reduce the
reoccurrence of or minimize the visual appearance of graffiti,
while helping youth utilize their artistic talents for personal
expression and instill a sense of neighborhood pride.
¦ Redesign the Arts Commission website along with update the
Arts for All and Ford Theatres sites, and roll out the updated
ExperienceLA.com platform and integrate with LA Tourism’s
website, DiscoverLosAngeles.com.
The Arts Commission’s critical unmet needs include additional funding to bring Arts for All fully to scale to serve all 81 County
school districts; stabilize the Organizational Grant Program to adequately fund an increased number of grantees; and launch a
project grant program to fund arts programming in non-arts organizations such as social service and health organizations. In
addition, funds and positions are needed to support the re-opening of Ford Theatres, including public information and digital
marketing activities, and to provide support for the Organizational Grant and Civic Arts programs due to increases in workloads of
core operations and for overall administrative support.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease in
NCC of $10.2 million primarily due to the deletion of one-time
funding for the Legacy System Replacement Project Phase II,
deletion of one-time carryover funding for the Voice-over
Internet Protocol (VoIP) Project and live scan requirements, and
a projected decrease in retirement contributions. The
Recommended Budget also includes Board-approved
increases in salaries and employee benefits, partial prior-year
curtailment restoration, and additional one-time funding for
15.0 Appraiser positions needed to support the Legacy System
Replacement Project.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Assessor’s Office will continue to:
¦ Introduce operational efficiencies to improve work activities
and public services including a partnership with tax system
departments to create a “one-stop” counter for tax services;
¦ Increase the use of social media and the internet to
disseminate critical service messages to the public about
Assessor programs and operations;
¦ Initiate the second phase of development of the Assessor
Legacy System Replacement Project while partnering with
County stakeholders and tax system departments;
¦ Recruit, train and develop additional staff to increase
operational effectiveness; and
¦ Pursue shorter duration projects that automate and improve
the assessment process.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC
of $0.9 million primarily due to the elimination of one-time
carryover funding, partially offset by the addition of 2.0 payroll
support positions and Board-approved increases in salaries
and health insurance subsidies. The Recommended Budget
also includes 1.0 position for ePayables Solutions, fully offset
by the deletion of 2.0 lower level positions and 1.0 revenue
offset investigation position to assist the Fire Department.
The Auditor-Controller advocates for fiscal responsibility and
service excellence through various initiatives, including:
¦ Ensuring public trust in County government by implementing
the Board-approved annual audit plan and conducting
investigations of fraud and malfeasance;
¦ Working with the Chief Executive Office to fully fund
compliance audits and enhancing service delivery by ensuring
that such services can be provided in a manner consistent
with government and accounting industry standards and best
practices for audit independence;
¦ Continuing the enhancement of eCAPS and the Advantage
eHR suite of applications to centralize and consolidate the
County’s financial management, reporting, human resources,
and talent management functions;
¦ Improving the fiscal accountability of social services
contractors by resolving issues related to federal recovery of
questioned costs, ensuring auditor access to contractor
records, and continuing to enhance the Contractor’s Manual
to ensure compliance with contract terms and conditions;
¦ Promoting use of direct deposit to pay vendors, thereby
reducing the County’s reliance on check disbursements;
¦ Advocating for development of an integrated, enterprise
Property Tax System to replace aging, obsolete and inefficient
legacy applications that require high levels of staff and
technical support; and
¦ Promoting County efficiency initiatives such as eForms, the
Countywide Contract Management System, and the
Countywide Open Data Initiative.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC
of $5.9 million primarily due to the elimination of one-time
funding for contract, development, and maintenance costs
associated with the enterprise system. The Recommended
Budget also includes ongoing funding for 5.0 positions for the
continuation of central support to the eCAPS/eHR project. The Transportation Clearing Account is a central receiving point for charges for transportation costs incurred by departments. All
charges are then distributed to the appropriate departments leaving this budget unit with no net appropriation. The
2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects the continuation of the countywide transportation program.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an $8.2 net
decrease in NCC primarily attributable to the deletion of
one-time funding, partially offset by increases in
Board-approved salaries and employee benefits. The
Recommended Budget includes the addition of 1.0 Grounds
Maintenance Worker I, 1.0 Senior Painter, and 1.0 Student
Worker, Information Technology positions, fully offset by a
reduction in appropriation. The Department increased funding
for Beach and Marina programs, maintenance and repair,
utilities, and training, fully offset with increases in Beach and
Marina revenues. The Recommended Budget also reflects
budgetary realignments based on historical experience and
anticipated requirements.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Implementation of the County’s and Department’s Strategic
Plans will accomplish the following outcomes: 1) visitors to
County beaches and Marina del Rey will experience world
renowned recreational opportunities and quality customer
service through accessible, clean, attractive and safe facilities;
and 2) Marina boaters, visitors and residents will enjoy
experiencing the County’s “Crown Jewel” through redeveloped
leasehold properties and beautiful and well-maintained public
amenities.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects the current levels
necessary to provide efficient and responsive delivery of
services to the Board and the public. The overall NCC increase
of $1.9 million is primarily due to Board-approved increases in
salaries and employee benefits and one-time funding
adjustments related to various community programs, partially
offset by deletions of carryover funding, deletions of one-time
funding and a decrease in retirement costs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Executive Office is in the process of implementing its
strategic plan, in alignment with the County’s Strategic Plan,
with multiple goals for FY 2015-16. Resources are needed to
achieve those goals which continue to focus on the use of
technology-driven services.
The Department’s unmet needs include funding to finalize the establishment of the OIG, increases to fund services received from
other County departments, and various staffing requests to enhance operational efficiency and service delivery.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects the Board’s
continuing commitment to allocate a significant amount of
available one-time funding to expand, replace, or refurbish the
County’s capital assets and infrastructure. The Recommended
Budget appropriates $992.6 million for 304 active projects that
address high-priority health, public safety, recreation, and
infrastructure needs.
Of the total 2015-16 Recommended Budget appropriation,
$726.3 million is allocated to General Fund projects that
encompass a broad range of recreational, cultural, law
enforcement, health, and general government functions
funded by $221.0 million in one-time revenue from grants and
other sources, and $505.4 million in local discretionary monies.
The General Fund appropriation represents the
2015-16 budgetary requirements of 229 projects that are
currently in acquisition or under development, design, or
construction. The total appropriation for the
2015-16 Recommended Budget represents a decrease of
$109.8 million and the completion of 42 projects from the
2014-15 Final Adopted Budget.
In addition to those projects appropriated in the General Fund,
the capital program includes certain critical projects which are
financed with special district revenue, commercial paper
proceeds, and are appropriated in certain special funds
summarized in Volume Two. These projects address capital
needs in the areas of infrastructure repair and development,
health services, public safety, and general government, and
include, but are not limited to, Rancho Los Amigos Seismic
Retrofit and Inpatient Consolidation and New Outpatient
Facilities Projects, Manhattan Beach Library Project, East
Antelope Valley Animal Care Center Project, Online Real-Time
Centralized Health Information Database Projects, El Monte
Airport Apron Parking Rehabilitation Project, and various Fire
District projects. There are 75 projects in acquisition,
development, design, or construction with a total project value
of $1.98 billion.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget does not reflect projects
that have been financed through the issuance of long-term
bonds. Such projects include the Harbor-UCLA Seismic Project,
Harbor-UCLA Medical Center Psychiatric Emergency Services
Expansion Project, Coroner Crypt Building Additions, and the
Tenant Improvement Project with a total value of $92.4 million.
Bond financed funds are held and administered by
independent bond trustees.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC
of $6.0 million primarily due to the deletion of $7.4 million in
carryover funds, partially offset by $1.2 million in
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits.
The Recommended Budget also reflects an increase in NCC of
$0.2 million for 2.0 additional positions to provide specialized
photographic work and video production services through
countywide communications media.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Due to a recent Board initiative, the Chief Executive Officer
(CEO) is assessing the current County governance and
departmental structure for the purpose of better meeting the
Board’s organizational objectives. Such objectives include
increasing communication and collaboration to address
complex issues facing the County, eliminating the unnecessary
layers of management, allowing the Board to focus on
establishing County policy and ensuring effective service
delivery. Additionally, the new structure will address key Board
priorities such as:
¦ Facilitate forming a close partnership between the Board and
the Sheriff’s Department as the Sheriff confronts numerous
challenges, ranging from a federal consent decree to jail
construction to new civilian oversight;
¦ Assist the Board to ensure the success of child protection and
family support initiatives; and
¦ Provide guidance on the potential integration of the County’s
three health-related agencies by assessing organizational
challenges and opportunities to improve patient care and
population health.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC
of $0.3 million primarily due to reductions in County
retirement contributions and one-time allocation costs from
the previous year, partially offset by Board-approved increases
in salaries and employment benefits, and funding for IT
security.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to:
¦ Support the County’s Strategic Plan by participating actively
as both owner and supporter of many County strategies and
objectives;
¦ Maintain a countywide strategic IT planning program
including an IT governance structure, which ensures
alignment of IT initiatives with County strategic goals,
strategies, and objectives;
¦ Review Board-approved IT contracts and department business
automation plans to ensure alignment with departmental and
countywide goals; and
¦ Foster better management of County IT resources to improve
service delivery and increase organizational effectiveness.
The Department’s unmet needs include additional funding for 1.0 Senior Information Technology Consultant, CIO position to
develop project management practices and support departments with solicitations of large IT projects.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects $177.1 million in
gross appropriation and $3.2 million in NCC. The increase of
$2.5 million in gross appropriation is primarily the result of
increases in Board-approved salaries and employee benefits,
and the utilization of available prior-year funding previously
set aside in PFU. This is the 13th consecutive year that CSSD will
receive a flat baseline administrative cost allocation from the
California Department of Child Support Services and also
assume a flat funding State allocation for the Electronic Data
Processing Maintenance and Operation. The Recommended
Budget also includes the net addition of 1.0 position to address
the critical needs of the Department.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to engage senior, mid-level and line
staff in its Child Support Statistical (CSTAT) process to strategize
and redesign business practices using current and real time
statistical data to align resources and improve performance.
The Department recently introduced an AdminStats tool to
look at internal administrative functions and internal customer
service delivery. CSSD remains committed to practices that
ensure effective and professional service delivery and support
the County’s Strategic Plan goals. It continues to align its
performance measures with the County’s Strategic Plan and
federal and State performance measures for local child support
agencies.
The Department recently introduced a Predictive Analytics tool
to determine the appropriate amount of casework resources
required to collect child support obligations. Based upon
certain factors, CSSD is better able to determine which cases
are more likely to pay child support obligations and assign
resources accordingly.
The Department also continues to move forward with the
“Child Support 2017” Strategic Initiative, taking every
opportunity to leverage resources and build an organization
that is structurally sound, efficient, financially healthy, and
focused on its goals and mission.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget for Administration reflects
an increase of $74.2 million in gross appropriation, funded with
increases of $71.7 million in revenue, and $2.5 million in NCC.
The revenue increase consists primarily of $4.7 million in
federal revenue for the Title IV-E Waiver and $67.0 million in
2011 State Realignment growth funds. The $2.5 million
increase in NCC is a result of $1.7 million to support the
Board-approved Katie A. Strategic Plan and $2.3 million to
partially fund employee benefits subsidies. These are partially
offset by a $1.0 million NCC decrease as a result of the deletion
of one-time funding for the San Fernando Valley Kinship
capital project and a $0.5 million decrease in rent charges.
The Recommended Budget also reflects the addition of
542.0 positions consisting of: 1) 444.0 line-operational
positions, including 250.0 Children’s Social Workers (CSWs),
70.0 Supervising CSWs, and 124.0 support staff positions to
reduce caseloads; 2) 58.0 positions, including 16.0 CSWs,
10.0 Supervising CSWs, and 32.0 support staff for specialized
programs; 3) 22.0 positions to implement a Foster Youth Work
Program; and 4) 18.0 positions for critically needed
administrative support.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
DCFS continues its collaborative initiatives with the CEO, other
County departments, and community partners to support and
strengthen the ability of families and communities to help
children thrive and to maintain child and youth safety. The
following initiatives are being put in place, or have been
implemented, to achieve these goals.
DCFS anticipates filling all CSW vacancies within the next few
months, thereby reducing individual CSW caseloads to
enhance services provided by allowing for increased time
spent with children and families. Having filled almost all CSW
vacancies, the Department aims to further reduce caseloads
through the addition of social workers, supervising social
workers, and associated support staff.
The Department will implement the Foster Youth Work
Program. This program will provide opportunities for
DCFS-served youth to gain hands-on skills development
training and work experience that will improve their
job-readiness, thereby improving their chances of being
self-sufficient upon emancipation. Unlike other job-training
programs, this program is designed specifically for foster youth
ages 16-21.
As part of the County’s commitment to treating commercially
sexually exploited children (CSEC) as victims of abuse and
human trafficking, rather than criminalizing them, DCFS, in
collaboration with other County departments, local law
enforcement agencies, and community partners, helped
successfully implement the CSEC First Responders’ Protocol. As
part of this effort, DCFS has added resources to expedite and
provide intensive services to this vulnerable population.
Recognizing that, when removed from their homes, children
fare better in the care of relatives, and that relative caregivers
need various types of assistance to successfully bring these
children into their homes, the Department continues to work
on improving services to support relative caregivers. DCFS has
started implementing the State’s Approved Relative Caregiver
(ARC) Program (SB 855), that provides funding to make
per-child, per-month payments equal to the higher basic
federal foster care rate, and helps to ensure that the basic
needs of these children are met.
In a continuing effort to maximize the use of technology, the
Department is currently working on various information
technology (IT) projects that will aid social workers in serving
children by improving the transmittal and record keeping of
information, data-sharing decision making, and allow social
workers more time to spend with children and their families.
The Court Reports and Petitions Document Management
System will develop and deploy an EMC Captiva and
Documentum software solution to capture, index, and store
the PDF copies of court reports and petitions. Court officers,
judges, County Counsel, and child attorneys will have online
access to these documents. This will replace the manual
process of printing and distributing copies of these documents,
reduce paper and toner costs, reduce or eliminate travel and
courier costs, reduce courts sanctions, and improve document
tracking.
DCFS is participating in the Electronic Psychotropic Medication
Authorizations (ePMA) Processes project, a multi-departmental
project that seeks to develop and implement a
workflow-based system to facilitate the submission, tracking
and adjudication of requests for psychotropic medication for
children in the care of the County. The proposed system will
result in faster and more accurate processing of authorization
requests, which will result in children receiving appropriate
treatment and approvals faster, when appropriate. The system
will also provide reporting capabilities to facilitate analyzing
data and trends in the PMA process. A later phase of the project
includes developing and implementing functionality within
the system to track the effectiveness or outcomes of the
psychotropic medication treatment.
In an effort to continue maximizing the use of data in the
decision making related to child safety, the Department will
continue to work on the Approach to Understanding Risk
Assessment project. The goal of this project is to apply modern
data mining tools and methods to currently-collected data for
early identification and intervention of cases. The project will
create a tool to further enhance assessment and intervention
by measuring, monitoring and analyzing key risk factors
associated with child abuse, which will allow DCFS to continue
to ensure the well-being of children and families in its care.
The Department’s critical unmet needs include additional funding to: 1) reduce social worker caseloads to 15 for generic workers,
and 12 for emergency response workers, in accordance with the SB 2030 Workload Study, in order to ensure maximum services to
children and families; 2) increase administrative support to enhance operational efficiency and workforce accountability; and
3) meet the Department’s space needs.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget for Assistance Payments
reflects a $0.5 million decrease in NCC primarily due to the
deletion of one-time funding of $2.6 million for AB 12 and
$1.3 million for the Promoting Safe and Stable Families (PSSF)
program. This decrease is partially offset by caseload and
California Necessities Index (CNI) increases of 1) $0.1 million in
the Emergency Assistance (EA) program, 2) $2.3 million in the
GRI program, and 3) $1.0 million in the Kin-GAP program.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department is currently implementing a number of
strategies to ensure safety, stability and permanency for
children under its care. The efficiencies, as a result of the
strategic changes, are projected to reduce foster care costs,
while maintaining the best interest of each child. The three key
areas that are projected to affect the assistance costs for foster
care include: 1) ensuring that only those children and families,
who would be appropriately served by the child welfare
system, enter the system; 2) reducing the time children spend
in out-of-home care; and 3) providing services to children and
families that enable children to remain in their homes or
achieve timely permanency.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease of
$0.2 million in gross appropriation primarily due to the
reduction of one-time and prior year carryover funding for
programs and services; a reduction of one-time funding for
administration of the Youth Jobs Program; and a reduction in
funding for retirement contributions. These decreases are
partially offset by additional Realignment funding for Adult
Protective Services (APS) and one-time funding for
administration of the Youth Jobs Program.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Promote sound, prudent, and transparent fiscal policies and
processes that help ensure maintenance of critical programs
and services.
¦ Enhance economic and social outcomes through integrated
services and best practices.
¦ Implement human capital best practices to enhance the
recruitment, development, retention and well-being of
qualified county employees.
¦ Develop and implement client-centered approaches through
integrated services and best practices.
¦ Maximize the effectiveness of processes, structures and
operations to support timely delivery of customer-oriented
and efficient public services.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
$59,000 in appropriation primarily due to one-time funding for
the Youth Jobs Program and the Senior Nutrition Program. In
addition, there is a net decrease of $41,000 in NCC attributable
to the reduction of prior-year one-time funding for both of the
aforementioned programs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Promote sound, prudent, and transparent fiscal policies and
processes that help ensure maintenance of critical programs
and services.
¦ Enhance economic and social outcomes through integrated
services and best practices.
¦ Implement human capital best practices to enhance the
recruitment, development, retention and well-being of
qualified County employees.
¦ Develop and implement client-centered approaches through
integrated services and best practices.
¦ Maximize the effectiveness of processes, structures and
operations to support timely delivery of customer-oriented
and efficient public services.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $0.9 million primarily due to the Board-approved transfer of
the Office of Small Business from the Internal Services
Department, creation of the Small Business Liaison, and
Board-approved increases in salaries and health insurance
subsidies. The Recommended Budget also includes the
creation of the Consumer Corps Pilot Program to provide
one-year internships to college and university students fully
offset with departmental revenue.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Identify and secure additional office space to accommodate
increased staffing and provide improved public access to our
services;
¦ Reorganize department operations to incorporate the Office
of Small Business, increase outreach and communications
with existing local small businesses, and help new small
businesses open in the County through the new
Small Business Concierge service; and
¦ Implement the pilot Consumer Corps Program to create work
opportunities to local college students that will help enhance
the services of the Department and provide valuable work
experience for youth.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $1.4 million, primarily due to Board-approved salaries and
employee benefits and front funding for the fourth year of a
five-year program for the Employment Advice Program and
House Counsel Services Programs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
County Counsel will continue ongoing strategic plan initiatives
in support of the County’s Strategic Plan, including:
¦ Developing and implementing new initiatives, strengthening
current practices, and enhancing client relations through
communication. The Office continues to develop and finalize
requirements for its website redesign to improve ease of use
and enhance its content. It will continue to be updated with
information of interest to the public and it will serve as a
gateway to restricted client-only areas where access to
non-public information and resources can be provided to
client agencies with appropriate authorization. Content and
functionality specifications will be reviewed to ensure
alignment with the Office’s client service objectives. Drawing
from multiple sources of client feedback including the Client
Surveys, the Office will determine priority of services and
adapt business processes to an online format.
Reviewing and improving organization policies, processes
and/or structures to enhance effectiveness. The Office will
focus on staff development and skill improvement
opportunities. Various employees will be surveyed to
determine training needs and skills gaps. In addition, a survey
will be distributed to County Counsel counterparts across the
State to gather feedback on how training programs are
developed and implemented. All survey results will be
analyzed to develop a staff development program.
¦ Utilizing new and effective technologies to update office
systems and programs and improving organizational
effectiveness. As a result, it is necessary to augment the size of
the Information Technology Branch staff. In addition, the
Office is working towards the implementation of a web-based
electronic case management and e-filing system for our
Workers’ Compensation Division and an electronic case
management system for the Dependency Division. Also, the
current Risk Management Information System will be replaced
with a new management system.
¦ Managing resources more effectively by promoting prudent
fiscal policies and practices and exploring innovative methods
that help ensure fiscal stability. For instance, the Office
continues to ensure that its risk management practices are
aligned with the rest of the County and enhancing current
ergonomic and wellness awareness programs to better
manage risks associated with employee safety.
¦ Assessing, enhancing, implementing and monitoring the
cybersecurity and privacy framework and program to better
protect and preserve the privacy, confidentiality, integrity and
availability of the County’s IT infrastructure, assets and
information. County Counsel’s Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy and Security Officer
and members of the legal staff participate in the HIPAA/Health
Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act
(HITECH) Privacy and Security Committee to ensure
departmental compliance.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC decrease
of $6.1 million primarily due to the deletion of one-time
funding for the Hall of Justice (HOJ) Project and police radios,
an increase in public safety sales tax (Proposition 172) revenue,
and lease cancellation related to the HOJ Project, partially
offset by Board-approved increases in salaries and employee
benefits, and the additions of 4.0 positions for the Electronic
Suspected Child Abuse Reports (E-SCARS) unit, 6.0 positions
for Paralegal/Paraprofessional Support, 5.0 positions for a new
conviction review unit, as well as funding for high tech crime
training. The Recommended Budget also reflects the addition
of 4.0 positions for the Cooperative Disability
Investigations - Social Security Administration (CDI-SSA) fully
offset by grant funding.
The Office’s FY 2015-16 strategic planning efforts remain
focused on the following areas:
¦ Expand the application of alternatives to incarceration in
appropriate cases.
¦ Carry out the provisions of AB 109 including training and
refining internal statistical reporting mechanisms.
¦ Increase efforts to address the proliferation of identity theft
and cyber crimes.
¦ Advance a crime prevention campaign aimed at educating
and protecting citizens from financial crimes, particularly
those involving seniors.
¦ Increase involvement in the environmental crimes
enforcement community.
¦ Continue to work on information and document exchanges
with other criminal justice agencies.

The FY 2015-16 Official Budget includes a request to fund 40.0 additional positions to carry out critical activities in support of the
Department’s mission such as:
• 1.0 Bureau Chief position to support the creation of a Criminal Justice Mental Health Executive Director position;
• 1.0 Head, Marketing and Communications Manager position to develop a comprehensive communications program including
the use of social media to bolster public awareness of the Department’s programs and initiatives;
• 2.0 Deputy District Attorney IV, 2.0 Senior Investigator, and 1.0 Supervising Investigator, DA positions to create a specialized
cyber team that will respond to private sector entities such as financial institutions and middle to small retail businesses by
investigating and sharing emerging cyber threat information between government and the private sector; and
• 2.0 Adult Hearing Officer positions to increase its ability to provide non-judicial alternatives in identified criminal referrals in a
non-courtroom and cost effective setting. This is consistent with the Department’s goals to expand alternative sentencing
models.
Also, additional funding is requested for essential space management needs.
The EPR budget provides funding for the County Office of
Emergency Management to prepare and implement plans and
policies for the protection of life and property within the
County in the event of an emergency or disaster; operate and
maintain the County Emergency Operations Center (EOC), train
personnel assigned to County government, special districts,
and other jurisdictions throughout the County; plan support
for Homeland Security; develop and provide emergency and
disaster related educational materials for County residents; and
conduct countywide disaster exercises.
Management of the County EOC includes the Operational Area
Response and Recovery System, an internet-based information
reporting and notification system used by jurisdictions and
agencies in the County operational area to convey conditions
and operational status as a result of an incident, emergency or
disaster, and the Specific Needs Awareness Planning program,
also an internet-based comprehensive planning and response
tool developed to address the needs of residents that may
have an insufficient ability to self-evacuate, or who may require
specialized care and resources during a disaster.
The budget also incorporates funds for Homeland Security
Grants that includes the State Homeland Security Grant
Program; Urban Area Security Initiative; Law Enforcement
Terrorism Prevention Program; Citizens Corps Program; Buffer
Zone Protection Program; and the Emergency Management
Performance Grant for County departments, unincorporated
areas, special districts, and cities within the operational area.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects deletion of
$1.0 million in carryover funding.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects anticipated
funding for various employee benefits offset with expenditure
distribution to County departments.
The County’s infrastructure requires ongoing investment to
meet continuous performance requirements. The
2014-15 budget appropriated funds for critical repairs,
including heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC),
elevators, fire safety, and roof repairs and other desperate
maintenance needs throughout the County. The 2015-16
Recommended Budget appropriates $170.8 million for critical
and other high-priority repairs, maintenance, and
accessibility modification needs at County facilities, including
beaches, parks, juvenile halls and camps, senior centers, and
health centers.
During FY 2014-15, departments identified additional deferred maintenance needs with an estimated total cost of $126.7 million.
These unfunded needs include various general facility repairs; replacement of outdated building systems such as boilers, chillers,
HVAC units; roofs; and elevator upgrades to achieve building operational efficiencies.
The Federal and State Disaster Aid budget provides County departments with economic recovery assistance following major
emergencies and disasters. It includes appropriation for emergency and post-emergency responses, in addition to the repair,
restoration, or replacement of disaster-damaged County buildings and property, pending reimbursement from appropriate
governmental agencies.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes financing sources
and financing uses as follows:
Financing Sources
For budgetary planning purposes, the Chief Executive Office
considers total financing sources the difference generated in
FY 2014-15 from County revenues exceeding expenditures
(fund balance available), the use of prior-year obligated fund
balance, and property taxes. Any decrease in fund balance
available from the budgeted amount will require expenditure
reductions or the identification of additional financing.
The recommended fund balance of $1,319.3 million is
comprised of $146.9 million from General Fund operations;
and $1,172.4 million of unused FY 2014-15 funds carried over
to FY 2015-16 for the following:
¦ $494.5 million of Capital Projects funds for the completion of
various projects and refurbishment needs;
¦ $151.3 million of Extraordinary Maintenance funds for major
repairs and maintenance of County facilities and assets;
¦ $38.8 million of Project and Facility Development funds for
consultant and specialized services related to projects that are
under development, as well as improvements to County
facilities;
¦ $378.8 million of Provisional Financing Uses funds primarily
for the Departments of Children and Family Services, Board of
Supervisors, Sheriff, Probation, Public Social Services, and
Mental Health, as well as the Correctional Enhancement
Program, Comprehensive Diversion - Inmate Treatment
programs and future budget uncertainties;
¦ $54.2 million of Board of Supervisors funds for various
community programs;
¦ $22.7 million of Homeless and Housing Program funds for
Homeless Prevention Initiative projects;
¦ $25.5 million of Children and Family Services funds for the
Katie A. Settlement Agreement;
¦ $4.7 million of Department of Public Social Services funds for
General Relief restructuring projects; and
¦ $1.9 million for continued support of the Los Angeles Regional
Interoperability Communications System Joint Powers
Authority administrative operations.
Obligated fund balance of $12.1 million is decreased for the
following:
¦ $9.5 million of Health Services Tobacco Settlement funds for
health-related costs;
¦ $1.5 million for the Assessor’s Legacy System Replacement
Project to ensure that the design, functionality and
operational effectiveness of the replacement system meet the
County’s operational and business objectives;
¦ $0.9 million for the Pitchess Detention Center Landfill to
satisfy the closure requirements adopted by the Los Angeles
Regional Water Quality Control Board in November 2014; and
¦ $0.2 million for Public Library Homework Centers.
Property tax revenues reflect a net increase of $212.3 million
from the FY 2014-15 Final Adopted Budget. The increase
includes $211.8 million due to a projected 5.05 percent
increase in assessed valuation; and $0.5 million in sales tax
(Triple Flip) revenue as a result of anticipated increases in
taxable sales in the County. Property tax revenues include
in-lieu vehicle license fee revenue as part of the State’s Local
Government Agreement (2004 Budget Act).
The recommended property tax revenue changes are
comprised of the following:
¦ $211.6 million increase in the Regular Roll;
¦ $0.2 million increase in the Supplemental Roll; and
¦ $0.5 million increase related to the taxable sales in the County
and the dollar for dollar swap of sales tax revenue with
Educational Revenue Augmentation Fund (ERAF) property tax
revenue (Triple Flip).
Financing Uses
Financing Uses include funding for appropriations
for contingencies as outlined in the revised Board Policy
4.030 “Budget Policies and Priorities”, approved on
September 30, 2014.
Provision for obligated fund balance may be nonspendable,
restricted, committed or assigned for specific needs including
future legal or contractual obligations. There is no provision for
obligated fund balance financing uses in 2015-16.
The Fire Department, as a Special District, is funded
independent of the County General Fund, and relies primarily
on property taxes and a special tax approved by the voters in
1997 to provide essential fire protection and emergency
medical services. The Department will be focusing on
establishing the Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Bureau;
ensuring fiscal sustainability by identifying new revenue
streams and maintaining sufficient levels of reserves;
minimizing risk; and enhancing the culture of the organization
through continuing training. These efforts will provide the
foundation to sustain the current level of emergency staffing
and essential support services.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes 2.0 support
positions to assist with the firefighter examination process;
funding for Board-approved increases in salaries and employee
benefits; services and supplies and capital assets for the new
EMS bureau and other operations, partially offset by decreases
in retirement and unavoidable costs; and the deletion of
one-time funding for firefighter training classes, settlement
expenses, capital assets and other expenditures.
The Department’s Strategic Plan includes 12 goals designed to
support the Department’s envisioned future. These goals are:
Preventing Injury and Illness; Delivering Exemplary Emergency
Services; Innovating New Delivery Systems; Fostering
Workforce Excellence; Ensuring Financial Stability and
Accountability; Developing the Leader in Each Employee;
Strengthening the Department’s Infrastructure; Automating its
Systems; Containing Risks; Mitigating Disasters; Preparing the
People Served; and Communicating the Department’s Value.
The 2015-16 budget request includes funding to sustain departmental operations. The Department will continue to evaluate new
funding sources to support ongoing operations.
The Fire Department - Lifeguard budget provides funding for
lifeguard services at County-operated beaches, which are the
financial responsibility of the General Fund. The budget unit
establishes an appropriation for a General Fund transfer to the
Fire Department’s budget, which includes a percentage of all
costs and budgeted positions for ocean lifeguard services. The
2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease of
$1.1 million in NCC primarily due to the deletion of one-time
funding for a dock house, Dive Team training, generators, and
service and supplies and decreases for longevity bonuses and
retirement contributions, partially offset by Board-approved
increases in salaries and health insurance subsides.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Fire Department’s Strategic Plan includes 12 goals
designed to support the Department’s envisioned future.
These goals are: Preventing Injury and Illness; Delivering
Exemplary Emergency Services; Innovating New Delivery
Systems; Fostering Workforce Excellence; Ensuring Financial
Stability and Accountability; Developing the Leader in Each
Employee; Strengthening our Infrastructure; Automating its
Systems; Containing Risks; Mitigating Disasters; Preparing the
People We Serve; and Communicating the Department’s Value.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget supports the Fire
Department’s Strategic Plan efforts as it relates to the lifeguard
operations.
The Department has $2.2 million in unmet needs for underfunded items ($0.8 million) and infrastructure needs ($1.4 million). To
address such needs, $1.5 million has been allocated in the Provisional Financing Uses budget unit for lifeguard operations and will
be transferred to the Fire - Lifeguard budget unit after the Department’s priorities have been finalized.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC
of $4,000 primarily due to a decrease in retirement
contributions.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Grand Jury continues to:
¦ Increase recruitment of Civil Grand Jurors to better represent
the varied population of the County;
¦ Safeguard valuable Grand Jury original records and develop
long-term storage solutions; and
¦ Plan for a third Grand Jury to be used for Criminal Grand Jury
matters when needed.
The County’s Grand Jury requires additional staff to address an increased workload in recruitment and selection. In order to
maintain compliance with the law and meet the Board’s expectations, recruitment of all segments of the County’s population is
required. Funding for 1.0 full-time position at the level of Administrative Assistant II (estimated cost of $75,000) is needed to
address increases in workload.
The second Criminal Grand Jury (SB 796, which added Section 904.8 to the Penal Code), if and when impaneled, will require
additional funding of approximately $900,000 for staff, grand juror expenses, space, and infrastructure.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC increase of
$40,000 in one-time funding for the purchase of surveillance
cameras for the children’s playground which is consistent with
established contractual obligations and demonstrates a
commitment to public-private partnerships.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Consistent with the County’s vision to improve the quality of
life in the County, Grand Park exists to serve the people of
Los Angeles by assuring open spaces for casual sitting, leisurely
strolling and civic gatherings. Grand Park serves the
community by providing access to community groups,
neighbors, schoolchildren, and sponsored performing events.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget is fully funded with
available resources, and reflects the minimum maintenance of
effort (MOE) required by law ($332.8 million and vehicle license
fees (VLF)-realignment revenue of $266.8 million), plus an additional $71.4 million in County funding. The additional
County funding components include $11.7 million from the
General Fund and $59.7 million in Tobacco Settlement funds.
The Recommended Budget also reflects $25.1 million in
County resources allocated to the Department of Public Social
Services (DPSS) for the In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS)
Provider Health Care Plan and $11.8 million allocated to the
Capital Projects/Refurbishments budget for health-related
capital projects.
The Recommended Budget reflects a net increase in NCC of
$73.1 million, consisting primarily of increases in VLF of
$67.6 million and a one-percent increase of $3.3 million in the
MOE related to AB 85, which governs the Affordable Care Act
(ACA) implementation in California.
The Recommended Budget includes a net increase of
366.0 positions and related operational costs, primarily
associated with 351.0 positions for the second phase of the
standardized nurse staffing plan to comply with State
regulations, 30.0 positions for the second phase of the
community health worker initiative to facilitate medical care
for high-risk, high-need patients, 27.0 positions to establish
additional primary care medical homes, and 14.0 positions to
support the Medical Hubs expansion. The Recommended
Budget also includes funding in support of patient care at the
new Martin Luther King, Jr. Community Hospital (MLKCH)
anticipated to open in May 2015.
The Recommended Budget reflects $210.3 million in Measure
B Special Tax revenue, of which $208.5 million is allocated for
County hospital emergency and trauma care costs and
$1.8 million is allocated for services related to trauma centers
and emergency medical services in Health Services
Administration-Emergency Medical Services.
The Recommended Budget also reflects the use of
$184.9 million in estimated obligated fund balance to be
transferred to the four hospital enterprise funds for ongoing
health care costs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The ACA was implemented on January 1, 2014 and the
Department is continuing to refine its analysis of the impact.
The Department is making good progress on key initiatives
and operational changes that will prepare the health system to
succeed under the ACA. With the support of the Board, DHS
and its many partners are working together to transform its
system into an integrated care delivery model that will enable
it to provide the right care, at the right time, in the right
location, by the right kind of provider.
The Recommended Budget includes a revenue placeholder of
$81.3 million while the Department continues to work
diligently to develop its revenue projections related to the
ACA, the upcoming replacement 1115 Waiver, and the
reconciliation of the AB 85 realignment revenue redirection.
The Department’s chronic funding challenges have resulted in directing funding to cover the increased demand of patient care and
created unmet needs in areas such as training, medical equipment purchases and facility maintenance.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects the planned
discontinuation of annual installment funding to assist
MLK-LA with pre-hospital opening activities.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an overall NCC
decrease of $7.7 million in one-time funding primarily due to
the reduction in one-time carryover savings. The budget
provides $40.7 million in one-time and ongoing funding for
homeless assistance programs including: Homeless Families
and Single Adult Housing models; Long Beach Homeless
Veterans Initiative which provides emergency, transitional,
permanent housing, and supportive services for veterans;
Specialty Courts such as the Prototype Court and Homeless
Court Programs for defendants who are homeless and have
co-occurring illnesses (mental health and substance abuse);
and others that provide supportive services for homeless
families, individuals, and veterans.
Although the recent economic downturn has improved
nationally, the negative impact on the homeless population
continues to exist. It is important that the County continue to
work towards preventing and ending homelessness for
individuals, families, and youth.
The HHP has overseen at least 63 programs funded in part by
HPI, with the goal of securing emergency, transitional, or
permanent supportive housing for individuals, families, or
youth. Some of the highlights include:
¦ Established the Family Solution Centers (FSC), which connects
homeless families to one of eight FSCs for rapid rehousing,
permanent supportive housing, and services. This project is
funded in part by HPI ($1.0 million) and is administered by
LAHSA.
¦ Implemented the Single Adult Model, to permanently house
and provide supportive services to homeless single adults
who have physical and/or mental health conditions, and who
may also have a co-occurring substance abuse disorder.
¦ Participated in the United Way’s Home for Good Funders
Collaborative, which resulted in millions of dollars being
leveraged and coordinated to permanently house and provide
supportive services for approximately 1,000 chronically
homeless individuals.
¦ Continued the process and strategies learned from the
Homeless Encampment Protocol program, which responded
to homeless encampments throughout the County. This
collaborative program addressed over 35 homeless
encampments throughout the County in 2014.
In addition, HHP is in the planning stages to consolidate
funding for Transition Age Youth (TAY) to build a system to
help homeless TAY obtain stable housing and achieve
self-sufficiency.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC
of $0.7 million. The decrease is primarily attributed to the
deletion of one-time funding, partially offset by increases in
Board-approved salaries and employee benefits, the expansion
of the Executive Leadership Development Program and front
funding for the Impact Team.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ To appropriately align delivery/tracking of training with
business needs and latest technologies, the Department of
Human Resources (DHR) will develop and implement a new
countywide eLearning system to replace the existing
LearningNet. DHR will continue to work closely with the
Auditor-Controller and line departments on the
implementation of the new enterprise online application and
examination system. In addition, DHR will further enhance
standardization in countywide human resource practices,
particularly in the area of workplace investigation and
advocacy/performance management, by identifying best
practices and providing proper measures to common policy
issues.
¦ Key accomplishments of DHR over the past year include:
1) additional migration of historical cases from department
legacy systems to the Performance Management Tracking
System (PMTS), a central repository for all administrative
matters related to discipline in the County, and the rollout of
the PMTS Executive dashboard that enables access to real time
data across departments; 2) the completion of the
countywide rollout of the Absence Management System
(AMS) which provides for a standardized tool for case
management of employees on leave in accordance with
federal and State laws and County leave policies; 3) the
implementation of the Career Development Intern (CDI)
Program through coordination with County departments on
the hiring of CDI for all non-exempt departments; and 4) the
graduation of the first five cohorts of the Executive Leadership
Development Program (ELDP), a targeted training for the
County’s mid-to-senior level managers in support of the
County’s succession planning effort.
Other notable accomplishments include: 1) deployment of the
e-Form for annual outside employment reporting which
eliminates the manual process previously required for the
tracking of data and related reporting and provides a central
depository of such information within the County;
2) completion of the Management Appraisal Performance
Plan (MAPP) redesign effort through the implementation of a
new MAPP evaluation form that improves the overall
performance management value of the Plan and facilitates
training for all MAPP participants; 3) administration of a
significant number of large-size master calendar and
department-specific exams at the convention center with
funding support for testing facility rental costs; 4) completion
of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) compliance exam and
compliance reviews for additional line departments; and
5) winning the National Association of Counties (NACo)
Achievement Award for the countywide fitness challenge and
the PMTS.
The Department’s unmet needs include funding for the establishment of a countywide testing/training space; a position to provide
support for the evaluation of training needs of departments and the development/maintenance of curriculum that will help the
County workforce build skills relevant to business needs and the knowledge needed for successful performance; and an additional
position to address workload increases in personnel investigations.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC
of $2.5 million primarily due to the deletion of one-time
funding for the email migration of five County departments,
building maintenance workload, server consolidation, power
and sustainability improvements at the Downey Data Center,
purchase of plug-in hybrid electrical vehicles, settlement costs
for a case finalized in 2014-15, and a reduction in ongoing
funding for the transfer of the Office of Small Business (OSB) to
the Department of Consumer and Business Affairs (DCBA).
These decreases are partially offset by ongoing and one-time
funding for building maintenance workload, enhancements in
building maintenance, crafts apprenticeship program, and
increases in salaries and employee benefits. Also, reflected is a
net increase of $7.1 million in appropriation and 11.0 positions
primarily attributable to various reimbursable services
provided to County departments and other agencies, such as
building maintenance, telecommunications, computing, and
fleet services.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The ISD Strategic Plan for 2015-16 identifies strategic areas of
focus and associated goals that will enhance its ability to
provide effective and cost efficient internal and external
customer service, as well as take a leadership role in
implementing the County’s Environmental Policy. This year’s
plan includes the following new or continuing strategic
objectives:
¦ Collaborate with the CIO and CEO to determine data center
space requirements of all departments and provide
information to the Board on data center consolidation efforts
including build, acquisition or lease alternatives.
¦ Continue leading a countywide effort to reduce water
consumption in County facilities. ISD will coordinate with
County departments and provide technical support, assist in
identifying external funding and incentives, and report results
through the County’s sustainability website or other online
reporting tools. Significant reductions in water consumption
in County facilities can be achieved through use of efficient
plumbing fixtures, upgrades to campus and building cooling
towers, and improvements to landscaping irrigation.
¦ Continue leading a countywide effort to deploy Electrical
Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE) stations at County facilities
to charge employee and public plug-in vehicles. A pilot is
currently underway that will run through July 2015 and will
culminate in a report to the Board with recommendations for
cost recovery.
¦ Continue to operate and maintain a number of essential
legacy computing systems on behalf of County departments
and the courts. ISD is developing a strategy for all legacy
applications, and will identify the risks and costs for continued
operations and support versus modernization, re-platforming
or replacement.
¦ Lead countywide initiatives to replace telecommunications
infrastructure. ISD is working to replace obsolete Private
Branch Exchange (PBX) telephone systems (67,000 users) and
Centrex systems (58,000 phones) with VoIP due to planned
obsolescence in the year 2020. ISD is monitoring industry
trends to identify the impact mobile devices will have on this
initiative.
¦ Continue expanding broadband capacity to accommodate
videoconferencing, electronic medical records, server
virtualization, data center centralization, Wi-Fi access, and
increased use of personal computing devices.
¦ Continue with re-banding and replacing the Countywide
Integrated Radio System (CWIRS) with a new P-25 compliant
system and continue to provide essential radio technical
support and contracting expertise to the Los Angeles Regional
Interoperable Communication System.
¦ Continue the expansion of ISD’s customer service quality
assurance program to ensure strong customer feedback
mechanisms.
Major accomplishments from last year include:
¦ Supported the CEO in developing an Enterprise Risk
Information Center Dashboard (ERIC) utilizing the IBM Cognos
Business Intelligence tools to pull data from the Risk
Management Information System Data Mart. ERIC provides
County managers with informational tools to better
understand and recognize the nature of claim costs that will
allow for prioritization, selection, and implementation of
control measures to lessen the probability of future claims and
the associated costs of administering claims. ERIC is in use
countywide.
¦ Assisted the Department of Social Services (DPSS) with the
expansion of their Your Benefits Now (YBN) system in support
of the California implementation of the Affordable Care Act,
known as CalHEERS, and added 170 VoIP agents to the DPSS
Contact Center.
¦ Implemented all Southern California Regional Energy Network
(SoCalREN) programs, including the Energy Upgrade California
program that provides low-cost options to implement energysaving
measures including incentives for residential and
multi-family properties.
¦ Increased the number of customers in the County’s
Centralized Email System (CES) from 47,000 to 60,000 and
began preparations to move to the Microsoft Office 365
Government Cloud for email services.
¦ Expanded ISD’s private cloud hosting solution, from 1,670 to
2,060 servers. Implemented user self-service server
deployment, which brought the average server deployment
time to less than 25 minutes. Provided choices in server
hosting from basic to fully managed and reduced the cost per
server ranging from 21 percent to 71 percent based on need.
¦ Completed the build-out of the new CWIRS P-25 radio
infrastructure, including all towers and microwave sites, in
preparation for full customer equipment replacement for the
coming year.
¦ Migrated over 130 frame relay Asynchronous Transfer
Mode (ATM) circuits to fiber MetroEthernet, providing a lower
price point for expanded bandwidth to meet departmental
needs for centralized services, videoconferencing and
mobility.
¦ Enabled mobile employees by implementing a new service for
IT Shared Services customers to provide access to critical
applications outside of a full computer desktop.
¦ Implemented energy-efficiency projects (lighting
retrofits/controls, heating ventilation air conditioning,
retro-commissioning) that resulted in a countywide annual
cost avoidance of $0.8 million in electric and natural gas costs.
The Customer Direct Services and Supplies is a “pass through” budget to account for various services and supplies that ISD
purchases directly from outside vendors on behalf of customer departments.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an increase of $7.7 million in anticipated requirements from customer departments.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects funding for
anticipated judgments and/or settlements, attorney fees and
litigation costs, service contracts, and various commercial
insurance policies. The budget also includes a central
appropriation to fund large, unanticipated losses and losses of
a countywide nature.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC increase of
$18,000 attributed to an increase in the Consumer Price Index
based cost-of-living adjustment pursuant to the
2012 operating agreement. The Recommended Budget also
reflects full-year funding and support for buildings and
grounds maintenance, utilities, and other anticipated
operational costs of LA Plaza de Cultura y Artes.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Consistent with the County’s vision to improve the quality of
life in the County, LA Plaza de Cultura y Artes exists to serve the
people of Los Angeles, particularly children and families, by
educating them about Los Angeles history and
Mexican-American culture.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget provides for the collection
of lease payments due on LAC-CAL equipment leases from
County departments and the transfer of such payments to the
LAC-CAL Corporation. Also reflected is the payment of
insurance premiums for which expenditures will be distributed
to affected departments.
In prior fiscal years, the JPA issued separate and independent
requests for proposals (RFP) for the design and construction of
public safety-grade Land Mobile Radio (LMR) voice and
Long-Term Evolution (LTE) data wireless networks. The JPA
then selected, negotiated and awarded separate contracts to
the prevailing vendor in both RFPs.
Both the LMR and LTE networks are currently undergoing
system design, with the JPA expediting all work associated
with the LTE network in an effort to utilize federal grant
funding resources that expire in August 2015. The LMR
network features a more practical design schedule, due to
flexibility of its funding sources. Each network is independent
of the other and will be activated separately.
The JPA is also refining the details of the system’s estimated
financing needs, and is in the process of developing a
comprehensive funding plan and formula to divide the
system’s costs equitably among its members.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects continued
funding for administrative operations of the JPA.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC decrease
of $3.2 million primarily due to the deletion of one-time and
carryover funds for the new electronic case file system (ECFS)
and a reduction in capital assets, offset by Board-approved
adjustments in salaries and employee benefits and one-time
funding to continue implementation of the ECFS. The
Recommended Budget also reflects the deletion of
20.0 volunteer positions.
The Medical Examiner-Coroner strives to provide
compassionate, quality service to all of its customers, including
decedents’ families, funeral directors, law enforcement, courts,
the District Attorney, Public Defender and other justice
agencies, foreign consulates, and the news media. Goals and
objectives are designed to improve the level of service
provided to the community, by delivering complete work
products in a timely, accurate, efficient and usable manner. The
Department is proud to be a leader in death investigation and
continues to be successful in maintaining the following
accreditations: National Association of Medical Examiners,
Institute of Medical Quality/California Medical Association,
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education, Peace
Officers Standards and Training, and, American Society of
Crime Laboratory Directors/Laboratory Accreditation
Board-International (ASCLD/LAB-ISO).
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department will assess and prioritize new and ongoing
departmental IT projects including the continued
development and implementation of the ECFS. The
Department will continue to work with the Chief Information
Office and the Internal Services Department to complete the
next phases of the project.
The Department continues to have unmet needs such as costs associated with expanded technology capabilities; the possible
transfer of the County morgue, crematory and cemetery; expansion of the Antelope Valley Regional Office; and position
realignment and/or new position classifications pending review of a departmental reorganization plan.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects the Department’s
focus on strategic initiatives that represent collaborations with
other County departments and a commitment to countywide
priorities. DMH will enhance services provided to Transition
Age Youth (TAY), a population that has historically been
reluctant to seek care. As stigma has been reduced and
awareness of the benefits of early services for TAY has
increased, demand for services has also expanded. The
Recommended Budget reflects a growing investment in
contracted services for TAY including additional emergency
shelter beds; two new drop-in centers where TAY can receive
outreach, engagement and navigation services to link them to
mental health providers; and two additional psychiatrists to
address mental health, developmental, and social issues
unique to this population.
The Recommended Budget reflects additional funding for jail
diversion through implementation of SB 82 Oversight and
Accountability Commission (OAC), SB 82 California Health
Facilities Financing Authority (CHFFA), and Assisted Outpatient
Treatment also known as Laura’s Law. The Recommended
Budget includes 69.0 positions and funding for contract
agencies to implement SB 82 OAC. This will enable DMH to
establish mobile crisis and triage teams for homeless
individuals, veterans and older adults in all eight service areas.
It will also enhance contracted jail in-reach services provided
by agencies with extensive forensic mental health expertise;
and more effectively link hospital emergency rooms with
existing and planned mental health urgent care centers (UCC).
The UCC will also serve as the locations where law enforcement
may transport individuals identified as eligible for pre-booking
diversion.
The Department is also adding three additional UCC programs
and 35 Crisis Residential Treatment Programs, including the
addition of 19.0 positions, funded by the SB 82 CHFFA grant.
The UCCs will be Lanterman-Petris-Short- (LPS) designated and
provide crisis intervention and stabilization services 24 hours
per day, 7 days per week, including integrated services for
co-occurring substance abuse disorders, for individuals
13 years and older who would otherwise be taken to
emergency rooms or incarcerated. The Crisis Residential
Treatment Programs will provide the most intensive level of
residential services and will target the prevention of
hospitalization or incarceration, and reduce hospital stays.
Similarly, the Recommended Budget reflects the addition of
18.0 positions and expansion of contracted treatment services
for the implementation of Laura’s Law. Laura’s Law serves those
who suffer from mental illness, have refused offers of mental
health treatment, are deteriorating, are often homeless, and
frequently come to the attention of law enforcement.
The Recommended Budget further reflects a continued focus
on implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) by adding
positions associated with prior expansion of the ACA and to
support educational opportunities for the professionals
needed to implement health care reform. The Recommended
Budget also funds consultation services for individuals with
co-occurring mental health and substance abuse disorders.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
DMH continues to identify and implement strategic
approaches to ensure the provision of high quality
and cost-effective care to individuals with serious mental
illness/disorders. In FY 2015-16, in addition to the items
included above, these will include:
¦ Expansion of integrated mental health-substance abuse
disorder-primary care services through a variety of structural
arrangements (e.g. DMH staff co-located in DHS facilities,
involvement of substance use disorder providers in mental
health urgent care facilities, Federal-Qualified Health Center
primary care staff delivering services in DMH directly
operated, and contracted mental health programs).
¦ Continued development of strategies that support integrated
care such as universal authorization forms, common care
plans, integrated referral and screening via electronic
platforms, such as eConsult.
¦ Collaboration with other County Departments such as
Children and Family Services (Katie A. Strategic Plan),
Probation (Juvenile Justice), and Public Social Services (GR).
¦ Continued implementation of the Psychiatric Emergency
Service Decompression Plan, including expansion of the Olive
View UCC in collaboration with DHS.
¦ Development of a new Mental Health Services Act (MHSA)
Innovations Program designed through the MHSA
stakeholder process.
¦ Implementation of the Integrated Behavioral Health
Information System (IBHIS) with full entry of DMH directly
operated programs into the system and expansion for
contract providers.
¦ Expansion of Mental Health-Law Enforcement Teams that
respond to law enforcement calls involving individuals with
known or suspected mental illness.
¦ Continuation of focus on outcomes and increasing services for
underserved ethnic populations.
The Department’s unmet needs include: 1) augmentation of funding for the Probate and LPS sections of the Office of the Public
Guardian; 2) enhancement of outpatient services in several areas, such as jail diversion and full implementation of
Proposition 47 which creates increased demand for specialized forensic mental health programs; 3) expansion of State Hospital
and IMD beds as the State continues to shift responsibility for mentally ill offenders to the County.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC decrease
of $0.3 million primarily due to the deletion of one-time
carryover funding for the Veterans Outreach Program, furniture
restoration, vehicle purchase and Patriotic Hall Military
Museum Project. The Recommended Budget also includes
funding for Board-approved increases in salaries and employee
benefits.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to focus on increasing veterans’
service levels by collaborating with County departments,
developing and training staff, and partnering with military and
veterans’ service organizations. The Department will optimize
operational effectiveness and integrate service delivery by:
¦ Strengthening and enhancing its capacity to sustain essential
veterans’ service through effective training, agency
collaboration and leadership by:
• Ensuring that all veteran service representatives are
State-accredited by the California State Department of
Veterans Affairs (DVA), Training Responsibility
Involvement Preparation of Claims (TRIP) through the
Department of Veterans Affairs, and nationally accredited
through the National Association of County Veteran
Service Officers.
• Establishing partnerships with County departments and
veteran organizations and agencies such as: 1) partnering
with the Department of Public Social Services to identify
veterans receiving General Relief and pursue
compensation claims with the DVA; 2) coordinating with
the Department of Mental Health (DMH) to provide
mental health services to veterans and their families;
3) continuing efforts with the Sheriff’s Department to
provide services to veteran inmates in County jails;
4) working with the Departments of Human Resources
and Beaches and Harbors to explore job opportunities for
veterans; 5) building a one-stop veterans shop at Patriotic
Hall in partnership with veterans organizations and
agencies; and 6) implementing a communications plan
connecting veterans to services and benefits.
¦ Maximizing opportunities to measurably improve veteran’s
outcomes and leverage resources by:
• Delivering veteran services through innovative methods
and continuous integration by establishing
Memorandums of Understanding with County
departments and agreements with veteran organizations.
• Increasing outreach and promoting efforts to increase the
number of veterans receiving services using outcome
measures.
• Providing learning opportunities in partnership with
academic institutions, and County and government
agencies.
• Recognizing department/staff through applications for
County, State and national awards programs.
The Department is requesting 1.0 Supervisor, Veterans Claims and 2.0 Veterans Claims Assistant III positions to assist with the filing
of claims for federal benefits. Additional staffing resources will also be required to maintain services and programs the Department
currently provides or recently implemented as follows: Veterans One Stop Service Center; Women Veteran’s Program; Veteran’s
Homeless Clinic; State Reintegration Program; collaboration with the Housing Authority to assist veterans with the application
process for Section 8 Housing; partnering with the DMH for intervention and prevention services; and establishment of the Driver’s
License Veteran’s designation that will serve as a veteran’s identification card.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
$0.1 million primarily due an increase in the CPI-based COLA
adjustment pursuant to the 1994 operating agreement
amended on May 20, 2008, partially offset by the deletion of
one-time carryover funding. The Recommended Budget also
includes funding for Board-approved increases in salaries and
health insurance subsidies fully offset with a decrease in
services and supplies funding consistent with the
Board-approved operating agreement.
The Recommended Budget continues support for a full
exhibition schedule, including special presentations of works
by Frank Gehry, Ed Moses, Noah Purifoy, and Diana Thater, as
well as a costume and textiles installation highlighting men’s
fashion. The permanent collection will be highlighted with
installations of pre-Columbian, Chinese, Korean, and Japanese
works. Several LACMA-organized exhibitions will continue to
travel domestically and abroad, raising the museum’s image
and prestige in the field, including Larry Sultan (Milwaukee),
Earthly and Divine (Mexico and Saudi Arabia), and New
Objectivity (Italy).
Art Programs with the Community continues its multi-year
partnership with schools, libraries, and other organizations
throughout Los Angeles Unified School District Local Districts
East, West, and South. Through this program, LACMA provides
curricula for teachers that make connections with the State
Content Standards for the visual arts, language arts, and social
science. LACMA is also continuing the Art + Film Educational
Initiative, designed to expose audiences to the intersection
between art and technology. This program series includes
hand-drawn animation workshops for LAUSD middle school
students (Frame x Frame), classroom teacher professional
development (Art + Film Teacher Institute), and an after school
filmmaking program (Through Your Lens). Evenings for
Educators continues to be a successful professional
development program for K-12 teachers, presenting strategies
to incorporate the visual arts into the classroom with activities
to enhance creativity, curiosity, and critical-thinking skills.
Through these and many other Educational Outreach
programs, LACMA is able to engage over 460,000 guests, in
addition to those who visit the galleries every day throughout
the year.
The Museum of Art will continue implementation of its
long-range strategic objectives:
¦ Improve the quality and presentation of the collections;
¦ Attract and engage a broader audience through expanded
international recognition of LACMA as a quality art institution
and continued commitment to educational programs and
overall scholarship;
¦ Improve the museum campus; and
¦ Develop a stable and sustainable financial and organization
plan.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget is based on the
1994 operating agreement amended on September 26, 2006,
and further amended on June 24, 2013, October 8, 2013, and
June 23, 2014 between the County and the Museum of Natural
History Foundation, which established each entity’s
operational and financial responsibilities. This public-private
partnership enables the Museum to maintain educational and
research programs and basic operations at the Museum
located in Exposition Park, the George C. Page Museum at the
La Brea Tar Pits, and the William S. Hart Museum in Newhall.
The Recommended Budget reflects an NCC increase of
$57,000 primarily attributed to an increase in the Consumer
Price Index-based cost-of-living adjustment and an increase in
base funding to support physical and programmatic
expansion, partially offset by the deletion of one-time
carryover funding.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Museum continues to implement its strategic plan, which
is consistent with the County’s Strategic Plan. Through the
strategic planning process, the Museum will identify and
prioritize programs for funding in FY 2015-16 that further its
mission.
The Museum is requesting County General Fund allocations for two unmet capital project needs. The first request is $3.6 million for
the Page Museum to address Phase 1 (Priority 1) deficiencies that directly impact the health and safety of building occupants or do
not meet building, mechanical or electrical codes as identified in the Department of Public Works Building Evaluation Report dated
December 4, 2014. Between July 1, 2013 and June 30, 2015, the Museum will spend $1.9 million in enhanced programming and
capital improvements for the Page Museum and the La Brea Tar Pits. The requested funding will improve the sustainability and
energy efficiency of operations and support the program needs of the Museum.
The second request is $2.5 million to assist in the planning and design of the existing theater renovation. Upon completion, the
Museum will be able to commence private fundraising opportunities that could partially fund the proposed renovation project.
Currently, the array of the Museum’s programming and third party activities and events are held in one of the diorama exhibit halls;
eliminating the availability for visitors to view collections in that exhibit hall. The 54-year old theater at the Museum is unusable,
obsolete, and in need of extensive renovation to resolve code compliance issues. The requested funding will assist the Museum in
its objective to increase public serving museum space within the current building footprint and to partner and collaborate with the
surrounding community entities and programs offered by other County departments to provide a venue for school performances,
theatrical/musical presentations, community conferences, and public meetings.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a NCC increase of
$0.6 million primarily due to a cost-of-living adjustment and
unavoidable contract cost increases, partially offset by an
anticipated decrease in capital lease costs. Consistent with
established contractual obligations, and demonstrating a
commitment to maintaining public-private partnerships, the
Recommended Budget continues to provide County funds to
maintain and operate the facility.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Consistent with the County’s vision to improve the quality of
life in the County, the Center exists to serve the people of Los
Angeles by assuring the presentation of the very best of the
performing arts in its theaters and concert hall. The Center
serves the community by providing access to the performing
arts to families and children on the Center’s campus and by
providing educational services in the region’s schools.
The Center continues to identify unmet needs for numerous deferred maintenance projects and the implementation of various
best practices approaches.
Nondepartmental revenues are derived largely from
revenue-generating activities not related to any specific
County department.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget primarily reflects:
¦ An increase of $2.0 million in revenue from assessment and
tax collection fees;
¦ A realignment of $3.4 million for charges assessed to the
Hospitals and Special Funds/Special Districts, for the use of
general County services;
¦ An increase of $4.6 million in franchise revenues;
¦ An increase in other tax revenue, including $12.0 million in
deed transfer tax based on actual trend and steady growth in
the County’s housing values and $2.2 million in transient
occupancy tax;
¦ A decrease of $2.2 million in revenues generated from
penalties and costs for delinquent taxes;
¦ A decrease of $1.0 million in revenue from royalties, rents and
concessions; and
¦ A decrease of $1.5 million in revenues from homeowners’
property tax exemption claims.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects:
¦ An anticipated increase in countywide costs, which are
partially offset by the elimination of one-time funding for
various countywide initiatives.
¦ A decrease in other financing uses due to the deletion of
one-time funding for the Public Library, information
technology projects, and the elimination of a one-time
transfer from the General Fund to the Productivity Investment
Fund. The decreases are partially offset by an increase in
funding for the Public Library for Homework Centers.
¦ An increase in revenue due to projected growth in interest
earnings from the treasury pool.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a $9.1 million NCC
decrease primarily attributable to the deletion of one-time
funding, partially offset by Board-approved increases in
salaries and employee benefits, backfill of Proposition A
revenue, the Castaic Area Trails Plan, County Cost Allocation
Adjustment, and the addition of a Regional Recreation
Director, Pool Aquatics position.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department remains committed to maintaining the
County’s Strategic Plan. Continued and enhanced efforts found
in efficiencies, exploring new possibilities to augment revenue,
and discovering creative methods to sustain with minimum
funding will all be necessary for the Department’s operations
as well as to support the three Strategic Goals: Operational
Effectiveness/Fiscal Sustainability (Goal 1), Community
Support and Responsiveness (Goal 2), and Integrated Services
Delivery (Goal 3).
The Department’s 2015-16 critical needs consist of partial reinstatement of programs (recreation, crafts positions and capital
assets), curtailed as a result of the economic downturn; replacement of aging, non-diesel vehicles; and additional funding for
services and supplies for recreational programming.
Funding and augmentations for the aforementioned needs allow the Department to continue its operations without disruptions
and in some cases, may allow the Department to operate its facilities at a preferred service level. Partial reinstatement of programs
include full accessibility to lake swim beaches and nature centers; various recreational positions associated with children and senior
recreation programs; various craft positions for facility maintenance and repairs; and capital assets for facility construction and
ground maintenance. Approximately 20% of the Department’s fleet of 600 vehicles has reached the County replacement standard
of 7 years or older and/or 100,000 or more miles, and funding to replace these vehicles will greatly reduce the frequency of repair
and costs.
Other unmet needs include funding to develop community gardens; additional personnel is needed for Employee Relations to
allow for effective, efficient handling of numerous caseloads (which has since increased from the implementation of the County
Policy of Equity); and ongoing funding to enhance support services for recreational programming. Other efficiencies would be
achieved through enhancements in supervisor training and strategic planning, integration of a GPS system, automation of fuel
management system, and preservation of historical assets. Lastly, additional personnel, equipment and services are needed for
intranet development, computer maintenance and upgrades, and overall efficiency.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC decrease
of $5.8 million, primarily due to the deletion of $12.0 million in
one-time carryover funding for Title IV-E Waiver ($3.3 million),
Education Reform ($2.0 million), digitalized records project
($2.0 million), vehicle replacements ($2.0 million), lawsuit
settlement ($1.0 million), Vapor Tracer/Body Scanner
($1.0 million), Information Technology (IT) Mobilization Pilot
Project ($500,000), headquarter renovation project ($47,000),
and Commercially Sexually Exploited Children (CSEC) First
Responder Protocol Pilot project ($225,000); and a decrease of
$4.0 million in retirement contributions; partially offset by
$7.0 million for Board-approved increases in salaries and
health insurance subsidies, $746,000 for Deferred
Compensation, $73,000 for Health Insurance Buydown,
$128,000 for the countywide cost allocation adjustment;
$2.0 million in one-time funding to replace the existing PBX
telephone system to a VoIP system; and $300,000 for the
Succeeding Through Achievement and Resilience (STAR) Court
program.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Probation Department has developed a strategic plan
transforming from a custodial and supervision model to an
evidence-based practices treatment and rehabilitation model.
The goals include implementing evidence-based practices;
developing and expanding collaborative efforts and
community capacity; and maintaining a commitment to
organizational development. The top priorities of the
Department include:
¦ Continue efforts to maintain Department of Justice
recommendations;
¦ Continue the implementation of AB 109 Realignment;
¦ Continue efforts to change the culture of the Department;
¦ Continue to work with the Chief Executive Office to identify
funding for previously deferred facility maintenance projects.
The Probation Department’s most critical unmet needs include the following: 1) $1.2 million for 15.0 critically needed
administrative support positions; 2) $2.6 million for two additional Juvenile Day Reporting Centers (JDRC) for the Fourth and Fifth
Supervisorial Districts including 17.0 positions; 3) $362,000 to expand the existing JDRC in the Third Supervisorial District from a
part-time to full-time program; 4) $3.0 million to backfill the intrafund transfer loss from the Department of Mental Health for the
Dorothy Kirby Center; 5) $5.2 million to backfill the revenue loss from the National School Lunch Program; 6) $5.0 million as a
placeholder to address the Air Quality Management District (AQMD) violations for the replacement or retrofitting of generators;
7) $0.5 million to contract out for laundry services; 8) $5.6 million to replace the roof at Barry J. Nidorf Juvenile Hall; and
9) $1.0 million to retrofit the San Gabriel Area office.
The Community-Based Contracts budget funds private contracts, administered by the Probation Department, to reduce juvenile
crime and provide juvenile delinquency prevention services.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget appropriates $17.1 million
in services and supplies to fund consultant studies that
quantify departmental space needs, develop master plans,
provide technical, structural, and environmental impact
assessments, and assist in the development of facility
programs and capital planning efforts.
The Recommended Budget also incorporates $19.5 million in
other charges to fund County contributions for improvements
to County and other public facilities implemented by other
agencies or jurisdictions; $0.8 million in capital
assets–equipment to fund the acquisition of trailers to mitigate
operational impacts to recreation and public-oriented
programs that are displaced during construction; and
$6.0 million in other financing uses which represents transfers
of unspent funds from capital projects to be reallocated to
departments operating budgets for the purchase of furniture
and equipment, and to the Civic Art Special Fund per Board
policy to fund public art projects.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The budget provides a funding mechanism for departmental
and countywide capital development and planning activities.
The activities funded from this budget contribute to the
multi-year planning efforts of departments, and the County as
a whole, by ensuring that capital programs appropriately
reflect operational and programmatic requirements and
departmental strategic plans.
The Provisional Financing Uses budget unit serves as a
temporary budget for program funding that has yet to be
allocated to a specific budget unit. Once funding needs have
been determined, funds are transferred to the affected budget
unit by Board order.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
$99.9 million.
The following is a description of each budget category change.
Auditor-Controller
Reflects a $0.4 million increase for eCAPS maintenance costs.
Capital Projects
Reflects a $14.5 million decrease in prior-year carryover
funding.
Children and Family Services
Reflects a decrease of $11.1 million primarily due to the
transfer of one-time funding ($10.4 million) for the
Katie A. Settlement Strategic Plan.
Parks and Recreation
Reflects a $4.0 million increase for anticipated operational
costs associated with newly constructed or refurbished park
facilities.
Sheriff
Reflects a net increase of $67.3 million primarily for settlement
costs ($65.7 million) and debt service savings ($13.2 million),
partially offset by the transfer of ongoing funding
($22.2 million) to the Sheriff’s Department for the
implementation of the Citizens’ Commission on Jail Violence
recommendations.
Various
Reflects a net increase of $53.8 million for mental health needs
at County jails ($23.5 million), costs associated with the
Comprehensive Diversion – Inmate Treatment program
($10.0 million), budget uncertainties ($6.9 million), Stormwater
Urban Runoff Quality Program ($6.5 million), Palmdale Animal
Care Center ($3.6 million), Fire Lifeguard curtailment
restorations ($1.5 million) and various other programs
($3.8 million). These increases are partially offset by a decrease
in prior-year carryover savings ($2.0 million).
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC increase of
$6.4 million primarily due to Board-approved increases in
salaries and employee benefits; the addition of 3.0 interpreter
positions; the elimination of State revenue for the Sexually
Violent Predator program, pending the Court’s modification of
reimbursable activities; partially offset by the deletion of
one-time funding for the case management system,
Proposition 36 travel costs, video conferencing projects, and
office refurbishments.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Expand “holistic representation” that involves use of an
interdisciplinary team to best represent the interests of the
client and to address underlying issues (personal,
psychological, and social), which may have caused that
individual to engage in criminal activity. This approach will
improve client representation outcomes and allow the
Department to meaningfully participate in the County’s
mental health initiatives. With that goal in mind, the
Department plans to deploy psychiatric social workers to work
closely with trial attorneys throughout the County. In addition,
the Department is collaborating with the Department of
Mental Health and Sheriff’s Department to establish a mental
health liaison project in the County jails. This project involves
psychiatric social workers assisting public defender attorneys
who are representing inmates with mental disabilities (mental
illness, learning disabilities and development disabilities). This
team will assess inmates’ needs, advocate for the appropriate
treatment and make case disposition recommendations to the
court. Implementation of this project will reduce delays in
processing court cases through the criminal justice system
and ultimately jail overcrowding.
¦ Continue to invest in ongoing staff development and training
to advance the skills of employees and implement an
intensive, transformative leadership and management
program for managers.
¦ Restore and enhance support staff operations to improve the
organization’s flexibility and responsiveness to change,
including implementing an updated secretarial initiative.
Support staff operations were depleted by the fiscal downturn
and hiring freeze, making it more challenging to address the
demands created by major legal practice changes.
¦ Enhance and support mobile technology and functionality of
staff to improve efficiency and continue the comprehensive
video technology plan for staff training, public outreach and
client communications.
¦ Develop and acquire a case management system to enhance
assessment and performance measures focusing on
distribution of workload and appropriate staff deployment,
and efficiency.
The Department’s unmet needs include additional funding for an Employee Relations Head Deputy; an Immigration Attorney;
facility manager and warehouse positions; 36.0 positions to assist with the Mental Health Diversion Program; and a Public
Information Officer. In addition, one-time funding is needed for warehouse refurbishments; various office security upgrades; the
case management system; additional Wi-Fi service in various offices; refresh computers; and mobility application and tablet
devices to enhance employee productivity.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget demonstrates an internal
focus to enhance resources in support of the Department’s
mission, specifically in the areas of communicable disease
control and prevention, emergency preparedness and
response, community health services, HIV and STD programs,
and administration. In general, requested positions are being
funded by increases in grant funds, fees, and other revenue
sources. In addition, several requested positions reflect a
strategic shift in emphasis of resources through a
corresponding reduction of positions in other areas.
The Recommended Budget provides for total appropriation
funding of $946.0 million supported by grants, fees, and
revenues resulting in an NCC of $195.2 million. This reflects an
NCC increase of $3.5 million primarily attributable to
Board-approved adjustments to salaries and employee
benefits and an increase in vehicle license fees (VLF)
realignment. The total number of budgeted positions increases
by a net total of 40.0 positions to 4,611.0 positions.
Significant changes to departmental revenue include:
¦ Health Fees Revenue is projected to increase by $0.6 million
due to increases in workload and updated Board-approved
fees for the Cross Connection and Drinking Water Programs.
¦ Public Health Services – Federal revenue decrease of
($8.0million) due to the Community Transformation grant
ending March 29, 2015.
¦ Public Health Services – Federal revenue increase of
$3.5 million due to the successful awarding of a grant for the
Chronic Disease Prevention Strategy in Los Angeles (CDPS)
project, which began September 30, 2014.
¦ Substance Abuse Prevention and Control (SAPC) – Federal
revenue decrease of ($0.4 million) due to funding from the
Adult Drug Court for Medication Assisted Treatment (MAT)
Services that ended September 2014.
¦ SAPC – Federal revenue decrease of $5.0 million due to the
Substance Abuse Services for High Risk Parents and Caregivers
project funded by the First 5 LA Grant ending June 30, 2015.
The Department’s Strategic Plan includes goals for health
protection, health improvement, organizational effectiveness,
workforce excellence, fiscal accountability, communicable
disease control and prevention, community health services,
HIV/AIDS, emergency preparedness and response, healthy and
safe community environments, preventive health care,
empowered health consumers, health equity, public health
protection, and improved infrastructure.
The Department has the following unmet needs: 1) creation of a stable funding source for the continuous delivery of core chronic
disease prevention programs; 2) funding to modernize County-owned facilities; 3) funding for administrative staffing to address
sustained workload and increased complexity of key functions; and 4) funding for Department initiatives related to the
dissemination of health education-related matters to County residents.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a reduction of
$26.0 million primarily attributed to the deletion of one-time
funding from the Utility User Tax - Measure U allocations, new
construction projects and various Board-funded
refurbishments and capital projects. This reduction is partially
offset by a 5.05 percent anticipated property tax growth rate.
The Department’s budget also includes Board-approved
increases in salaries and health insurance subsides and the
addition of 5.0 budgeted positions.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Public Library’s strategic plan establishes a roadmap for
sustaining the Department’s leadership as a 21st century
library. The new purpose statement along with eight key
initiatives sets the framework for developing innovative service
models that will meet the increasing needs of our diverse
communities.
The Department will continue to construct new libraries and
refurbish aging library buildings. These buildings will be
designed with sustainable features that incorporate
self-service models; spaces that encourage creativity; larger
meeting rooms for civic engagement and community events;
and equipped with robust and emerging technologies to
support digital initiatives.
The Public Library’s official budget requests $6.0 million to augment the Department’s facilities and maintenance budget to
address structural or other building maintenance issues due to extended deferred maintenance at various library facilities. In
addition, Public Library requests a $6.0 million increase in the books and materials budget to meet the national average for
material expenditure per capita for a major urban library system, given the vast population served. The official budget also
requests $0.3 million to purchase two bookmobiles to replace the aging bookmobiles and continue to serve patrons living in
remote locations.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget for the Department of
Public Social Services (DPSS) – Administration reflects a
$95.9 million increase in gross appropriation and a
$0.5 million increase in NCC. The NCC increase is primarily due
to Board-approved salary increases, and the County’s share of
increases in employee benefits, offset by the elimination of
one-time funding. The Recommended Budget reflects a net
increase of 31.0 positions. The new positions requested are
primarily for information technology including the Leader
Replacement System (LRS), In-Home Support Services (IHSS),
CalFresh, and administrative support.
Although there was an increased demand for the full range of
DPSS services in the last few years, with the economic recovery,
cash assistance caseloads are projected to flatten or decline,
while caseloads for non-cash programs such as Medi-Cal are
projected to continue increasing.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department remains committed to measures that ensure
effective and professional service delivery and support
the County’s goals of Operational Effectiveness/Fiscal
Sustainability, Community Support and Responsiveness, and
Integrated Service Delivery.
DPSS’ Total Accountability Total Success (DPSSTATS)
performance review process continues to evaluate measures
that impact the Department’s work performance and
management accountability. The Department’s Strategic Plan
2014-2016, “Beyond the Leading Edge,” includes 41 Objectives,
clustered in five Goal areas: Customers, Operations/Processes,
Workforce Development, Technological Innovation, and
Facilities.
The Department has successfully expanded the Customer
Service Center (CSC) to all district offices, enhancing access and
improving the timeliness of case actions. The current service
population of the CSC reached over 2.2 million cases with a
monthly average of 638,000 calls, which are either resolved by
the automated Integrated Voice Response (IVR) system or
answered by an eligibility worker. The IVR provides
24/7 automated access for participants to their case
information. Additionally, with the Electronic Document
Management System (EDMS), full case imaging has enabled
staff to handle calls more efficiently and completely. The ability
to quickly access and evaluate cases from any DPSS
workstation has greatly enhanced customer service.
DPSS continues to utilize the Department’s first mobile health
and nutrition office, a 34-foot self-contained mobile unit
equipped with wireless technology, to fully support the use of
laptops and Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) equipment. The
unit functions as a one-stop CalFresh/Medi-Cal office to allow
walk-in applicants to conveniently apply for CalFresh and/or
Medi-Cal without having to go to district offices. The mobile
office will also serve as an emergency response unit during any
type of natural disaster.
From May 2013 to May 2014, the CalFresh-Only caseload saw
an 11.5 percent or 345,957 household increase, due in part to
the implementation of the CalFresh Awareness Month
Campaign. As of May 2014, the total number of households
receiving CalFresh benefits (households receiving cash
assistance with CalFresh and CalFresh-Only households) was
575,266, which represents 1,179,271 persons.
DPSS continues to assess current and future staffing needs
based on organizational goals and budget realities, and offer
opportunities to develop and enhance the skills of its
workforce. The Department’s succession plan is designed to
provide opportunities for training and guidance to create a
qualified pool of highly educated, well-trained, and
success-oriented successors. DPSS implemented a Career
Resource Coordinator (CRC) Program and Clerical Skill Building
Program to provide ongoing professional development and
test preparation resources to all employees.
The Department also provides educational advancement
opportunities for its employees. Since 2005, DPSS has
partnered with California State University, Northridge (CSUN),
offering a Master’s of Public Administration (MPA) Program. In
addition, it recently implemented a Bachelor’s of Science in
Public Sector Management degree through CSUN and an
Associate of Arts tansfer degree through Pierce College. DPSS
also continues to train executive staff through the executive
leadership program with the University of Southern California
(USC).
DPSS continues to maximize leading edge technology to
improve outcomes and program excellence, as outlined in the
Department’s Strategic Goal of Technological Innovation. DPSS
fully expanded EDMS to all district offices and five centralized
Electronic Scan Centers (ESC) throughout the County. To date,
EDMS offices have imaged 36.8 million documents. The
Department plans to utilize digital imaging in other programs
and areas to expand and streamline business processes.
Recently, DPSS piloted Point of Service Scanning (POSS),
allowing eligibility workers to scan participants’ original
documents at the point of interview, eliminating the need to
make copies.
DPSS also utilized iPads to pilot the mobile check-in and
self-service projects providing participants options to address
their business needs. Features include the ability to upload
documents, check EBT balance inquiries, review case
information, check-in, and apply for benefits online.
The Service Area Redistricting Application (SARA) provides an
automated solution to create and update district program
boundaries. The system uses Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) to visually manage boundaries, caseload impact, and
interactions with other boundaries.
The DPSS Risk Management Plan established 16 objectives, of
which 11 have been successfully completed. The primary goal
was to reduce the number of new workers’ compensation
claims during the fiscal year, and a 6.13 percent reduction in
the number of new claims filed was achieved.
DPSS programs provide a vast array of services to families,
children, single adults, and the elderly and are designed to
alleviate financial hardship and promote family health,
personal responsibility, and economic self-sufficiency. Over
3.2 million participants are served monthly. DPSS also serves as
the County’s Operational Area Coordinator for care and shelter,
and the Operational Area Liaison with the grocery industry and
nonprofit human services organizations. In this capacity, DPSS
is the lead in coordinating shelter support in the event of a
disaster or emergency. In addition, the Department continues
to provide services for homeless prevention, job training and
employment, and housing relocation.
DPSS continues to partner with other County departments to
improve service delivery and provide integrated services
through the implementation of the Coordinated Care Initiative
(CCI) and Cal MediConnect. Furthermore, to date, 65 percent of
the General Relief (GR) restructuring recommendations to
assist GR participants to transition from County assistance by
securing employment or State/federal disability benefits, have
been implemented. As part of the 2014 California Work
Opportunities and Responsibility to Kids (CalWORKs) Youth
Employment Program, DPSS and CSS placed more than
2,000 youth, ages 16-21, in subsidized employment with a
goal of 4,000 in the upcoming year. DPSS also continues its
partnership with DCFS to provide services for mutual families
and resources for other needy DCFS families and caretaker
relatives. As a result, 25,000 families have benefited from this
service coordination.
Funding for programs the Department administers depend largely on State and federal subvention. The 2015-16 Recommended
Budget assumes sufficient funding to support the current operational level. Due to the volatile nature of the State budget process,
the Recommended Budget does not factor in the Governor’s January budget proposal. The final State funding allocations will not
be known until after the State’s 2015-16 Budget is signed; therefore, DPSS will continue to provide leadership in advocacy efforts
focused on adequate funding levels to effectively administer its programs.
The Department’s unmet needs are primarily focused on additional staffing needed to meet increased demands. Over the past
several years, funding did not increase at the same rate as caseload and program demands. Currently, case workers for the
approved caseload in our core programs are staffed significantly below the full need level, though the level of understaffing varies
significantly by program. To fulfill the unmet needs for caseworkers, it would require a significant number of workers in all
programs.
The Public Social Services Assistance Budget funds mandated
and discretionary public assistance and social services
programs, financed with federal, State, and County funds.
These programs include: CalWORKs; GR; IHSS; Refugee
Resettlement Program/Refugee Cash Assistance (RRP/RCA);
Cash Assistance Program for Immigrants (CAPI); REP;
Community Services Block Grant (CSBG); General Relief
Anti-Homelessness (GRAH); and Work Incentive Nutritional
Supplement (WINS).
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in
appropriation of $31.6 million and a $9.2 million decrease in
revenue primarily due to a net decrease in CalWORKs funding
as a result of a projected decrease in caseload. There is also a
net decrease of $18.0 million in NCC primarily as a result of a
projected decrease in the GR caseload.
The majority of services provided through the
PublicWorks - General Fund are required by federal, State, and
local mandates and are funded by fees for services. Crossing
guard, landslide mitigation, graffiti abatement, pre-County
improvement district studies, property rehabilitation and
nuisance abatement, and unincorporated area services
programs continue to rely on funding from the County.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a $14.0 million net
NCC decrease primarily attributable to the elimination of
one-time funding for Unincorporated County Road and
Waterworks projects ($4.8 million); Unincorporated Area
Stormwater Urban Runoff Quality Program ($3.6 million);
Hauled Water Initial Study Plan ($1.2 million); I-5 Pico/Lyons
Landscaping ($1.0 million); Oxford Basin Vegetation Project
($1.0 million); High Desert Corridor ($0.8 million);
Carmenita Road Median Enhancement Project-Phase II
($0.4 million); Sidewalk/Road improvements in Chapman
Woods ($0.3 million); Crossing Guard services ($0.2 million);
Descanso Gardens Water Rights Study ($0.2 million);
Claremont Sewers ($0.2 million); Graffiti Abatement
($0.1 million); Monrovia/Duarte Monument Signs
($0.1 million); and other Board-funded programs/projects
($0.3 million). The decrease is partially offset by a $0.2 million
increase in negotiated COLA, fringe benefits, and retirement
costs.
¦ To maximize public safety, ongoing training is provided to the
employees to enhance employee and technical growth.
Specialized training is provided in mandated subjects such as
the California Building Code and provides for a higher
standard of compliance.
¦ The Public Works - General Fund budget relies on NCC to fund
various activities in the Department. Public Works projects the
available NCC from the previous year to determine the
funding level required for the activities in the coming year and
will adjust each activity accordingly so that NCC does not
exceed from the adjusted allowance approved by the Board.
¦ The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
programs and services. The four main components of the
Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process include program,
financial and staffing plans, and the budget request. Program
plans strategically establish management objectives for
outcomes/results, situation analyses, comprehensive needs
assessments, results-based work plans, and funding requests.
Financial plans project revenue sources and financing uses for
each operating fund and set preliminary budget allocations
for individual programs. Based on these funding allocations,
staffing plans are then developed as part of divisional
operational plans. The budget request is then prepared based
upon the program, financial, and staffing plans.
The Department’s unmet needs include an additional $12.9 million for the Unincorporated Area Stormwater Urban Runoff Quality
Program to address regulatory stormwater and urban runoff compliance requirements. Toward this need, the
2015-16 Recommended Budget sets aside $8.8 million in the Provisional Financing Uses and Capital Projects/Refurbishments
budget units for the Unincorported Area Stormwater Program.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a $14.2 million
increase primarily attributable to increases in the use of
obligated fund balance and property tax revenues; partially
offset by a decrease in fund balance. The primary sources of
revenue of the District are property taxes and benefit
assessments. The objectives of the District are outlined within
the Flood Control Act, which mandates the District to carry out
flood protection and water conservation programs. These
objectives include keeping the existing flood protection
system in a safe and effective condition to respond to
emergencies, perform maintenance and repair, and conserve
water.
The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
public works programs and services. The four main
components of the Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process
include program, financial, and staffing plans, and the budget
request. Program plans strategically establish management
objectives for outcomes/results, situation analyses,
comprehensive needs assessments, results-based work plans,
and funding requests. Financial plans project revenue sources
and financing requirements for each operating fund and set
preliminary budget allocations for individual programs. Based
on these funding allocations, staffing plans are then developed
as part of divisional operational plans. The budget request is
then prepared based upon the program, financial, and staffing
plans.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a $33.0 million
decrease primarily due to a reduction in fund balance
available; gas tax revenues; state revenues; and the deletion of
one-time funding for unincorporated area road projects and
road construction and maintenance activities, including the
construction of highways and bridges/tunnels; partially offset
by an increase in federal revenue for the Bridge Replacement
Program.
The FY 2015-16 budgeted revenues for the Highway User Tax
Account (gas tax) is approximately $163.0 million. It reflects a
$21.0 million (11 percent) decrease from the
FY 2014-15 estimate of $184.0 million, and a $46.0 million
(22 percent) decrease from the FY 2013-14 actual of
$209.0 million. This trend of lower gas tax revenues is expected
to continue due to the drop in gasoline prices and growing
prevalence of fuel-efficient, alternative fuel, and zero-emission
vehicles.
Although the precipitous drop in gas tax revenues in
FY 2015-16 will not result in any reductions in levels of service
for the road maintenance and operations programs, there will
be a reduction in the number of roadway pavement
rehabilitation and preservation construction projects. While
Public Works has budgeted conservatively, the continued drop
in gas tax revenues will necessitate the department to
implement further efficiencies and reductions to the
transportation improvement programs. Public Works will
continue to monitor gas tax revenues and budget accordingly
for future fiscal years.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ The Recommended Budget was assembled with an emphasis
on optimizing the use of new gas tax (formerly Proposition 42)
funds for maintenance and preservation of the existing
roadway system. This strategy meets the County Strategic
Plan goal of Operational Effectiveness by maximizing the use
of available limited revenues while providing residents in
unincorporated County areas with safe roads that provide the
necessary mobility options for work, education, and
recreation.
¦ The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
public works programs and services. The four main
components of the Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process
include program, financial, and staffing plans, and the budget
request. Program plans strategically establish management
objectives for outcomes/results, situation analyses,
comprehensive needs assessments, results-based work plans,
and funding requests. Financial plans project revenue sources
and financing requirements for each operating fund and set
preliminary budget allocations for individual programs. Based
on these funding allocations, staffing plans are then
developed as part of divisional operational plans. The budget
request is then prepared based upon the program, financial,
and staffing plans.
The Internal Service Fund is designed to simplify billings for
services provided between the multiple funds that finance
Public Works operations. This fund allows for salaries and
employee benefits, materials and supplies, and equipment
charges for Public Works to be paid through the fund and the
appropriate amounts recovered from each special fund.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a $2.2 million
increase primarily due to Board-approved increases in salaries
and health insurance subsidies; retiree health insurance
premiums; capital project management services for County
capital projects; administrative support services to align the
budget to anticipated costs; and various position changes to
meet the operational needs of the Department. These
increases are partially offset by decreases in County retirement,
workers’ compensation and unemployment insurance costs;
capital asset-equipment purchases; and contingencies.
¦ The Recommended Budget presents Public Works with a
challenge in projecting future budgetary requirements for
services that will be rendered to other Public Works funds, for
the construction management of capital projects, and for
services to other County departments. The Capital Building
Projects Program relies heavily on the Board’s approval of
funding for County capital projects. A work plan is prepared
for the coming budget year to detail the capital project work
that will be funded. Rates and fees are analyzed each year and
adjusted to ensure that the Internal Service Fund recovers all
costs for services performed.
¦ The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
public works programs and services. The four main
components of the Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process
include program, financial and staffing plans, and the budget
request. Program plans strategically establish management
objectives for outcomes/results, situation analyses,
comprehensive needs assessments, results-based work plans,
and funding requests. Financial plans project revenue sources
and financing requirements for each operating fund and set
preliminary budget allocations for individual programs. Based
on these funding allocations, staffing plans are then
developed as part of divisional operational plans. The budget
request is then prepared based upon the program, financial,
and staffing plans.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget provides for the
maintenance of core mission activities including public
counseling services at the downtown headquarters office and
eight field offices, case processing, community planning and
outreach, and zoning enforcement. Environmental impact
review and the activities of the Environmental Review Board
and the Significant Ecological Area Technical Advisory
Committee will continue as well as specifically funded
programs, including public hearings and workshops on the
Santa Monica Mountains Local Coastal Program (LCP), Airport
Land Use Compatibility Plan, Antelope Valley Area Plan, and
West Carson Transit Oriented District Specific Plan (TODSP).
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a $0.8 million NCC
decrease primarily attributable to the deletion of one-time
funding for consultant services for various planning initiatives
and a decrease in County retirement contributions, partially
offset by Board-approved increases in salaries and health
insurance subsidies and the addition of 2.0 positions to address
workload increases due to the adoption of the
Santa Monica Mountains LCP.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to implement its Strategic Plan
while supporting the County’s Strategic Plan including the
following initiatives:
¦ Providing responsive and proactive code enforcement of
discretionary permits, zoning and subdivision regulations in
unincorporated areas, and participating in the countywide
Nuisance Abatement Team (NAT);
¦ Enhancing public service through improved permitting
processes and databases, web-based case filing pilot projects,
new electronic transactions, Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) based land use and zoning information, and smart
phone enforcement operation;
¦ Enhancing communication with landowners, neighbors,
constituents, and other governmental agencies by carefully
allocating resources to incorporate local area network
enhancements and other web-based technologies;
¦ Building stronger and healthier communities through
development of land use, circulation, open space, noise, safety
and housing elements of the General Plan Update; and
¦ Securing Regional Planning Commission and Board approval
of community plans and zoning standards for unincorporated
areas.
The Department’s Unmet Needs include additional funding for a position to produce a wide variety of diverse professional quality
graphic materials and creative designs artwork for community events, public outreach campaigns and public hearings.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes resources
necessary to conduct the November 2015 Consolidated and
the June 2016 Presidential Primary elections as well as to
perform Recorder/County Clerk operations. The budget also
includes funding to move forward with new programs that
promote efficiency, while taking into consideration the
unstable fluctuations in the real estate market and continuing
high costs of conducting elections.
The Department continues to seek ways to reduce operating
costs through efficiency efforts and has carried forward
substantial curtailments incurred since FY 2008-09. While
recorder fee revenues were beginning to show improvement in
FY 2012-13, subsequent year trends show a substantial decline
attributable to a slow-down in refinancing and real estate
market activity in general. In addition, the Department
continues to absorb the high cost of unscheduled special
elections.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department’s Critical/Strategic Plan will continue to
implement automated and enhanced processes to improve
public service and employee workforce in the elections, voter
registration, Recorder, and County Clerk services. As such, the
Department will:
¦ Continue development of the multi-year Voting Systems
Assessment Project (VSAP) to modernize the County’s voting
system;
¦ Continue development and implementation of a Countywide
Archives and Records Management Program that will assess
and develop a process for indexing and maintaining County
records and items of historical value;
¦ Develop a revenue forecasting model to better understand
the economic predictors and volatile movement that affect
recording activities, hence departmental revenue;
¦ Implement voter registration and duplicate record
management tools to supplement current data cleansing
processes;
¦ Promote the multi-county eRecording system (SECURE) of
Business to Government and Government to Government
entities;
¦ Continue activities related to Recorder/County Clerk process
efficiencies, including implementation of an online ceremony
appointment system that will allow customers to schedule
appointments and pay online;
¦ Continue the multi-functional Mobile/Online Application
project to increase voter access to election information;
¦ Continue skill building workshops and certificate programs to
provide Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk (RR/CC) staff new
tools to increase efficiency and effectiveness; and
¦ Continue to expand efficiency initiatives and strategies to
further streamline processes, improve operations, reduce
costs, maximize efficiencies, enhance delivery of public
services, and expand green energy conservation programs.
The Department continues to defer much needed building maintenance projects that could compromise the integrity of our
facilities, critical election and recorder computer systems, and public records. The Department plans to seek an estimated
$1.6 million in deferred maintenance funding. Specific needs include a fire suppression system at the Norwalk
Headquarters ($1.2 million), a new roof for the Van Nuys District Office ($0.3 million), an air conditioning system at Norwalk
Headquarters ($90,000), and replacement of emergency exit sign lights ($40,000).
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an $11.7 million
decrease in NCC due primarily to increased billable use
allowance expenditures and a reduction in debt service for
centrally financed projects, partially offset by other debt
service increases and capital lease charges.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC decrease
of $20.5 million. This includes a $13.2 million decrease in debt
service; a $5.1 million decrease due to a lease cancellation
related to the Hall of Justice (HOJ) project; $20.4 million
decrease in retirement; and the deletion of $1.2 million to
upgrade the NEC Private Branch Exchange (PBX) telephone
system to VoIP due to completion of the project. The Budget
also reflects the deletion of $9.0 million in one-time funding
comprised of: $0.5 million in carryover funding for Operations
Safe Canyons/Santa Monica Mountains Enforcement Program,
Whittier Patrol Car project, and furniture for HOJ; $7.9 million
for costs associated with the move to HOJ, the Electronic
Criminal Document Archive and Digital Evidence Management
systems, start-up costs for crime analyst positions and the
Population Management Bureau Analysis team, and for
overtime costs to reduce the backlog of child abuse and adult
rape cases; $0.3 million for Operations Safe Canyons/Santa
Monica Mountains Enforcement, Malibu Summer Enforcement and Arson Watch/Red Flag and East Los Angeles Civic Center
patrol programs; and $0.3 million for start-up costs and
vehicles for unincorporated area patrol in the Fourth
Supervisorial District. Also reflected is a $33.4 million reduction
in NCC due to an anticipated increase in public safety sales tax
(Prop 172) receipts.
The above decreases are partially offset by the addition of
$22.2 million and 94.0 positions to implement phase II of the
Citizens’ Commission on Jail Violence (CCJV)
recommendations; $21.8 million for Board-approved increases
in salaries and employee benefits; and $17.8 million increase in
rent charges.
The Recommended Budget also includes a net increase of
25.0 positions due to the following ministerial changes:
10.0 positions for the newly created Transit Policing
Division (TPD) fully offset by revenue from MTA and Metrolink;
16.0 positions for contract law enforcement services as
requested by contract agencies and County departments;
1.0 position for crime lab services fully offset by revenue from
the City of Santa Monica; and the net deletion of 2.0 positions
inadvertently included in a prior budget phase.
The Budget also recommends that $103.9 million in funding be
set aside in the Provisional Financing Uses (PFU) budget unit to
address mental health issues, compliance with the Americans
with Disability Act, and allegations of excessive use of force in
the jails. Funding will remain in PFU pending completion of the
Chief Executive Office fiscal analysis and/or Board approval of
the settlement agreement.
The Department’s most critical needs, in addition to restoring any reductions in funding, are the following: 1) $3.5 million and
20.0 positions for the Population Management Bureau to streamline inmate classification, housing, and program needs, including
identifying alternative custody treatment beds; 2) $1.7 million and 35.0 positions for maintenance and security at the
HOJ; 3) $48.5 million for unavoidable cost increases in employee benefits ($41.5 million) and services and supplies ($7.0 million);
4) $12.0 million to backfill the loss of federal funding for the State Criminal Alien Assistance Program; 5) $86.1 million to address a
structural deficit related to Peace Officer Standards and Training bonuses ($44.2 million) and leaves of absences ($41.9 million); and
6) $150.7 million to fill 300.0 vacant Deputy and 1,000.0 civilian positions that are currently being used to address salary savings.
In addition, the Department is requesting: 1) $3.6 million and 13.0 positions to expand the Child Abuse/Adult Rape unit to better
meet and serve the needs of victims; 2) $0.9 million for the Summer Violent Crime Enforcement Program to address
Board-approved increases in salaries and expand the program for three additional weeks; 3) $1.9 million and 18.0 Custody Assistant
positions to allow sworn personnel to remain in direct law enforcement assignments; 4) $1.0 million and 8.0 positions for the
Fingerprint Program to enable South Patrol Division to process crime scenes and perform fingerprint analysis in a timely and
efficient manner; 5) $1.5 million and 9.0 positions for the Information Technology Project Management Office to provide oversight,
assistance, and technical expertise; 6) $1.6 million and 8.0 positions for the Risk Impact unit to examine the statistical results of
various risk issues facing the Department and conduct a review of management efforts; 7) $2.0 million and 10.0 positions for the
Medical Command Center to improve operations and streamline processes; 8) $3.0 million and 11.0 positions to handle risk
management issues at the South Los Angeles Station; 9) $0.6 million and 3.0 positions for additional personnel and a patrol car for
mountain areas; 10) $1.1 million and 6.0 positions for the Vital Intervention and Directional Alternatives Program, an intervention
program for at-risk youths; 11) $4.8 million and 28.0 positions for the Operation Center to make it a fully functional and operational
facility; 12) $0.3 million and 1.0 position for the Sheriff’s Information Bureau to ensure shift coverage; 13) $115.3 million for
additional information technology needs; and 14) $16.5 million to address deferred maintenance at various facilities.
The Department is also requesting one-time funding for the following: 1) $3.7 million for roof replacement and repairs at various
custody facilities; 2) $2.0 million to replace the older portable radios to meet P25 compatibility requirements; 3) $0.5 million to
replace the antiquated Mountain Top Radio Base Station; 4) $0.8 million for Mobil Digital Computer hardware maintenance; and
5) $0.6 million to replace outdated food preparation and machinery equipment.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects: 1) $0.5 million net
increase for telephone utilities; 2) $2.6 million net decrease for
ENIA; and 3) $3.7 million net increase for VoIP equipment lease
costs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ ISD will continue to enhance the performance of the County’s
telecommunications systems and minimize costs.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease in
NCC of $0.8 million primarily due to the deletion of one-time
funding for the Property Tax Telephone System Replacement
project. The Recommended Budget also includes
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits
and a net increase of 2.0 positions for the public administrator
and information technology functions.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The following are examples of the Department’s continuing
efforts to create efficiencies, work collaboratively with other
departments, and maximize revenue:
¦ Continue the refunding project, with the support of the CEO,
for bonds issued by the former redevelopment agencies. In
November 2014, The Bond Buyer newspaper announced that
this program received the 2014 Deal of the Year Award for the
Far West region of the United States. The Bond Buyer
recognized the program as a groundbreaking program that
was the first to “pool” individual redevelopment agency
credits into larger bond issuances. Since the first bond sale in
December 2013, the program has issued in excess of
$350.0million of refunding bonds on behalf of eight former
redevelopment agencies. The total debt savings are in excess
of $101.0 million and will benefit the County, the State, and
each city that participated in the program.
¦ Conduct online tax-defaulted property “B” auctions. As well as
conducting online Public Administrator auctions for specialty
and/or collectable items to maximize the proceeds to be
distributed to the heirs.
¦ Streamline the annual property tax mailing process.
¦ Sustain the Customer Service Ambassadors’ Program during
peak annual property tax seasons. Ambassadors wear bright
blue vests for easy identification, carry sample bills and helpful
information, answer questions, and direct taxpayers to the
appropriate lines for enhanced customer service and
decreased wait times.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects funding for the
County’s $290.6 million MOE payment to the State, which is
comprised of $245.9 million base MOE, $37.6 million CFP, and
$7.1 million representing 50 percent of any excess above the
AB 233 fines and forfeitures MOE. In addition, the budget
includes $106.8 million for court-related expenditures that are
the County’s responsibility. The Recommended Budget also
reflects Board-approved increases in employee benefits, and
costs related to the Post-Conviction Assistance Center contract,
partially offset by a decrease in retirement costs.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $11,000 primarily attributable to increases in utility costs for
NCC-funded facilities. The Recommended Budget also reflects
an increase in funding for electricity, water, other utilities,
power plant operations, California Public Utility Commission
(CPUC) programs, and energy management programs, partially
offset by decreases in funding for natural gas, Enterprise
Energy Management Information System (EEMIS) program,
and Energy Efficiency and Conversation Block Grants (EECBG).
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Continues to complete energy retrofit projects, increase water
conservation efforts, and centrally administer utilities costs
throughout the County.
On November 4, 2008, unincorporated County voters approved the passage of the Utility User Tax - Measure U. The revenues are
generated from user taxes on gas, electricity, and communication. These revenues are fully offset with appropriations in various
budget units including the Departments of Board of Supervisors, District Attorney, Parks and Recreation, Public Library, Public
Works, and Sheriff for various programs within the unincorporated areas.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects no change from the 2014-15 Final Adopted Budget based on current revenue trends.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget reflects an increase of
$73.9 million, which is primarily attributable to a lesser amount
redirected to the State as required under AB 85 (Redirection of
1991 State Health Realignment).
