The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an overall net
County cost (NCC) increase of $41,000 primarily due to
Board-approved increases in employee benefits, partially offset
by the deletion of one-time funding and revenue increases in
High Risk Pest Exclusion. The Recommended Budget also
includes 1.0 Safety Officer I position to oversee the
Department’s risk management function and 1.0 support
position in the Weights and Measures program, fully offset by
State revenue.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to:
¦ Pursue additional revenue source opportunities, through
proactive involvement in legislation development,
coordination with upper management of the California
Department of Food and Agriculture and Division of
Measurement Standards, and establishment of partnerships
with other agencies, to more effectively perform its mission.
¦ Implement the Department’s long-term strategies to continue
to improve Service Excellence and Workforce Excellence
through ongoing employee development and development
of the Agricultural Commissioner/Weights and Measures
(ACWM) Internet website and other outreach efforts to
enhance public awareness of the Department and its services.
¦ Maintain focus of recruitment efforts to attract qualified and
skilled applicants to fill inspector positions to ensure
environmental and public safety, provide mandated and
increased protections to consumers and businesses, and
provide protection to the environment, native plant life and
the agricultural industry.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $0.9 primarily due to Board-approved increases in employee
benefits; the addition of 2.0 Investigator II positions; and
funding to address the department’s services and supplies
structural deficit, partially offset by the deletion of one-time
carryover funding.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to:
¦ Work with justice partners to implement the Public Safety
State Realignment Program;
¦ Implement and refine its programs and initiatives to
correspond with the County’s Strategic Plan Goals,
emphasizing operational effectiveness and public safety;
¦ Collaborate with the Internal Services Department and the
Chief Information Office to migrate the Department’s Active
Directory structure to the County’s;
¦ Migrate the Department’s Case Management System to a
browser based technology and assist the Public Defender in
implementing this system for their office; and
¦ Collaborate with the Internal Services Department to migrate
the Department’s application and data servers to the County’s
Virtual Server Cloud.
The Department requires funding for 3.0 Investigator positions.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an overall increase
in NCC of $32,000 primarily due to increases in employee
benefits, funding for 1.0 position to enhance the Department’s
Information Technology (IT) Division, and one-time funding for
a private kennel lease in the Antelope Valley. These increases
are partially offset by the deletion of one-time funding for the
Animal Care Replacement System, website project, video
surveillance cameras, and the costs associated with the Athens
stable project.
The Department is proceeding with plans to replace its existing
animal management application. The project involves the
documentation of current and ideal business processes, design
and testing of the new application, and an implementation
strategy that includes the acquisition and deployment of new
mobile accessibility hardware. The planned software and
hardware components will provide staff with mobile access to
the new application both in the field and within the housing
facilities of each animal care center. The implementation of
these strategies will afford the Department opportunities to
enhance the level of care provided to animals housed at the
care center, improve operational efficiencies in handling calls
for service, and ensure accuracy and accountability.
The Department continues to strategize and redesign
operational practice to ensure effective and professional
services. The Department is in the process of restructuring the
Major Case Unit with a Central Case Processing Unit to optimize
staff resource and improve performance.
The refurbishment of aged kennel buildings and other animal
housing facilities continues to be a primary focus of the
Department’s facility management strategy. Work is also
commencing on a long-term facility plan to address the need
to site and develop fully enclosed community animal care
centers in strategic locations within the Department’s service
areas.
The Department’s unmet needs request includes restoration of programmatic staffing curtailed to address the County’s projected
structural deficit, replacement of aged vehicles, and various critical IT projects.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
$699,000 primarily due to funding for the Arts Internship
program, Ford Theatre, Organizational Grant program, and
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits,
partially offset by the deletion of one-time funding for Civic Art
and Free Concerts.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Continue a multi-year initiative to implement the
Board-adopted Arts for All, a comprehensive strategic plan for
systemic, sequential K-12 arts education in all 81 school
districts in the County encompassing 1.7 million students.
¦ Institute a number of new systems to improve grants and
professional development programs, including continued
implementation of an online grant application system to
streamline the application process for constituents and
administration.
¦ Begin implementation of the Master Plan for the current and
future facilities of the John Anson Ford Theatres focusing on
upgrades to the theatre itself while preserving the historic
elements of the theatre and the completion of an
environmental impact report.
¦ Continue the integration of civic art into more than
40 ongoing capital projects, with a continuing emphasis on
the development of County-based artists, community
engagement, and creative placemaking.
The Arts Commission’s critical unmet needs include funding for positions related to the John Anson Ford Theatres and full
restoration of the Free Concerts program. In addition, funding is requested to fully restore and expand the Organizational Grant
program to include non-arts organizations such as social services and higher education and address various outdated information
technology infrastructure at the Arts Commission.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $20.7 million primarily due to the backfilling of property tax
administrative fees (PTAF) lost due to the California Supreme
Court ruling on the Alhambra lawsuit, funding to continue the
Department’s systems automation efforts, and
Board-approved increases in employee benefits and the
absorption of these costs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Assessor’s Office will continue to:
¦ Introduce operational efficiencies to improve work activities
and public services;
¦ Pursue enhancements to appraisal tools to assist in
determining market values of properties affected by the
declining housing market and to address the additional
demands resulting from an increased volume in assessment
appeals cases;
¦ Develop the ability to store critical assessment documents and
forms electronically, and create various electronic workflows
to increase productivity by allowing staff to better manage
process, store and retrieve these documents; and
¦ Pursue shorter duration, multi-year re-engineering projects
that automate and improve the assessment process.
The Assessor’s critical needs include $2.5 million for the replacement of outdated and troublesome telephone systems;
$435,000 for various software needs including the expansion of the document imaging project; $599,000 to replace old computers
and printers; $323,000 for other computer hardware; $357,000 for business intelligence software; and $164,000 for various training
needs.
The Department also has a critical need to improve the County’s Property Tax System by expanding the electronic content
management system in order to keep pace with the increasing workload and to reduce paper and storage costs. In addition, the
acquisition of integration software (Service-Oriented Architecture) is necessary to combine the Department’s primary disparate
work processes into one integrated system, as well as replace its Unsecured Property Database. In all, these projects remain to be
critical and expensive items facing the Department and are in line with the County’s Strategic Plan for operational effectiveness.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $781,000 primarily to backfill the property tax
administrative fee (PTAF) loss due to the California Supreme
Court ruling on the Alhambra lawsuit, as well as Assembly Bill
(AB)x1 26 Redevelopment Agency Dissolution, funding for a
position transferred from the Probation Department
(Probation), and Board-approved increases in employee
benefits, partially offset by the elimination of one-time
carryovers.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Auditor-Controller advocates for fiscal responsibility and
service excellence through various initiatives, including:
¦ Ensuring public trust in County government by implementing
the Board-approved annual audit plan and conducting
investigations of fraud and malfeasance; ¦ Working with the Chief Executive Office (CEO) to fully fund
compliance audits and enhancing service delivery by ensuring
that such services can be provided in a manner consistent
with government and accounting industry standards and best
practices for audit independence;
¦ Working with the CEO to resolve the structural deficit for
Shared Services in order to properly fund the program that
supports 18 client departments’ needs for fiscal and payroll
services;
¦ Implementing and maintaining eCAPS (vendor self-service,
content management) and the Advantage eHR suite of
applications to centralize and consolidate the County’s
financial management, reporting, human resources, and
talent management functions;
¦ Improving the fiscal accountability of social services
contractors by resolving issues related to federal recovery of
questioned costs, ensuring auditor access to contractor
records and continuing to enhance the Contractor’s Manual to
ensure compliance with contract terms and conditions;
¦ Promoting use of direct deposit to pay vendors, thereby
reducing the County’s reliance on check disbursements;
¦ Advocating for development of an integrated, enterprise
Property Tax System to replace aging, obsolete, and inefficient
legacy applications that require high levels of staff and
technical support; and
¦ Promoting County efficiency initiatives such as the Mileage
Authorization Reimbursement System and the County Travel
Program. The Auditor-Controller’s unmet needs include staff to provide systems support to the Department; funding for critical audit
services that preserves the independence of those functions and ensures the necessary resources to respond to Board directives;
and central funding for an integrated, enterprise Property Tax System (estimated cost is $70.0 million over several years).
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease of
$2.5 million primarily due to the elimination of one-time
funding for contract and development, offset by the increase in
one-time funding to meet an accelerated eCAPS Project
deliverables schedule.
The Transportation Clearing Account is a central receiving point for transportation costs charges incurred by departments. All
charges are then distributed to the appropriate departments leaving this budget unit with no net appropriation. The 2013-14
Recommended Budget reflects an increase in appropriation due to potential transit vendor fare increase, the continuing
conversion to the Transit Access Pass (TAP) program from the traditional paper bus passes, and escalating fuel and transportation
costs.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a $0.8 million net
decrease in NCC attributable to the deletion of one-time
funding, partially offset with increases in employee benefits
and the countywide cost allocation adjustment. The
Recommended Budget includes the addition of 20.0 Grounds
Maintenance Worker I (GMW I) temporary positions to clean
beach restrooms, 2.0 positions for human resources, and
1.0 Electrician position, offset with projected increases in
Marina revenue. The Department has restored funding for the
popular Day in the Marina Program and the annual Discover
Marina del Rey Day, offset with savings in the Facilities and
Property Maintenance budget. The Recommended Budget
also reflects a budget realignment based on historical
experience and anticipated requirements.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Implementation of the County’s and Department’s Strategic
Plans will accomplish the following outcomes: 1) visitors to our
beaches and Marina del Rey will experience world renowned
recreational opportunities and quality customer service
through accessible, clean, attractive and safe facilities; and
2) Marina boaters, visitors and residents will enjoy
experiencing the County’s “crown jewel” through redeveloped
leasehold properties and beautiful and well maintained public
amenities.
The Department’s Official Budget Request reflects an increase of $1.6 million in appropriation from the 2012-13 Recommended
Budget. Included is 1.0 Staff Assistant I position for the Parking Unit; a $0.5 million decrease in the Department’s salary savings in
order to fill additional vacancies; funding for leased vehicles and equipment; ten portable radios for the Parking Unit; an electronic
car counting system that displays the number of available spaces in parking lots and parking lot signage; and 120 short-term
parking meter/credit card upgrades.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an overall increase
in NCC of $939,000, primarily due to additional funding to
support the departmental administration, funding to replace
the loss of revenues related to the property tax administration
fees (PTAF), and increases in employee benefits, partially offset
by funding for community programs, deletion of one-time
funding, and carryovers for various programs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Executive Office is in the process of implementing its
strategic plan, in alignment with the County’s Strategic Plan,
with multiple goals for FY 2013-14. Resources are needed to
achieve those goals which continue to focus on the use of
technology-driven services.
The Department’s unmet needs include restoration of various programmatic funding curtailed to address the County’s structural
deficit as well as additional funding to address increased costs from other County departments for services received.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects the Board’s
continuing commitment to allocate a significant amount of
available one-time funding to expand, replace, or refurbish the
County’s capital assets and infrastructure. The Recommended
Budget appropriates $976.9 million for 311 active projects that
address high priority health, public safety, recreation, and
infrastructure needs.
Of the total recommended 2013-14 appropriation,
$791.1 million is allocated to General Fund projects that
encompass a broad range of recreational, cultural, law
enforcement, health, and general government functions
funded by $270.1 million in one-time revenue from grants and
other sources, and $521.0 million in local discretionary monies.
The General Fund appropriation represents the
2013-14 budgetary requirements of 188 projects that are
currently under development, design, or construction.
The total appropriation for the 2013-14 Recommended Budget
represents a decrease of $134.3 million from the 2012-13 Final
Adopted Budget. The net decrease reflects the completion of
19 projects in 2012-13 and continuing progress on 188 other
projects that are currently under development, design, or
construction.
In addition to those projects appropriated in the General Fund,
the capital program includes certain critical projects which are
financed with special district revenue, commercial paper
proceeds, and are appropriated in certain special funds,
summarized in Volume Two. These projects address capital
needs in the areas of infrastructure repair and development,
health services, public safety, and general government, and
include, but are not limited to, the Martin Luther King Jr.
Inpatient Tower Project, Countywide Data Center Project,
Rancho Los Amigos Seismic Retrofit and Inpatient
Consolidation Project, Manhattan Beach Library Project, and
various Fire District projects. There are 66 projects in
development, design, or construction with a total construction
value of $1.73 billion.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget does not reflect projects
that have been financed through the issuance of long-term
bonds. Such projects include the Hall of Justice Rehabilitation
Project, the Harbor-UCLA Surgery and Emergency Room
Replacement Project, the Patriotic Hall Refurbishment Project,
the Coroner Annex Building Project, Martin Luther King Jr.
Multi-Service Ambulatory Care Center Project, and the
Harbor-UCLA SB 1953 Seismic Retrofit Project. In the
aggregate, these projects are valued at $996.8 million. Bond
financed funds are held and administered by independent
bond trustees.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects the deletion of
$7.7 million in carryover funds and $1.1 million of grant
funding from the Department of Justice and Los Angeles
Network Enhanced Services Health Data Project; the addition
of $0.9 million due to increases in employee benefits and rent
allocation adjustments; $0.2 million to support Valinda
community enhancement team efforts; the addition of
1.0 senior manager level position to focus on integrating and
coordinating Children and Family Services within social
services, health and mental health, and public safety
departments; the restoration of training funds eliminated
during budget curtailments; and at no additional NCC,
implement the Race to the Top-Early Learning Challenge Grant,
1.0 position to provide additional support to the County’s
Employee Commute Reduction Program, and the realignment
of operating requirements to meet projected operating
expenditures.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The latest County Strategic Plan update was approved by the
Board in March 2013, which included updated strategic
initiatives under Goal 1 (Operational Effectiveness), Goal
2 (Fiscal Responsibility), and Goal 3 (Integrated Service
Delivery). Each Goal continues to include a number of key, high
impact strategic initiatives that reflect some of the County’s
most pressing challenges. These strategic initiatives may be
multi-year efforts, but include three to five action items to be
completed during the calendar year. The structure of the
Strategic Plan is designed to:
¦ Be more responsive to the dynamic environment in which the
County operates;
¦ Clearly identify and focus on the highest-impact strategic
priorities, reflecting a limited set of priority issues and
opportunities; and
¦ Recognize the uniqueness of individual department goals and
ensure that these equally important priorities are addressed
effectively and timely through department strategic planning
and operations.
The Department continues to promote collaboration between
operating units and identification and implementation of
efficiency measures and initiatives throughout the County.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC
of $34,000 primarily due to the elimination of one-time
carryover funding for the Countywide Managed Print Services
project, partially offset by increases in employee benefits.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to:
¦ Support the County’s Strategic Plan by participating actively
as both owner and supporter of many County strategies and
objectives;
¦ Maintain a countywide strategic IT planning program
including an IT governance structure, which ensures
alignment of IT initiatives with County strategic goals and
objectives;
¦ Review Board-approved IT contracts and department business
automation plans to ensure alignment with departmental and
countywide goals; and
¦ Foster better management of County IT resources to improve
service delivery and increase organizational effectiveness.
The Department’s unmet needs include additional funding for 1.0 Senior Information Technology Consultant, CIO position to
support the County’s Information Security Program and address increasing responsibilities attributable to State and federal
security and privacy regulatory compliance.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects $166.9 million in
gross appropriation and $0.1 million in NCC. The budget
continues to reflect a flat baseline administrative cost
allocation from the California Department of Child Support
Services (DCSS) that has not increased in 11 consecutive years.
The State allocation for the Electronic Data Processing
Maintenance and Operation (EDPMO) budget also assumes the
same base funding level as FY 2012-13. The budget reflects the
elimination of one-time funding for the integration project at
8300 Vermont and Magnolia Place County buildings; a
reduction in intrafund transfer from the Department of
Children and Family Services (DCFS) associated with decreased
utilization of the Electronic Data Service Document Processing
(EDP) contract; and, the elimination of one-time carryover
funding. The budget also includes the deletion of 12.0 vacant
budgeted positions, and the addition of 10.0 new positions to
address critical needs of the Department.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to engage senior, mid-level and line
staff in its Child Support Statistical process to strategize and
redesign business practices using current and real time
statistical data to align resources and improve performance.
The Department remains committed to measures that ensure
effective and professional service delivery and support the
County’s Strategic Plan goals. In addition, the Department also
has begun a “Child Support 2017” initiative in which we are
seeking opportunities to leverage resources and build an
organization that is structurally sound, efficient, financially
healthy, and focused on its goals and mission. Furthermore, the
Department continues to align its performance measures with
the County’s Strategic Plan and the federal and State
performance measures for local child support agencies.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget for Administration reflects
a $35.8 million net increase in gross appropriation, funded with
a $27.9 million increase in revenue and a $7.9 million increase
in NCC. This increase is due primarily to: 1) $1.3 million in Title
IV-E Waiver Savings from the Provisional Financing Uses (PFU)
budget to fund Board-approved Waiver strategies to improve
critical performance outcomes; 2) $0.4 million in Katie A. funds
to continue funding for the Board-approved Katie A.
Settlement Agreement Strategic Plan (Katie A. Strategic Plan);
3) $1.0 million to partially fund the operational costs for the
Children Welcome Center (CWC); and 4) $11.1 million to
partially fund increases in employee benefits subsidies. These
are partially offset by decreases of: 1) $3.0 million due to
increased Realignment Sales Tax revenue; 2) $2.6 million in the
elimination of one-time funding associated with the transfer of
the Department’s Information Technology (IT) function to the
Internal Services Department (ISD); and 3) $0.3 million in the
elimination of one-time funding for the Vermont/Magnolia
Integration Project.
The Recommended Budget also reflects 103.0 additional
positions consisting of: 1) 27.0 Public Health Nurse positions
for the Expanded Medical Hubs, fully offset by Title XIX federal
revenue and 2011 State Realignment; 2) 58.0 line-operational
positions for the Extended Foster Care (EFC) program, fully
offset by the federal and State Realignment revenue;
3) 17.0 positions for the CWC; and 4) 1.0 Performance
Management position to implement the Education-Based
Discipline Program to enhance workforce accountability.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
DCFS continues its collaborative initiatives with the
Chief Executive Office (CEO), other County departments and
community partners to support and strengthen the ability of
families and communities to help children thrive and to
maintain child and youth safety. This challenging and
demanding undertaking involves responding to more than
170,000 reports of child abuse each year and caring for more
than 35,000 children who are entrusted to DCFS’ charge on any
given day. Since January 2010, more than 9,000 families have
been reunified. In addition, the lives of eight tiny newborns
were spared through the utilization of the safe surrender
process.
In September 2012, the Department completed the
development, the first in over a decade, of a comprehensive
Strategic Plan (Strategic Plan 2012-16) that guides operations
over the next three to five years. The development of the plan
included extensive input from staff throughout the
Department, community partners, and other key stakeholders.
The Plan entails DCFS’ Vision, Mission and Values and three
overarching Goals (Emphasizing Child Centered Practices,
Pursuing Workforce Excellence, and Strengthening
Organizational Operation and Systems).
DCFS’ Strategic Plan, overarching Goals, and initiatives are in
alignment with the County’s 2012 Updated Strategic Plan.
Despite the fiscal constraints placed on public services due to
the economic downturn, DCFS continues to demonstrate
significant improvements in the quality of service delivery and
strengthening of its organizational structures. DCFS developed
and implemented strategies and initiatives designed to
maximize operational effectiveness, utilize creative and
innovative practices, and facilitate the timely application of
client-centered supportive services as follows:
¦ Shared Core Practice Model (CPM): As part of enhanced
collaborative efforts to improve the quality of child welfare
and mental health services, DCFS and the Department of
Mental Health (DMH) developed and implemented a shared,
consistent approach to working with families and children.
The two departments are committed to a shared CPM, which
requires substantive systemic and practice changes to
integrate services and support.
¦ Katie A. State Settlement: As part of the settlement, DCFS
collaborated with DMH to develop a plan to implement
Intensive Home Based Services (IHBS), Intensive Care
Coordination (ICC) and Therapeutic Foster Care (TFC). This
plan identifies intensive needs for children and youth who are
full-scope Medi-Cal eligible, meeting medical necessity, and
having an open child welfare services case. In addition, the
Department made significant strides in Katie A. outcome
improvements, such as reducing the number of kids under
12 years old placed in group homes from 179 to 104. This
accomplishment was made possible by enhancement of the
pre-placement screening process and increasing the
percentage of children receiving mental health screening to
the 98 percent level.
¦ CWC: On May 22, 2012, the Board directed DCFS to collaborate
with other departments to develop and implement plans to
overhaul Emergency Response Command Post (ERCP)
operations and ensure the safety of children, particularly
those under the age of ten, awaiting placement. The CWC,
located adjacent to the Los Angeles County-University of
Southern California Medical Hub, opened on July 16, 2012
provides comfortable, short-term care and supervision for
children up to age ten awaiting placement after-hours,
weekends or holidays. A limited number of children over age ten are also accommodated as they await placement with
their younger family members and teenage mothers and their
infant children also accommodated at this site. More recently,
DCFS and the Department of Health Services (DHS)
recognized the need to gradually expand the CWC’s age
eligibility to children ages 10, 11 and 12. Since its opening
through the end of December 2012, 1,144 children have
awaited placement at CWC.
¦ Web-based Drug Testing System: DCFS provided access to the
drug and alcohol test results through the use of the Pacific
Toxicology’s web-based system. With the implementation of
this system, the manual faxing of test results in over
20,000 transactions has been eliminated.
¦ Delinquency Prevention Project: This project utilizes existing
Child Welfare Services/Case Management System (CWS/CMS)
and Structured Decision Making (SDM) technology to project
youth who are at potential risk of future delinquent behavior.
The employment of this tool as soon as a child welfare case is
opened enables both in depth case planning and immediate
intervention. The project is especially important in that
one-fourth of the Dependency Court youth becomes formal
wards of Delinquency Court. The Department’s objective is to
align practice model and resources in a manner that provides
for those children with the greatest needs.
These endeavors have been made possible by the use of
flexible funds under the Title IV-E Child Welfare Waiver Capped
Allocation Demonstration Project (CADP), which allowed DCFS
to implement critical system changes in the way child welfare
services are provided to children and families in the County. As
evidenced in the IV-E Waiver indicators below, DCFS continues
to make meaningful improvements in the following key
performance indicators (from July 1, 2010 to June 30, 2012):
¦ Timely Response to ER Referrals (Immediate Response)
increased from 97.2 percent to 99.0 percent;
¦ Timely Response to ER Referrals (5-day) increased from
94.2 percent to 97.3 percent;
¦ Re-entry following reunification decreased from 12.4 percent
to 11.5 percent; and
¦ Placement Stability (children in out-of-home care from 8 days
to 12 months) increased from 85.6 percent to 87.5 percent.
The National Standard is 86.0 percent.
In addition, the following strategies and initiatives
implemented in FY 2012-13 continue to support and generate
the desired outcomes:
¦ Data-Driven Decision Making Practice: DCFS continues to
refine and enhance the capability and functionality of the
Data-Driven Decision Making Practice and monthly stats
meetings. Through the implementation of these processes,
participants use data and the stories behind to provide a
format for discussion regarding strengths, challenges,
strategies and best practices. The process includes reviewing
data, engaging staff in conversations about the key
performance indicators and focusing collective attention
critical elements of our work. In addition, a newly installed
data dashboard on the DCFS internal website allows all staff
and managers to monitor current data regarding key
performance indicators and statistics related to child safety
and well-being.
¦ California Fostering Connections to Success Act (formerly
known as AB12): Effective January 1, 2012, the Department
has successfully implemented a new EFC law which extends
foster care benefits to foster youth from age 18 to 21. The
objective of this law is for foster youth and the adults in their
lives to work in new ways to help youth achieve goals such as
education, work, and health in order to successfully transition
to adulthood. Since the inception of EFC, the Department has
served close to 1,300 EFC population including
705 (86 percent) of the 809 foster youth turning 18 through
December 30, 2012; and 556 (69 percent) of the 812 “bubble
youth” who were 18 years of age as of December 30, 2011, still
under jurisdiction, and opted to stay pursuant to the Trailer
Legislation that allowed youth who turned 19 in 2012 to
participate in EFC as Non-Minor Dependents (NMDs) and draw
down EFC funding. In addition, the “cost neutrality” cap, which
is a provision to ensure counties are not disadvantaged
financially for the implementation of EFC, was slated for
removal when AB12 funding was incorporated into the
2011 State Realignment. This could have potentially shifted
the additional financial burden to the county when
insufficient funds are allocated by the State. Due to the
successful advocacy effort by DCFS and CEO, State agreed to
retain the “cost neutrality” cap on the county costs for EFC.  The Department’s critical unmet needs include additional funding to: 1) reduce social worker caseloads to 15 for generic workers
and 12 for emergency response workers in accordance with the SB 2030 Workload Study in order to ensure maximum services to
children and families; 2) increase administrative and support to enhanced operational efficiency and workforce accountability; and
3) accommodate the Department’s space needs.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget for Assistance Payments
reflects an overall $3.4 million decrease in net County cost
(NCC) primarily due to: 1) a decrease of $3.2 million in the
Foster Care Waiver programs due to an increase in revenues;
2) a net decrease of $3.4 million in the General Relief Ineligible
(GRI); 3) a net decrease of $2.5 million in Promoting Safe and
Stable Families (PSSF) Program; and 4) a $13.0 million decrease
as a result of increased Sales Tax Revenue. The NCC decreases
are partially offset by: 1) a projected caseload increase of
$11.7 million due to the implementation of the third-year of
Extended Foster Care (AB12); 2) a projected caseload and
placement cost increase of $1.4 million in the Emergency
Assistance (EA) program; 3) a projected placement cost
increase of $4.9 million in the Adoption Assistance program;
and 4) a projected placement cost increase of $0.7 million in
the Kin-GAP Program.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department is currently implementing a number of
strategies to ensure safety, stability and permanency for
children under its care. The efficiencies as a result of the
strategic changes are projected to reduce Foster Care costs. The
three key areas that are projected to affect the assistance costs
include: 1) ensuring that only those children and families who
would be appropriately served by the child welfare system
enter the system; 2) reducing the time children spend in
out-of-home care; and 3) providing services to children and
families to enable the children to remain safely in their home or
achieve timely permanency.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease of
$2.8 million in gross appropriation and a $1.1 million net
decrease in NCC due primarily to the reduction of one-time
funding for the Prevention and Early Intervention (PEI)
Programs; the Summer Youth Employment Program (SYEP);
security guard services at community and senior centers; and
Utility User Tax (UUT) Cy Pres funding for the Community
Development Commission’s (CDC) Whittier Resource Center.
These decreases are partially offset by additional funding from
the Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority
(LAMTA) for an Area Agency on Aging (AAA) and Adult
Protective Services (APS) Door Assistance Transportation
Program; additional NCC to fund security guards at community
and senior centers; and increases in various employee benefits
and health insurance subsidies. The budget also includes
funding for services at community and senior centers.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Promote sound, prudent, and transparent fiscal policies and
processes that help ensure maintenance of critical programs
and services.
¦ Enhance economic and social outcomes through integrated
services and best practices.
¦ Implement human capital best practices to enhance the
recruitment, development, retention, and well-being of
qualified county employees.
¦ Develop and implement client-centered approaches through
integrated services and best practices.
¦ Maximize the effectiveness of processes, structures, and
operations to support timely delivery of customer-oriented
and efficient public services.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a net
appropriation increase of $1.6 million primarily due to
additional funding for the Summer Youth Employment
Program (SYEP), Senior Nutrition Program, and Area Agency on
Aging (AAA) and Adult Protective Services (APS) Door
Assistance Transportation Program. These increases are
partially offset by the reduction of one-time funding for the
Prevention and Early Intervention (PEI) Programs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Continue to collaborate with County departments and our
network of non-profit and community agencies in providing
quality services.
¦ Leverage and maximize funding to quality services to create
subsidized employment opportunities for County residents
and businesses.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a NCC increase of
$844,000 primarily for consumer education and public
outreach, core consumer protection services, and
Board-approved increases in employee benefits. The
Recommended Budget also reflects the discontinuance of the
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funding for
fraud prevention for seniors and families, reduced funding
from CDBG for the Homeowners Fraud Prevention Project and
the reduction of various program services provided to the
Community Development Commission. Also includes new
funding from the Departments of Children and Family Services
and Probation for foster youth identity theft protection
services.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Implement Senate Bill 62 to reduce the number of homes lost
to foreclosure, loan modification scams, and real estate fraud;
¦ Expand existing contracts and seek new contracts and grants
to help more consumers;
¦ Research and identify new revenue sources to fund ongoing
consumer services programs;
¦ Upgrade existing phone system that serves more than
300,000 annually to provide better customer service with a
friendly interface, updated messages, and quicker routing to
counselors;
¦ Develop and launch a new department website to better
serve the needs of the more than 700,000 consumers who use
it annually;
¦ Complete the implementation of the e-complaints system for
paperless filing and tracking of consumer complaints with
online filing and digital communication;
¦ Develop a financial literacy program to help consumers make
better economic decisions and avoid common credit pitfalls;
¦ Use social media to connect with the public on important
consumer news and issues; and
¦ Expand our language capabilities to communicate with
diverse communities in multiple languages.
The Department of Consumer Affairs’ (DCA) critical unmet needs include additional funding to address the Homeowner
Notification Program, an innovative program launched in 1996. Last year, more than 450,000 notifications were mailed to
homeowners. The notification warns of fraud involving recorded documents and instructs homeowners to notify DCA for
assistance or to report fraud. Annually, DCA receives more than 10,000 requests for assistance resulting from these notifications.
DCA stopped receiving funding for this program in FY 2010-11; however, DCA was still required to provide services to homeowners
who requested assistance.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a net NCC
decrease of $0.6 primarily due to the deletion of one-time
funding from prior fiscal year, offset by increases to
Board-approved employee benefits, a countywide cost
allocation adjustment, and one-time funding to continue the
implementation of a new electronic case file system (ECFS) and
digitize existing case files.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Coroner’s primary goal for 2013-14 is the successful
re-accreditation of the Forensic Laboratories. The accrediting
body, the American Society of Crime Laboratory Directors/
Laboratory Accreditation Board, has adopted International
Standards Organization (ISO) 17025 standards and its
re-accreditation will require the Department to fully meet
those standards. The Department also continues its efforts
toward implementation of a DNA Laboratory designed to
provide DNA services to the public and outside agencies.
The Coroner continues its efforts to replace its current case
tracking system. The system was designed as the backbone for
tracking and documenting all Coroner cases handled by the
department and is a critical tool/component to the
Department’s operations. However, the system was last
updated in 2000, is not web-based, and is no longer supported
by the vendor or any other entity.
The Board, on recommendation of the CEO, has provided
funding for replacement of the ECFS in a phased approach. The
Chief Medical Examiner-Coroner/Interim Director will work
with the Chief Information Office and Internal Services
Department to complete the next three phases of the ECFS
which will expand system functionality to include specimen
tracking, morgue management, and case folder tracking.
The Coroner requests funding to restore prior staffing reductions and additional staff positions to maintain various accreditations
and certifications, and to provide quality medicolegal death investigations to the citizens of the County; additional funding to
appropriately adjust its employee benefits; and restoration of a Public Information Officer position. The need for professional and
effective delivery of information particularly in handling high profile cases has increased significantly. The Coroner also requests
funding for: 1) the replacement of field response vehicles which have not been budgeted over the last four years, purchase of a
back-up x-ray machine and replacement of laboratory equipment; 2) modular unit to replace the Antelope Valley Regional Office as
the current office is in poor condition; 3) the construction of a structure to house a Computed Tomography scanner; 4) painting of
all Coroner buildings; and 5) specific repairs related to resurfacing parking lots, driveways, lighting, etc. in both the front and back
of the Department’s headquarters. These repairs were identified in the quarterly facility inspection reports conducted by
Department staff as part of a risk assessment.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $1,377,000 due to funding for increases in employee
benefits, one-time funding for capital assets to implement
videoconferencing in four County Counsel locations, and
partial front funding for the Employment Advice Program and
non-billable house counsel services.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
County Counsel will continue ongoing initiatives in support of
the County's Strategic Plan including:
¦ Develop and implement new initiatives, strengthen current
practices, and enhance client relations through
communication and training;
¦ Address client needs by developing procedural programs,
policies, or recommendations to support their missions and
goals;
¦ Utilize new and effective technologies to update office
systems and programs, and improve organizational
effectiveness;
¦ Manage resources more effectively by promoting prudent
fiscal policies and practices, and exploring innovative
methods that help ensure fiscal stability;
¦ Implement environmentally responsible practices in the
Office's operations; and
¦ Implement a strategic framework to protect and secure the
County's technology assets and information. The County
Counsel's Departmental Security Officer and members of its
legal staff participate in the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act/Health Information Technology for
Economic and Clinical Health Act Privacy and Security
Committee to ensure departmental compliance.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a $269,000 NCC
increase primarily due to an increase in 7.0 positions for the
High Technology Crime Division’s Countywide Computer
Emergency Response Team (CCERT) and increases in employee
benefits, partially offset by a projected increase in Public Safety
Sales Tax (Proposition 172 revenue). The Recommended
Budget also reflects the deletion of 2.0 positions due to the
elimination of the Vandalism Enforcement Team (VET) and a
decrease in 3.0 investigative positions due to a reduction in
Auto Insurance Fraud grant funding, which is offset by the
addition of 2.0 support positions in the Office’s Executive
Branch Division. The Office’s FY 2013-14 strategic planning efforts are focused
on the following areas:
¦ Expand the application of alternatives to incarceration in
appropriate cases.
¦ Continue implementation of the provisions of Assembly Bill
109 including training and refining internal statistical
reporting mechanisms.
¦ Increase efforts to address the proliferation of identity theft
and cyber-crimes.
¦ Initiate a crime prevention campaign aimed at educating and
protecting citizens from financial crimes, particularly those
involving seniors.
¦ Increase involvement in the environmental crimes
enforcement community by augmenting the Environmental
Crime Unit.
¦ Continue to work on information and document exchanges
with other criminal justice agencies.
The District Attorney is requesting 7.0 investigative positions to support the Office’s Major Narcotics and Los Angeles Interagency
Metropolitan Police Apprehension Task Force war on drugs activities and 4.0 investigative and support staff positions for the
Bureau of Investigation to address the increased workload of the Public Integrity and Justice System Integrity Divisions related to
public corruption and criminal acts committed by justice system employees acting in their official capacities.
In addition, the District Attorney is requesting restoration of specific curtailments taken in fiscal years 2008-09, 2009-10, 2010-11,
and 2011-12. Therefore, the Office’s Official Budget Request includes restoration of 100.0 permanent and 56.0 part-time positions
which include: 3.0 Field Deputy, DA positions curtailed from Community Relations; 65.0 Attorney positions curtailed from both
General and Specialized Prosecution; 16.0 Investigative positions curtailed from Prosecution Support and Special Investigative
Units; 56.0 part-time Legal Support positions (Law Clerks, Senior Law Clerks and Student Professional Workers); 10.0 Paralegals
curtailed from Central Trials and Specialized Prosecutions such as Major Crimes, Hardcore Gangs, etc.; and 6.0 Hearing Officer
positions from the Abolish Chronic Truancy (ACT), Juvenile Offender Intervention Network (JOIN) and Adult Hearing Officer
programs.
The EPR budget provides funding for the County Office of
Emergency Management to: prepare and implement plans and
policies that protect life and property within the County in the
event of an emergency or disaster; operate and maintain the
County Emergency Operations Center (EOC); train personnel
assigned to County government, special districts, and other
jurisdictions throughout the County in emergency
management policies and procedures; plan support for
Homeland Security; develop and provide emergency and
disaster related educational materials for the residents of the
County; and conduct countywide disaster exercises.
Management of the EOC includes the Operational Area
Response and Recovery System, an internet-based information
reporting and notification system used by jurisdictions and
agencies in the County operational area to convey conditions
and operational status as a result of an incident, emergency or
disaster, and the Specific Needs Awareness Planning program,
also an Internet-based comprehensive planning and response
tool developed to address the needs of residents that may
have an insufficient ability to self-evacuate, or who may require
specialized care and resources during a disaster.
The budget also incorporates funds for Homeland Security
Grants that includes the State Homeland Security Grant
Program; Urban Area Security Initiative; Law Enforcement
Terrorism Prevention Program; Citizens Corps Program; Buffer
Zone Protection Program; and the Emergency Management
Performance Grant for County departments, unincorporated
areas, special districts, and cities within the operational area.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects funding to
provide oversight and coordination of countywide emergency
preparedness and response efforts. The Recommended Budget
also reflects an equivalent decrease in both appropriation and
revenue for various grants and the deletion of $875,000 in
carryover funding.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects anticipated
increases in workers’ compensation, long-term disability and
insurance appropriation offset with expenditure distribution to
County departments.
The County’s infrastructure requires ongoing investment to
meet continuous performance requirements. The
2012-13 budget appropriated funds for critical repairs at
County beaches, parks, water treatment plants at Probation
facilities, and roof repairs throughout the County. The
2013-14 Recommended Budget appropriates $116.0 million
for these and other high-priority repairs, maintenance, and
accessibility modification needs at County facilities, including
Parks, juvenile halls, senior centers, and animal shelters.
During FY 2012-13, departments identified additional deferred maintenance needs with an estimated total cost of $99.5 million.
These unfunded needs include various general facility repairs; replacement of outdated building systems such as boilers, chillers,
heating, ventilating and air conditioning units; roofs; and elevator upgrades to achieve building operational efficiencies.
The Federal and State Disaster Aid budget provides economic recovery assistance following major emergencies and disasters, such
as the 2007 Southern California Wildfires, the 2008 California Wildfires (Sesnon and Sayre), the 2010 Severe Winter Storms, the 2010
Crown Fire, and the December 2010 Winter Storms. It also includes contingency appropriation for emergency and post-emergency
responses, the addition to restoration of buildings and property, pending reimbursement from appropriate governmental agencies
and insurance companies.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects the potential need for appropriate revenues from federal and State agencies in the
event of a major disaster. In addition, this budget reflects the anticipated expenditures for the County to continue the permanent
repair, restoration, and replacement of facilities damaged during the aforementioned disasters.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget includes financing sources
and financing uses as follows:
Financing Sources
For budgetary planning purposes, the Chief Executive Office
considers total financing sources the difference generated in
FY 2012-13 from County revenues exceeding expenditures
(fund balance available), the cancellation of prior-year
obligated fund balance, and property taxes. Any decrease in
fund balance available from the budgeted amount will require
expenditure reductions or the identification of additional
financing. The recommended fund balance available of
$1,180.3 million is comprised of the following:
¦ $151.3 million from General Fund operations;
¦ $509.1 million of unused FY 2012-13 Capital Projects funds
carried over to FY 2013-14 for the completion of various
projects and refurbishment needs;
¦ $97.9 million of unused FY 2012-13 Extraordinary
Maintenance funds carried over to FY 2013-14 for major
repairs and maintenance of County facilities and assets;
¦ $54.6 million of unused FY 2012-13 Project and Facility
Development funds carried over to FY 2013-14 for consultant
and specialized services related to projects that are under
development, as well as improvements to County facilities;
¦ $233.3 million of unused FY 2012-13 Provisional Financing
Uses funds carried over to FY 2013-14 primarily for the
Departments of Children and Family Services, Probation,
Health Services for Community Partners, Military and Veterans
for Patriotic Hall, Sheriff, Auditor-Controller, Agricultural
Commissioner/Weights and Measures for a database upgrade,
Beaches and Harbors for the Electrical Vault Replacement and
Board of Supervisors, the eProperty Tax Project, Grand Park
maintenance, Information Technology Shared Services,
2-1-1 Information Line and economic reserves;
¦ $50.6 million of unused FY 2012-13 Board of Supervisors
funds carried over to FY 2013-14 for various community
programs;
¦ $37.9 million of unused FY 2012-13 Homeless and Housing
Program funds carried over to FY 2013-14 for Homeless
Prevention Initiative projects;
¦ $26.4 million of unused FY 2012-13 Children and Family
Services funds carried over to FY 2013-14 for the Promoting
Safe and Stable Families (PSSF) Prevention Initiative
Demonstration Project and the Katie A. Settlement
Agreement;
¦ $13.2 million of unused FY 2012-13 funds carried over for the
Los Angeles Regional Interoperable Communications System
(LA-RICS);
¦ $5.3 million of unused FY 2012-13 Department of Public Social
Services funds carried over to FY 2013-14 for General Relief
enhancements, the Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA)
project and the LEADER Replacement System; and
¦ $0.7 million of unused FY 2012-13 Public Health funds carried
over for methamphetamine treatment.
The use of obligated fund balance of $52.0 million that had
been committed for the following:
¦ $49.2 million Committed for Health Services Tobacco
Settlement for health-related costs; and
¦ $2.8 million Committed for Capital Projects and Extraordinary
Maintenance to fund various District improvements for
priority capital needs.
Property Tax revenues reflect a net increase of $173.1 million
from the FY 2012-13 Final Adopted Budget. The increase
includes $109.5 million due to a projected increase in assessed
valuation based on the Assessor’s preliminary forecast;
$3.6 million in sales tax (Triple Flip) revenue as a result of
anticipated increases in taxable sales in the County; and
$60 million in revenue related to the County’s General Fund
share of the redistributed property tax revenue resulting from
the Redevelopment Dissolution Act (ABx1 26) enacted in
February 2012. Property tax revenues include in-lieu Vehicle
License Fee revenue as part of the State’s Local Government
Agreement (2004 Budget Act).
The recommended Property Tax revenue changes are
comprised of the following:
¦ $168.4 million increase in the Regular Roll;
¦ $1.1 million increase in the Supplemental Roll; and
¦ $3.6 million increase related to the taxable sales in the County
and the dollar for dollar swap of sales tax revenue with
Educational Revenue Augmentation Fund (ERAF) property tax
revenue (Triple Flip).
Financing Uses
Obligated fund balance may be restricted, committed or
assigned for specific needs including future legal or
contractual obligations. There are no financing uses in
2013-14.
The Fire Department, as a Special District, is funded
independent of the County General Fund, and relies primarily
on property taxes and a special tax approved by the voters in
1997 to provide essential fire protection and emergency
medical services. The Department continues to experience an
imbalance between ongoing revenues and costs, primarily due
to increased costs for employee benefits. With the continuation
of cost containments, increased efficiencies, use of one-time
funds, and the recently approved special tax increase by the
Board, the Department will sustain the current level of
emergency staffing and essential support services, and meet
increases in retirement, workers’ compensation, Choices, and
other employee benefit costs in FY 2013-14. In addition, the
2013-14 Recommended Budget includes 3.0 positions as part
of the establishment of the Leadership and Professional
Standards Bureau as well as 5.0 positions considered essential
to support increased service demands and adequately support
existing service levels.
The Department provides 24-hour, emergency services to over
four million people living and working in 57 of the County’s
88 cities, the unincorporated communities and the City of
La Habra, in neighboring Orange County. The Department’s
vast 2,300 square mile jurisdiction also includes 158 lifeguard
towers spanning 72 miles of coastline, to protect millions of
annual beach visitors, and over one million housing units. The
Fire Department is one of the largest emergency service
organizations in the country, and enjoys a world-renowned
reputation for its adeptness and innovation in managing
large-scale wildfires, earthquakes, and other natural and
manmade disasters in Southern California.
The Department’s Strategic Plan, published in September
2012, focuses on integrating technology into our profession,
enhancing transparency and accountability, addressing risk
management issues, and ensuring the welfare of our
workforce. Additional emphasis will be placed on human
factors, such as cultural diversity, sensitivity, inclusiveness,
workforce development, and effective communication.
The Department’s 2013-14 Recommended Budget includes
funding for initiatives in-line with the following departmental
strategic planning efforts:
¦ Delivering Exemplary Emergency Services (converting Engine
92 into an Assessment Engine which can provide advanced
life support thereby, reducing on-scene squad time);
¦ Ensuring Financial Stability and Accountability (a new position
to improve the grant claiming process);
¦ Strengthening the Department’s Infrastructure (a fiber optics
bandwidth system, computer hardware support, wastewater
testing at various camps, replacement engines for rescue
boats, a core switching upgrade as part of Phase III of the
infrastructure upgrade project, replacement of a 38-year-old
rescue boat, and a new phone system for the Lifeguard
operation);
¦ Automating Systems (development of program code to
support electronic forms and workflow); and
¦ Mitigating Disaster (72-hour sustainability program to ensure
that fire stations and Lifeguard headquarters can maintain
operations for at least 72 hours after a catastrophic event).
The Fire Department’s critical needs are financed in the Budget Request. The Department utilizes multi-year fiscal forecast planning
to ensure that adequate funding is available to sustain departmental operations. Even though recent budget forecasts indicate that
property taxes are increasing slightly, revenue from the local tax base will not keep pace with future salary and employee benefit
increases, and infrastructure needs. To partially mitigate this structural imbalance, the Department is continuing its cost
containment efforts and use of one-time reserve funds.
The Fire Department - Lifeguard Budget provides funding for
lifeguard services at County-operated beaches that are the
responsibility of the General Fund. The budget unit establishes
an appropriation for a General Fund transfer to the Fire
Department’s budget, which includes a percentage of all costs
and budgeted positions for ocean lifeguard services. The
2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
$429,000 comprised of $473,000 in one-time funding for the
purchase of a new rescue boat; $429,000 for various employee
benefit adjustments; partially offset by a decrease of $473,000
in one-time funding for FY 2012-13.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Fire Department provides 24-hour, emergency services to
over four million people living and working in 57 of the
County’s 88 cities, the unincorporated communities and the
City of La Habra, in neighboring Orange County. The
Department’s vast 2,300 square mile jurisdiction also includes
158 lifeguard towers spanning 72 miles of coastline, to protect
millions of annual beach visitors, and over one million housing
units. The Department is one of the largest emergency service
organizations in the country, and enjoys a world-renowned
reputation for its adeptness and innovation in managing
large-scale wildfires, earthquakes, and other natural and
manmade disasters in Southern California.
The Department’s Strategic Plan, published in September
2012, focuses on integrating technology into its profession,
enhancing transparency and accountability, addressing risk
management issues, and ensuring the welfare of its workforce.
Additional emphasis will be placed on human factors, such as
cultural diversity, sensitivity, inclusiveness, workforce
development, and effective communication.
The Department’s 2013-14 Recommended Budget includes
funding for initiatives in-line with the following departmental
strategic planning efforts:
¦ Delivering Exemplary Emergency Services (converting Engine
92 into an Assessment Engine which can provide advanced
life support thereby, reducing on-scene squad time);
¦ Ensuring Financial Stability and Accountability (a new position
to improve the grant claiming process);
¦ Strengthening the Department’s Infrastructure (a fiber optics
bandwidth system, computer hardware support, wastewater
testing at various camps, replacement engines for rescue
boats, a core switching upgrade as part of Phase III of the
infrastructure upgrade project, and replacement of a 38 year
old rescue boat);
¦ Automating Systems (development of program code to
support electronic forms and workflow); and
¦ Mitigating Disaster (72-hour sustainability program to ensure
that fire stations and Lifeguard headquarters can maintain
operations for at least 72 hours after a catastrophic event).
The Lifeguard Official Budget Request includes funding for the fiscal years 2009-10 and 2010-11 countywide curtailments of
$1.5 million and $1.6 million, respectively, and the costs for medical examinations associated with Fitness for Life bonuses of
$106,000. It also includes unfunded costs for fiscal years 2012-13 and 2013-14 in the amount of $1.1 million for various salaries and
employee benefits. In addition, the unmet needs also include $347,000 in unfunded costs for a new phone system, replacement
generators, replacement personal watercraft, a 72-hour Sustainability Cache, and replacement engines for inflatable rescue boats.
This results in a total unmet need of $4.7 million and an Official Budget Request of $31.7 million.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $7,000 primarily due to an increase in Board-approved
employee benefits.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Grand Jury continues to:
¦ Increase recruitment of Civil Grand Jurors to better represent
the varied population of Los Angeles County;
¦ Safeguard valuable Grand Jury original records and develop
long-term storage solutions; and
¦ Plan for a third Grand Jury to be used for Criminal Grand Jury
matters when needed.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an increase of
$988,000 in NCC primarily for full-year funding for building and
grounds maintenance, custodial, security, and programming
requirements for Grand Park. Consistent with established
contractual obligations and demonstrating a commitment to
public-private partnerships, the 2013-14 Recommended
Budget provides County funds to maintain and operate Grand
Park.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Consistent with the County’s vision to improve the quality of
life in the County, Grand Park exists to serve the people of
Los Angeles by assuring open spaces for casual sitting, leisurely
strolling, and civic gatherings. Grand Park serves the
community by providing access to community groups,
neighbors, schoolchildren, and sponsored performing events.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget is fully funded with
available resources, and reflects the minimum amount of local
resources required by law ($124.1 million and Vehicle License
Fees (VLF)-Realignment revenue of $269.4 million), plus an
additional $266.8 million in County funding. The additional
County funding components include: $198.1 million from the
General Fund; $99.4 million in Tobacco Settlement funds;
partially offset by $24.3 million in County resources allocated
to the Department of Public Social Services (DPSS) for the
In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Provider Health Care Plan
and $6.4 million allocated to the Capital Projects/
Refurbishments Budget for health-related capital projects.
The Recommended Budget reflects $214.7 million in Measure
B Special Tax revenue, of which $212.9 million is allocated for
County hospital emergency and trauma care costs at LAC+USC
Medical Center (LAC+USC) and Harbor-UCLA Medical Center
(H-UCLA), and for County hospital emergency care costs at
Olive View-UCLA Medical Center (OV-UCLA). The remaining
$1.8 million is allocated for services related to trauma centers
and emergency medical services in Health Services
Administration-Emergency Medical Services.
The Recommended Budget reflects an increase of $10.9 million
in NCC primarily due to an increase in VLF-Realignment
revenue, partially offset by a net decrease in NCC for the
reversal of one-time adjustments from the 2012-13 Final
Adopted Budget. The Recommended Budget also reflects a
decrease of NCC transferred to the capital projects budget of
$1.4 million and an increase to DPSS for the IHSS Provider
Health Care Plan of $0.3 million.
The Recommended Budget provides funding for increased
operational costs primarily due to a net cost increase of
$31.9 million in employee benefits; a net increase in debt
service payments of $26.7 million primarily for the
replacement Martin Luther King, Jr. and High Desert MACCs; a
net increase of $50.2 million in pharmacy costs related to the
transition of Ryan White patients to the HWLA program; and an
increase of $5.6 million for a Consumer Price Index (CPI)
adjustment for services and supplies.
The Department’s fund balance was used in prior years to fund
Departmental expenses; however, it is anticipated to be
depleted in FY 2012-13. The Department is evaluating if a
surplus will be generated for FY 2012-13. For now, the fund
balance is estimated to remain depleted and not available to
fund the Recommended Budget. The Department will update
this, if necessary, in a later budget phase.
The Recommended Budget also includes a net increase of
93.0 budgeted positions, primarily attributed to an increase in
positions for the implementation of the Electronic Health
Record Information System (EHRIS); positions for medical care
coordination for HIV/AIDS patients; positions for specialty
medical services for Sheriff’s inmates; and positions for the
conversion of various contract registry staff to County
positions; partially offset by a decrease in positions for
efficiencies in Juvenile Court Health Services (JCHS) operations.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
DHS is continuing to develop its analysis of the impact of the
Affordable Care Act (ACA), which is effective January 1, 2014.
The potential impact of ACA has not yet been factored into the
Department’s 2013-14 Recommended Budget.
The mid-year implementation of the ACA makes projecting the
impact for the entire 2013-14 fiscal year more difficult.
Disproportionate Share Hospital, Medi-Cal fee-for-service,
Safety Net Care Pool, and HWLA matched funding will be
impacted in FY 2013-14 in varying degrees. The analysis is
further complicated as certain Waiver-related funding streams
are shared among the public hospitals statewide, based on a
distribution formula that takes into account the number of
uninsured patients and other factors. The varying impacts of
the ACA in counties with public hospitals are factored into the
formula. Only when that process is completed will the
Department be able to determine how much of the shared
funds the County will receive for FY 2013-14. The ACA will also
impact the Department’s payer mix and this factor will be
included in the analysis. Any one of these items has the
potential to materially impact the Department’s projections.
Additionally, the two major features of the ACA that will have
the most significant effect on DHS are: 1) patient choice; and
2) payment based on capitation or bundled payments rather
than expenses. DHS must be successful in addressing these
features or could face huge financial shortfalls and/or closure
of facilities. DHS is rapidly taking the necessary steps to
prepare for the ACA implementation, including, but not limited
to:
¦ Developing and instituting a patient-centered medical home
model.
¦ Empanelling patients in primary care homes.
¦ Increasing enrollment in HWLA.
¦ Increasing the number of primary care, specialty care, and
diagnostic outpatient appointments.
¦ Implementing an electronic health record information system.
¦ Installing a disease management registry to track necessary
patient interventions.
¦ Launching eConsultation to improve provider communication
about patient care and to optimize the use of specialty care
capacity. ¦ Improving the patient experience.
¦ Decreasing the cost of services while improving quality and
service levels.
The Department is continuing to refine its projection analysis
for the various funding streams in light of these complexities
and will update them in a future budget phase.
The Department’s chronic funding challenges have resulted in directing funding to cover the increased demand of patient care and
delaying investments in areas such as training, medical equipment purchases and facility maintenance. The Department has
identified $44.7 million in unmet needs as follows: $8.9 million for additional staffing to meet patient care program needs for the
LAC+USC Healthcare Network; $10.2 million for the replacement of radiology equipment at H-UCLA; $4.5 million for additional
staffing for various areas in the MetroCare Network, such as social work, information technology, and pathology; $4.1 million for
additional staffing for various areas at the Rancho Los Amigos National Rehabilitation Center, such as occupational and physical
therapy, dental, speech therapy, language services, and coding; and $17.0 million for additional staffing for various areas in the
ValleyCare Network, such as the emergency department, nursing, radiology, obstetrics and gynecology, pharmacy, and
occupational and physician therapy.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an overall NCC
decrease of $1.6 million in one-time funding used for the
provision of various homeless and housing program services
such as: Access to Housing for Health; Respite Center for
Homeless Families; Benefits Entitlement Services Team for the
Homeless (BEST) project; and numerous emergency,
transitional, or permanent supportive housing program
services for individuals, families or youth. Some of these
programs were provided by County departments and others by
contract agencies. The budget also provides $60.5 million in
one-time and ongoing funding to continue homeless
assistance programs including the Long Beach Homeless
Veteran’s Initiative; Prototype Court program for defendants
who are homeless and have co-occurring illnesses (mental
health and substance abuse); Department of Public Social
Services (DPSS) applications at County jails and County
medical centers; and others that provide supportive services
for homeless families, individuals, and veterans.
While the ongoing economic downturn has had a significant
impact on many in the County, it has had a disproportionate
impact on those who are most vulnerable among us – the
homeless population. It is important that the County help the
most vulnerable homeless individuals and families regain
sustainable housing.
The HHP has overseen at least 63 programs funded in part by
HPI. In FY 2011-12, these programs have served approximately
11,871 individuals, families and/or youth. Some of the
highlights include the following:
¦ Secured emergency, transitional, or permanent supportive
housing for approximately 4,159 individuals, families or youth.
¦ On January 24, 2012, the Board approved a motion
establishing the Los Angeles County Interdepartmental
Council on Homelessness (LACICH) which was co-chaired by
the Chair of the Board and Vice-Chaired by the CEO. The
LACICH membership and corresponding workgroup
developed, with oversight from HHP, an interdepartmental
roadmap for addressing homelessness for youth, families,
chronically homeless, and veterans.
¦ Developed the Family Solution Centers, six regional sites
within the County which connect homeless families to
rapid-rehousing and permanent supportive housing and
services. This demonstration project is funded in part by HPI
($1.0 million) and is administered by the LAHSA.
¦ Participated in the development of the Gateway Cities
Homeless Action Plan implementation plan which will result
in increased permanent affordable housing with services,
outreach and engagement of street homeless, and rapid
re-housing in the Gateway Cities Region. This effort is funded
by HPI ($1.16 million per year for three years) from
Supervisorial Districts 1 and 4 and is administered by the
Gateway Cities Council of Governments and the CEO.
¦ Participated in the United Way’s Home for Good Funders
Collaborative which resulted in millions of dollars being
leveraged and coordinated to permanently house and provide
supportive services for approximately 1,000 chronically
homeless individuals.
¦ Continued to implement a Homeless Encampment Protocol, a
collaboration of the CEO, Sheriff’s Department, and LAHSA
which responds to homeless encampments throughout the
County. This collaborative program has addressed over
30 homeless encampments throughout the County in
FY 2011-12.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in net
County cost of $1.4 million primarily due to partial front
funding of the Impact Team, implementation of the Executive
Leadership Development Program, expansion of the
Administrative Intern Program, and increases in employee
benefits. The Recommended Budget also reflects the addition
of one-time funding for 2.0 Administrative Intern II positions
partially offset by the deletion of 2.0 Administrative Intern I
positions.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department of Human Resources will continue working
towards completing a countywide human resources (HR)
transformation which includes:
¦ Continue funding the Impact Team;
¦ Continue the implementation of the Absence Management
System (AMS);
¦ Implement the Executive Leadership Development Program
initially funded by a grant received by the Quality and
Productivity Commission;
¦ Continue enhancement of the examination process; and
¦ Expand the Administrative Intern Program.
The Department’s unmet needs include funding for the establishment of a countywide testing/training space; information
technology support in the form of security management and compliance for enterprise systems; additional positions for equity
investigations, mediation, appeals, HR departmental support, administrative services, and talent management; professional
development training for managers and supervisors; and HR automation initiatives.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC increase of
$3.7 million, primarily due to one-time funding for the email
migration costs of seven departments, the upgrade of water
pumping system and controls at the Hall of Administration
(HOA), the replacement of Private Branch eXchange (PBX)
systems with Voice-over Internet Protocol (VoIP) for the most
critical locations, ongoing funding to fully fund fleet services
indirect costs, and increases in employee benefits. This
augmentation is partially offset by the deletion of one-time
funding provided in FY 2012-13 for email migration costs of six
departments, the server consolidation initiative,
maintenance/repairs at the HOA, and a reduction for the
Countywide Cost Allocation Adjustment. Also reflected is a net
increase in gross appropriation of $21.9 million and
8.0 positions in various reimbursable services provided to
County departments and other agencies, such as computing
services, job order contracting services, fleet services, and
purchasing and contract services.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
ISD’s Strategic Plan for 2013-14 identifies steps for improving
service delivery for customer departments and the County as a
whole, and developing “green initiatives” to support the
County’s Energy and Environmental Policy. This year’s plan
includes the following new or continuing strategic objectives:
¦ Obtain additional grant funds to support energy,
environmental and IT initiatives.
¦ Expand the County’s private cloud initiative, which has
reduced server hosting and storage costs while improving
operations and disaster recovery.
¦ Expand countywide email service, providing savings via
economies of scale and additional functionality.
¦ Expand videoconferencing to improve efficiency and reduce
travel.
¦ Re-band the Countywide Integrated Radio Systems (CWIRS) to
comply with the Federal Communication Commission
mandates.
¦ Provide building trade support to the Chief Executive Office
(CEO) to implement a formalized building assessment pilot
program for County facilities.
¦ Continue to expand ISD’s customer service quality assurance
program to ensure strong customer feedback mechanisms
and compliance through regular management oversight.
¦ Continue to provide technical and contracting expertise for
the Los Angeles Regional Interoperable Communication
System (new public safety radio system).
¦ Continue to provide support to the CEO and the Department
of Public Works (DPW) in the construction project for a new
countywide data center, and lead countywide efforts to
develop and execute a consolidated data center strategy
based on shared computing and mechanical infrastructure.
This strategy incorporates disaster recovery for all identified
critical systems in a common County facility.
¦ Continue to support or upgrade countywide computer
applications including the support of eCAPS Phase IV
initiatives.
Major accomplishments from last year include: managed
countywide communications expense, including $1.5 million
annual savings from reductions in phone lines, directory
assistance usage, fax lines, voicemail, pay telephones, modem
lines, and toll-free lines, etc.; implemented savings on network
infrastructure with higher speed and reliability; and developed
a pilot project to improve controls over wireless expenses;
provided technical election support to the
Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk (RR/CC) in support of the
Presidential General Election; implemented energy efficiency
projects (lighting retrofits/controls, heating ventilation air
conditioning (HVAC), retro-commissioning) that resulted in
$1.3 million countywide annual cost avoidance in electric and
natural gas costs; and reduced ISD’s fleet by 130 vehicles in the
last 24 months.
The Customer Direct Services and Supplies is a “pass through” budget to account for various services and supplies that the ISD
purchases directly from outside vendors on behalf of customer departments.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease of $0.5 million in anticipated requirements from customer departments
and a ministerial realignment from expenditure distribution to revenue for departmental billings.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects funding for
anticipated judgments and/or settlements, attorney fees and
litigation costs, service contracts, and various commercial
insurance policies. The budget also includes a central
appropriation to fund large, unanticipated losses and losses of
a countywide nature.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a NCC decrease of
$257,000 primarily attributed to the deletion of one-time
carryover funding partially offset by an increase in the
Consumer Price Index based cost-of-living adjustment
pursuant to the 2012 operating agreement. The
Recommended Budget also reflects full-year funding and
support for buildings and grounds maintenance, utilities, and
other anticipated operational costs of LA Plaza de Cultura
y Artes.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Consistent with the County’s vision to improve the quality of
life in Los Angeles County, LA Plaza de Cultura y Artes exists to
serve the people of Los Angeles, particularly children and
families, by educating them about Los Angeles history and
Mexican-American culture.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget provides for the collection
of lease payments due on LAC-CAL equipment leases from
County departments and the transfer of such payments to the
LAC-CAL Corporation. Also reflected is the payment of
insurance premiums for which expenditures will be distributed
to affected departments.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects continued
funding for the cash match portion of the federal Broadband
Technology and Opportunities Program that was unused from
the prior year and a reduction of $1.7 million related to
one-time funding.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget is a significant departure
from prior years in which revenue decreases attributable to the
economic recession coincided with implementation of new
programs funded under the Mental Health Services Act
(MHSA). During FY 2013-14, DMH will concentrate on
consolidating the advances made through the implementation
of programs initiated during the last several fiscal years such as
Prevention and Early Intervention (PEI) evidence-based
practices and Public Safety Realignment (AB 109) mental
health programs. DMH will focus primarily on preparing for the
full implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) in January
2014. As part of these readiness efforts, we will expand
integrated mental health services delivered in collaboration
with primary care and will complete the design of a managed
care approach for delivery of services to dual eligible
individuals who qualify for both Medicare and Medi-Cal.
Certain juvenile justice programs are slated to be reduced due
to the expiration of funding, and a large portfolio of
time-limited prevention projects implemented during
FYs 2011-12 and 2012-13 will be concluded. Due to the
decrease in Probation-funded programs and completion of
these one-time prevention programs, the Recommended
Budget contains an overall appropriation decrease of
$54.5 million. In addition, the Recommended Budget includes
funding for 50 additional Institution for Mental Disease (IMD)
beds to help decompress County hospital emergency rooms by
facilitating the transfer of patients to more appropriate levels
of care. Finally, the Recommended Budget recognizes increases
in various unavoidable costs including $5.9 million in State-imposed Cost-of-Living Adjustments (COLAs) for IMD
beds and State hospital beds, and increased employee benefit
costs totaling more than $11.0 million.
Although funding for DMH is far more certain than in prior
years, it should be noted that revenue from certain funding
sources remains fluid. The receipt of federal revenue for the
State Plan Amendment (SPA) that will enable local
governments to claim additional federal revenue for actual
costs above the last allowable State Maximum Amount (SMA)
but below the federal cap on Medicaid reimbursement is still
pending. When the federal revenue is received, DMH is
expected to offset costs by approximately $12.0 million
annually and receive approximately $33.0 million one-time
revenue for prior fiscal years. Although the State’s realignment
of mental health managed care has resulted in a small increase
in funding, the realignment of Healthy Families and Early and
Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment revenue may not
fully cover all related costs, should anticipated program
expansion occur. Finally, a mechanism for claiming federal
funding for Healthy Way LA is not yet completed. The ability to
recoup additional costs associated with operating this program
will be critical during the coming year. DMH will continue to
work with a broad group of stakeholders to address any actual
shortfalls during the course of the fiscal year as the financial
picture becomes more certain.
The Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
8.0 positions which includes 2.0 positions for the Office of
Empowerment and Advocacy to support the Department’s
efforts to ensure the meaningful involvement of individuals in
recovery with the design of mental health programs. The
increase also includes 2.0 support positions for the integrated
programs delivered in collaboration with primary care and
2.0 positions to support the implementation of programs for
children up to five years of age, funded by First 5 Los Angeles.
Finally, the Recommended Budget includes 2.0 positions for
administration of the Transition Age Youth (TAY) service
expansion and 1.0 pharmacy technician position to enhance
the operation of the DMH pharmacy program. These
9.0 positions are offset by the decrease of 1.0 juvenile justice
position in the Central Placement Office.
The Recommended Budget will allow the Department to
continue collaborating with other County departments, its
stakeholders, and community partners to implement MHSA
programs, Board priorities, and other mandates that ensure the
provision of highest quality and most cost-effective services to
children, TAY, adults, and older adults with serious mental
illnesses or disorders. These include, but are not limited to, the
following: 1) the ongoing delivery and assessment of services
provided by MHSA funded programs to children, TAY, adults,
and older adults to ensure they reflect the Department’s
commitment to a wellness and recovery-oriented system of
care; 2) active participation in the restructuring of the General
Relief (GR) Program in association with the Department of
Public Social Services (DPSS); 3) the implementation of the
Collaborative Care Integration program with the Department
of Health Services (DHS) to deliver PEI mental health services at
DHS facilities; 4) services to chronically homeless individuals
with serious mental illness and co-occurring substance abuse
disorders; and 5) the execution of the County Action Plan to
address the needs of youth in probation halls and camps in
conjunction with the Probation Department as well as the
AB 109 program, focusing on the delivery of assessment and
treatment services to inmates and parolees with mental health
and/or co-occurring mental health and substance use
disorders.
During FY 2013-14 DMH will continue focusing on operational
efficiencies and revenue management/enhancement.
Additional efficiencies will include the enhanced use of the
Service Catalog through the additional automation of routine
paper-based practices and expansion of tele-psychiatry to
ensure delivery of psychiatry services to hard-to-reach areas. A
renewed focus on the changing benefits to which clients are
entitled will enable DMH programs to capture funding for
those who are newly eligible as well as maximize existing
funding sources such as Medi-Cal and Medicare.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to identify and implement strategic
approaches to ensure the provision of high quality and
cost-effective care to individuals with serious mental illness/
disorders. In FY 2013-14 these will include:
¦ Continued implementation of the 1115 Waiver as a transition
to Health Care Reform.
¦ Delivery of integrated mental health-primary care services
through a variety of structural arrangements (e.g., Community
Partner agencies with mental health contracts, co-location of
directly operated DMH staff in DHS facilities, alignment of
contract providers with primary care providers).
¦ Continued implementation of the Psychiatric Emergency
Service (PES) Decompression Plan in collaboration with DHS.
¦ Full implementation of AB 109 mental health/co-occurring
disorders services.
¦ Expansion of services to families of veterans returning from
Iraq and Afghanistan that will reduce the stress commonly
encountered during family reunification.
¦ Collaboration with other County departments such as
Children and Family Services (Katie A. Strategic Plan),
Probation (Juvenile Justice), and Public Social Services (GR).
¦ Inclusion of stakeholders and community partners in efforts to
transform the entire mental health system.
The Department’s unmet needs include: 1) an increase in employee benefits for mandated programs, including Public
Guardian - Probate services; 2) additional funding and positions for the Lanterman-Petris-Short Act within the Office of the Public
Guardian to address the significant caseload issues within the operation; 3) funding to address services for uninsured consumers,
including homeless, dually diagnosed and the underserved ethnic populations; 4) positions for the Department’s ACCESS Call
Center to enhance the provision of timely services, crisis intervention, linkage/referrals, language translation assistance, and to
avoid dropped calls; and 5) funding for program and central administrative infrastructure, including Information Technology, to
support the growth in mental health services’ programs and revenue sources.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a $715,000 NCC
increase primarily due to funding associated with the
re-opening of the newly renovated/refurbished Bob Hope
Patriotic Hall for custodial, security services, facility
maintenance and utilities including 2.0 support positions, and
Board-approved increases in employee benefits. The
Recommended Budget also includes funding for the newly
created Chief Deputy Director position essential to
departmental operations and 3.0 Veterans Intern positions to
assist with claims and veterans services, partially offset with
State veterans services funding.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to focus on increasing veterans’
service levels by collaborating with County departments,
developing and training staff, and partnering with veterans
service organizations. The Department will focus on:
¦ Creating a customer friendly website that promotes the
Department, provides information on veterans’ services, and
facilitates meetings and conferences through resources
available at Bob Hope Patriotic Hall.
¦ Expanding outreach services to veterans and survivors
through veterans’ events such as stand-downs and job fairs.
¦ Collaborating with other County veterans service offices
offering staff in-service education and certification training in
areas such as veteran’s benefits and the Department of
Veterans Affairs (DVA) policies and procedures.
¦ Partnering with the County of Los Angeles Housing Authority
on a homeless veterans voucher system to expand the
number of low income housing opportunities for homeless
veterans.
¦ Working with the Department of Public Social Services to
identify veterans receiving General Relief and pursue
compensation claims with the DVA.
¦ Joining efforts with the Department of Mental Health to
provide mental health services to veterans who are eligible for
federal entitlements through the DVA.
¦ Integrating the Veterans Program (VETPRO) computer
application with the U.S. Veterans Administration Benefits
Delivery Network (BDN) to improve staff access to information
for benefits delivery.
¦ Increasing subvention funding from the California Veterans
College Tuition Fee Waiver Program for dependents of
disabled or deceased veterans by promoting the program
through community outreach.
¦ Raising the revenue from the sale of veterans’ license plates
through targeted advertising.
¦ Continuing to partner with the USC School of Social Work –
Military Social Workers graduate program by offering
internship opportunities in the Department of Military and
Veterans Affairs.
¦ Working closely with the County morgue services and Office
of Decedent Affairs to provide burial services for indigent
veterans.
¦ Supporting veterans with veterans’ services and resources
residing at the State of California home in Lancaster and West
Los Angeles.
The County is home to one of the largest populations of veterans (approximately 400,000) in the United States. Thus, it is also home
to one of the largest populations of homeless veterans in the United States. Predictably, with the increasing number of returning
Afghanistan veterans and the growing number and complexity of veterans’ claims, there is a need to increase the Department’s
staffing levels. Today’s limited funding will not support the continuing increase in the needs of the veterans population. This will be
the Department’s biggest challenge in the coming years.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
$226,000 primarily due to an increase in the Consumer Price
Index-based cost-of-living adjustment pursuant to the 1994
operating agreement amended on May 20, 2008, partially
offset by the deletion of 2.0 vacant positions.
The Recommended Budget continues support for a full
exhibition schedule, including special presentations of works
by Hans Richter, James Turrell, Gabriel Figueroa, Alexander
Calder, and Helen Pashgian. The permanent collection will be
highlighted with installations of classic abstract artists, and
African, Japanese, and Balinese works. Several
LACMA-organized exhibitions continue to travel, raising the
Museum’s image and prestige in the field, including California
Design (Australia and England), Ken Price (New York City), Hans
Richter (Germany), and James Turrell (Israel).
Art Programs with the Community (APWC) continues its
multi-year partnership with schools, libraries, and other
organizations throughout the Los Angeles Unified School
Districts, Local Districts 4 and 7. APWC includes artist-led
workshops in classrooms, libraries, and community centers;
curriculum materials; professional development for teachers;
and free youth memberships to LACMA.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Museum of Art will continue implementation of its
long-range strategic objectives:
¦ Improve the quality and presentation of the collections;
¦ Attract and engage a broader audience through expanded
international recognition of LACMA as a quality art institution
and continued commitment to educational programs and
overall scholarship;
¦ Improve the museum campus; and
¦ Develop a stable and sustainable financial and organizational
plan.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget is based on the 1994
operating agreement amended on September 26, 2006,
between the County and the Museum of Natural History
Foundation (Foundation), which established each entity’s
operational and financial responsibilities. This public-private
partnership enables the Museum to maintain educational and
research programs and basic operations at the Museum of
Natural History located in Exposition Park, the George C. Page
Museum at the La Brea Tar Pits, and the William S. Hart
Museum in Newhall.
The Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC of
$1.4 million primarily attributed to the deletion of one-time
carryover funding, partially offset by an increase in the
Consumer Price Index-based cost-of-living adjustment.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Museum continues to implement its strategic plan, which
is consistent with the County’s Strategic Plan. Through the
strategic planning process, the Museum will identify and
prioritize programs for funding in FY 2013-14 that further its
mission.
In recognition of the economic crisis that is impacting the County, the only critical need included in the FY 2013-14 Capital Budget
request is related to the Museum’s auditorium. This project requires significant investment which cannot be covered from the
operating budget.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a NCC increase of
$367,000 primarily due to a cost-of-living adjustment and an
anticipated increase in capital lease costs. Consistent with
established contractual obligations, and demonstrating a
commitment to maintaining public-private partnerships, the
Recommended Budget continues to provide County funds to
maintain and operate the facility.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Consistent with the County’s vision to improve the quality of
life in the County, the Center exists to serve the people of
Los Angeles by assuring the presentation of the very best of
the performing arts in its theaters and concert hall. The Center
serves the community by providing access to the performing
arts to families and children on the Center’s campus and by
providing educational services in the region’s schools.
The Center continues to identify unmet needs for numerous deferred maintenance projects and the implementation of various
best practices approaches.
Nondepartmental revenues are derived largely from
revenue-generating activities not related to any specific
County department.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget primarily reflects:
¦ An increase of $7.7 million in deed transfer tax revenue based
on actual trend and an anticipated growth in the County’s
housing market;
¦ An increase of $7.5 million in sales and use tax revenue
associated with an anticipated growth in collections primarily
due to high gasoline prices;
¦ The decrease of $6.0 million in business license tax collections
due to the closure of the Puente Hills Landfill planned for
October 2013;
¦ A decrease of $2.9 million in overhead charges assessed to the
Hospitals for the use of general County services; and
¦ An increase of $0.3 million associated with the dissolution of
the Huntington Municipal Water District.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects:
¦ An anticipated increase in employee benefits.
¦ An increase in services and supplies to fund various
countywide initiatives including the staffing of Community
Redevelopment Agency Oversight Boards, the new
countywide Content Management System, as well as the
printing and distribution of welcome brochures for new
residents of the unincorporated areas of the County. This
increase is partially offset by the elimination of one-time
funding for the California State Association of Counties (CSAC)
conference.
¦ A decrease in other financing uses due to the deletion of
one-time funding for various Public Library projects, the
elimination of a one-time transfer from the General Fund to
the Productivity Investment Fund, and the deletion of
one-time funding for various information technology
infrastructure projects.
¦ A decrease in revenue due to a projected decrease in interest
earnings from the County treasury pool.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a $2.2 million net
decrease in NCC primarily attributable to the deletion of
one-time funding, partially offset by increases in employee
benefits, water cost, funding for golf revenue shortfall, and
diesel fueled equipment mandate. The Recommended Budget
also reflects the realignment of budget based on historical
experience and anticipated needs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department remains committed to maintaining the
County’s Strategic Plan Goals and Strategies and furthering
them where possible. Continued and enhanced efforts found
in efficiencies, exploring new possibilities to augment revenue,
and discovering creative methods to sustain with minimum
funding will all be necessary for the Department’s operations
and to support the five Strategic Planning Initiatives:
Operational Effectiveness (Goal 1), Children, Family and Adult
Well-Being (Goal 2), Community and Municipal Services
(Goal 3), Health and Mental Health (Goal 4), and Public Safety
(Goal 5).
The Department’s FY 2013-14 critical needs consist of one-time and/or ongoing obligations and operational deficiencies such as
rising costs unavoidable to the Department; costs associated with the opening of new park facilities and amenities; and meeting
countywide Information Technology (IT) standards and directives.
Funding augmentation for these needs allow the Department to continue operations without disruptions and in some cases, may
allow the Department to operate facilities at a preferred service level. The funding of projected cost increases in retiree health
insurance and grounds maintenance due to the re-solicitation of 14 contracts is critical to maintaining the Department’s main
mission. Additional funding is also needed to perform asset preservation, as well as conduct facility operations and management,
for new facilities and park amenities; and to meet countywide standards and directives in the area of IT, such as email migration,
server virtualization, enterprise licensing, and legacy application migration.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC increase of
$1.7 million primarily due to $3.5 million for Board-approved
increases in health insurance subsidies and changes to salaries;
$0.7 million for increased lease costs for the new Long Beach
Courthouse scheduled to open in September 2013; $6.5 million
from the Provisional Financing Uses (PFU) budget for the new
Citation Diversion program ($2.0 million and 20.0 positions),
Professional Standards Bureau ($1.8 million and
11.0 positions), Camps Enhancement ($0.8 million and
6.0 positions), Risk Management Unit ($0.8 million and 7.0 positions), District Bureau Chief Concept ($0.6 million and
5.0 positions) and Information Systems Bureau ($0.5 million
and 5.0 positions); partially offset by the deletion of
$8.5 million in one-time funding for the Title IV-E Reinvestment
program ($2.4 million), Education Reform ($1.9 million),
Probation Case Management System (PCMS) ($1.1 million), and
LAC + USC Power Plant retrofit ($3.1 million). The budget also
reflects reductions of $0.5 million in other adjustments.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Probation Department has developed a strategic plan
transforming from a custodial and supervision model to an
evidence-based practices treatment and rehabilitation model.
The goals include implementing evidence-based practices;
develop and expand collaborative efforts and community
capacity; and maintain a commitment to organizational
development. The top priorities of the Department are:
¦ Continue efforts to implement Department of Justice
recommendations;
¦ Continue the roll out of AB 109;
¦ Continue to roll out the District Bureau Chief concept;
¦ Continue to adopt the ‘Sheriff’s Model’ of Return-To-Work
enhanced activities; and
¦ Continue efforts to change the culture of the Department. 
The Department’s most critical unmet needs include the following: 1) $10.0 million initial funding for the Norwalk Southern Youth
Correctional Facility to be renovated for use as a Probation training facility; 2) $1.9 million for the Alhambra area office’s seismic
retrofit and refurbishment to address structural damages; 3) $1.4 million to replace unsafe, high-mileage vehicles to ensure the
Department has sufficient vehicles for site visits; 4) $46.0 million for deferred maintenance projects; and 5) $186.0 million for
various capital projects.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget appropriates $25.0 million
in services and supplies to fund consultant studies that
quantify departmental space needs, develop master plans,
provide technical, structural, and environmental impact
assessments; and assist in the development of facility
programs and capital planning efforts.
The Recommended Budget also incorporates $30.2 million in
other charges to fund County contributions for improvements
to County facilities provided by other agencies or jurisdictions;
$0.3 million in capital assets – equipment to fund the
acquisition of trailers to mitigate operational impacts to
recreation and public-oriented programs that are displaced
during construction; and $6.0 million in other financing uses
which represents transfers from various previously approved
capital projects to be reallocated to department operating
budgets for furniture and equipment, and to the Civic Art
Special Fund per Board policy to fund public art projects.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
This budget provides a funding mechanism for departmental
and countywide capital development and planning activities.
The activities funded from this budget contribute to the
multi-year planning efforts of departments, and the County as
a whole, by ensuring that capital programs appropriately
reflect operational and programmatic requirements and
departmental strategic plans.
The Provisional Financing Uses budget unit serves as a
temporary budget for program funding that has yet to be
allocated to a specific budget unit. Once funding needs have
been determined, funds are transferred to the affected budget
unit by Board order.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an increase of
$2.1 million. The following is a description of each budget
category change.
Auditor-Controller
Reflects a $0.5 million increase for eCAPS maintenance costs.
Children and Family Services
Reflects a net decrease of $31.4 million due to the transfer of
$9.6 million for Title IV-E Waiver programs, $9.4 million for
Katie A. Settlement programs, $8.1 million for foster care
(AB12) related expenses, and $4.4 million for rate increases,
partially offset by an increase of $0.1 million for the Psychiatric
Mobile Response Team.
Health Services
Reflects a $28.0 million increase to establish a line of credit
($20.0 million) and a one-time reserve ($8.0 million) for the
MLK Community Hospital as required by the Board-approved
Coordination Agreement.
Parks and Recreation
Reflects a $2.1 million increase for anticipated operational
costs associated with newly constructed or refurbished park
facilities.
Probation
Reflects a net increase of $1.5 million due to the Juvenile Day
Reporting Center ($1.3 million) and contract with the Sheriff’s
Department Employee Support Services ($1.0 million),
partially offset by the transfer of ongoing funding
($0.8 million) to the Probation Department for the Risk
Management Unit.
Provisional Financing Uses - Various
Reflects a net decrease of $13.6 million due to the elimination
of one-time funding transferred to various budget units in
FY 2012-13 ($7.9 million), as well as decreases in funding for
budget gap solutions ($11.9 million), various Probation
programs ($7.1 million), and various other programs
($3.9 million). These decreases are partially offset by net
increases in carryover savings from the prior year
($16.2 million), an archive and records management system for
the Registrar-Recorder ($0.5 million), and high-priority Coroner
programs ($0.5 million). Also reflects the reallocation of
appropriation to fund the Sheriff’s Gang Suppression program
($3.6 million) and a manager position for the Arts Commission
($0.1 million).
Sheriff
Reflects a $15.0 million increase for anticipated costs
associated with implementing the Citizens’ Commission on Jail
Violence recommendations.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $3.4 million primarily due to Board-approved increases in
employee benefits. The Budget also reflects a decrease of
9.0 positions due to the termination of the Post-Dispo
Advocacy Team (PDAT) project, as well as the restoration of
22.0 ordinance only positions.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Fiscal Management - Developments in the criminal justice
system during the current and upcoming fiscal year will
require the Department to accurately assess and evaluate the
impact of those developments in order to continue to provide
quality services within established budgetary allocations. This
will require a measured and ongoing assessment of current
and future staffing and resource needs based on
organizational goals and budget realities within the context of
the Department’s and County’s Strategic Plan. Issues such as
court closures, expansion of AB 109 Realignment, jail
overcrowding, the change in the Third Strike Law; and others
will impact the practice of law in the Public Defender’s Office.
This will require evaluation and assessment of existing and
developing criminal justice issues that will have operational
and fiscal impact on the Department as well as the
development of effective tracking and monitoring systems for
caseload and workload management.
¦ Outreach Management - In order to provide effective client
advocacy, the Public Defender will improve and expand both
internal and external communication with staff, and external
communication with key stakeholders and the public. This will
require the acquisition, development and commitment of
significant resources to facilitate improved multi-lateral
communication across traditional County lines. It also requires
the engagement and establishment of enhanced linkages
with cross-sections of stakeholders in both the public and
private sectors. The Department will further explore new and
innovative methods to facilitate the efficient internal
dissemination and timely delivery of information.
¦ Risk Management - The Department will evaluate and
augment its existing risk management efforts through a
variety of steps including developing and presenting human
resources training targeted towards specific management
groups; developing and presenting attorney training to assure
competent representation in light of Padilla v. Kentucky and
Missouri v. Frye; developing a plan to track courtroom
observation by Head Deputies and other supervisors;
developing departmental stress management programs and
techniques to address issues relating to employee health and
productivity; and developing and implementing training
plans addressing employee safety in the field, including
driving skills and responsibilities.
¦ Technology Resources Training - Due to fiscal constraints,
computer hardware, applications, and devices are generally
rolled out in phases, extending over a period of time. Also,
various employee groups may be provided with different tools
due to their job functions. This creates a workplace in which
employees are utilizing assorted devices, programs and
software versions, all of which create additional
communication challenges making it more difficult for
employees to help each other. This amplifies the need for
targeted assistance to identified employee groups. The
Department will determine desirable technology training for
targeted groups, confer with information technology (IT)
managers, consult with managers of the targeted training
groups, and survey the employees to ensure that the training
is effective and offered in an efficient manner.
The Department’s unmet needs include resources for the expansion of technologies and existing business systems and additional
direct support and IT staff.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects financing
solutions that fully address the Department’s projected
financing need and the solutions are primarily attributable to
increases in State Realignment Vehicle License Fees (VLF) and
Sales Tax revenue. With the noted revenue and the
improvement in the State and local economy, for the first time
in six years, barring any unexpected setbacks in the economy,
the Department’s financial outlook is positive. Coupled with
the recent improvements in the economy, the Department’s
continued efforts to implement operational efficiencies and
the maximization of State and federal resources will allow the
Department to continue to provide critical public health
programs and services to the County’s residents.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget includes a NCC increase of
$1.6 million primarily attributable to increases in employee
benefits and an increase in State Realignment VLF revenue,
partially offset by the elimination of prior-year carryover for
various public health programs and projects, the reversal of
one-time funding that helped to address the FY 2012-13
financing shortfall, and the partial reversal of one-time funds
provided for methamphetamine treatment services.
The Recommended Budget also reflects an increase of
21.0 positions across various departmental programs funded
by State and federal funding, including the First 5 Los
Angeles-funded Reducing Childhood Obesity Prevention
Grant, Immunization Grant, and Health Care Program for
Children in Foster Care. Aside from the additional State and
federally-funded positions, 2.0 positions are funded by the
Department of Health Services (DHS) for substance use
disorder residential treatment services and 1.0 position is
funded by the Department of Mental Health (DMH) for the
Department’s California Children’s Services program.
With the January 1, 2014, effective date of the Affordable Care
Act (ACA) on the horizon, the Department continues to assess
the impact of the ACA. Upon completing this assessment, the
Department will return in a future budget phase, as necessary,
to request adjustments that not only ensure ACA requirements
are met, but also ensure the Department continues to
effectively deliver services with an increased focus on
consumer protection, improving healthcare and reducing
health disparities, while strengthening key community
linkages.
Public Health’s Strategic Plan includes departmental goals for
Health Protection, Health Improvement, Organizational
Effectiveness, Workforce Excellence, and Fiscal Accountability.
The Recommended Budget supports efforts to preserve an
organizational infrastructure focused on maximizing
operational effectiveness and meeting service excellence
goals. A strong organizational infrastructure enables all public
health programs to better serve their clients, address the
public health needs of all County residents, and meet program
goals more effectively. The Recommended Budget supports
programmatic areas such as chronic disease and injury
prevention, community health services, communicable disease
control and prevention, Human Immunodeficiency Virus/
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (HIV/AIDS), and
substance abuse prevention and treatment, all of which
support the Department’s Strategic Plan Goal of increasing
years of healthy life and improving quality of life among
County residents and reducing current and future health risks,
while reducing large health disparities.
The Department has an unmet need of $0.4 million to fund 7.0 positions: $0.2 million for 4.0 positions in Human Resources;
$0.1 million for 1.0 Finance position; and $0.1 million for 2.0 Contract Monitoring positions.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a reduction of
$16.5 million and the deletion of 8.0 budgeted positions. The
reduction is primarily attributed to the deletion of one-time
funding, a decrease in revenues due to the withdrawal of the
City of Hidden Hills from the County Free Library System, and
reduced funding as a result of the expiration of various library
grants. The Department’s budget also reflects a 2.88 percent
anticipated property tax growth rate based on the Assessor’s
forecast and increases in health care and other employee
benefits.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
In FY 2013-14, the Public Library will commence
implementation of a new strategic plan. This new vision of the
Public Library will create a dynamic and innovative model that
sustains the County Library’s position as one of the great 21st
century public libraries. The Library’s renewed vision will focus
on becoming a center for learning, culture and civic
engagement in our diverse communities. Key values such as
community, invention, sustainability, customer service,
learning, integrity, and collaboration will be the foundation of the Library’s services. These values coupled with specific goals
and objectives will ensure the provision of a wide range of
traditional and non-traditional library services and programs
In the coming year, the Library will continue to develop
business, operational, and service strategies that include:
Lifelong Learning, Digital Library Leadership, Transformation of
Library Spaces, Community Engagement and Collaboration,
Creativity, Staff Development, and Financial Health.
We will also complete or expand current fiscal year objectives
related to self-serve model implementations, eCommerce
expansion, eRate certification, and revisions to our planning
standards.
The Department’s unmet needs request includes $6.5 million to address the following critical unmet needs: restoration of the
Department’s general fund contribution, increases for books and materials, enhanced library service hours, and the augmentation
of the facilities maintenance budget.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget for the Department of
Public Social Services (DPSS) - Administration reflects a
$44.0 million increase in gross appropriation and a $1.6 million
increase in NCC. The NCC increase is primarily due to increases
in employee benefits such as retirement and cafeteria plans, in
addition to implementation of the In-Home Supportive
Services (IHSS) Maintenance of Effort (MOE), required by the
Coordinated Care Initiative.
The Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
87.0 budgeted positions. The cost of adding 47.0 positions to
address staffing needs throughout the Department is
completely offset by a reduction of 67.0 positions, resulting in a
net decrease of 20.0 positions. In addition, the increase of
357.0 positions related to Health Care Reform and Medi-Cal
expansion is partially offset by the reduction of 250.0 positions,
a net increase of 107.0 positions. Combined, these changes
result in a net increase of 87.0 budgeted positions in the
Department.
During the past years of economic downturn, the
unemployment rate increased steadily, as did the demand for
DPSS services. Currently, economic projections are more
optimistic, reflecting a slow recovery, and for the first time in
years, the caseloads for most of the programs administered by
the Department are modestly decreasing. The Department has
met high demands for vital services with significantly reduced
resources. Despite the harsh budget and economic realities,
the Department remains committed to developing efficiencies
that allow for the provision of essential services through
technology and innovation.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department is committed to measures that ensure
effective and professional service delivery and support the
County’s goals of Operational Effectiveness, Fiscal
Sustainability, and Integrated Services Delivery. The continuing
fiscal restraint has made achieving these goals a challenge.
DPSS staff continues to perform despite the hardships during
these difficult economic times.
The Department continues to drive priorities strategically by
building on its 2012-13 DPSS Strategic Plan, “The Leading
Edge.” The Plan consists of five goals, 25 strategies, and
115 objectives, of which 61 objectives have been completed to
date and the remaining objectives are targeted for completion
by December 2013. DPSS is in the process of developing the
“2014 And Beyond” Strategic Plan which will replace the
current plan. In addition, DPSS Total Accountability Total
Success (DPSSSTATS) continues to generate measurable
impacts on work performance and management
accountability.
The Department’s Customer Service Center (CSC) expanded to
a third location in Northridge in June 2012 and continues to be
an effective service delivery module in enhancing access and
improving the timeliness of case actions. The CSC expansion
plan will support all 36 line offices throughout the County by
August 2013. The CSC provides participants with 24-hours,
7 days a week access to a fully-automated, self-service
Interactive Voice Response (IVR) phone system to receive case
specific information including benefit amounts, case status,
case worker information, sanction information, Quarterly
Reporting status, office hours, and locations.
The Outbound Dialing System, implemented in 2010, has
significantly enhanced the communication and service to DPSS
participants and customers by making reminder telephone
calls in ten different threshold languages and enabling the
Department to outreach, in the event of a disaster, to the most
vulnerable population: the disabled and elderly IHSS
consumers. The system received an LA County STARS! Award in
the category of Service Excellence and Organizational
Effectiveness from the Board in November 2010.
The Department developed a Countywide CalFresh Outreach
Plan and in collaboration with a network of 30 community
partners and other County departments, deployed a variety of
strategies to heighten public awareness of the CalFresh
Program, formerly known as the Food Stamp Program. This
campaign aims to increase access and participation in the
CalFresh Program and reduce hunger and food insecurity in
these tough economic times. At the May 1, 2012 Board
meeting, a proclamation recognizing the “CalFresh Awareness”
collaboration was issued and May 2012 was declared CalFresh
Awareness Month. The Department received 52,209 CalFresh
applications in the month of April 2012 and 59,600 CalFresh
applications in May 2012, an increase of 7,391 applications.
The General Relief (GR) Restructuring Plan, developed by a
workgroup of 11 County departments and 10 community
stakeholders, was designed to better assist GR participants
with the expectation that more of these individuals would be
able to transition off County assistance by securing
employment or State/federal disability benefits. The project
consists of 42 recommendations approved by the Board. Over
50 percent of these recommendations have already been
implemented, and most of the remainder are scheduled to be
implemented by June 2013. As one example of the impact of
GR Restructuring, the Department, in collaboration with the
Department of Mental Health (DMH), implemented the
Enhanced Mental Health Assessments where permanent
mental health disability was determined in 21 percent of cases
instead of only 1.5 percent of cases prior to implementation.
The Department received $2.3 million in special funding, to
reimburse the County for its efforts in completing the Adult
Day Health Care Centers (ADHC) Case Review. DPSS provided
the California Department of Social Services (CDSS) with data
and information which enabled CDSS to receive a share of
$85.0 million in special funding through the Department of
Health Care Services. The special funding was earmarked to
assist with the transitioning of the ADHC beneficiaries to other
community based organizations.
The Department’s Succession Plan is designed to provide
opportunities for training and guidance to create a qualified
pool of highly-educated, well-trained, and success-oriented
employees. The Mentorship Program is expanding into its
second phase for Administrative Services Manager/Human
Services Administrator positions and has been working with
departmental representatives to enhance the program and
develop a comprehensive training curriculum for mentors and
mentees. Since 2005, the Department has partnered with
California State University, Northridge, and implemented a
unique Masters of Public Administration Program to offer
employees an opportunity to further advance their education.
As an expansion of this career/education opportunity, in
September 2010, the Department began implementing a new
Masters on Social Work program at DPSS’ Administrative
Headquarters. The Career Resource Coordinator (CRC) Program
was established to provide employees with services and
guidance in their career interests. The CRC Program has been
implemented in each DPSS office/section.
The training and education of DPSS staff is critical, but so is
re-engaging staff back into the workforce. In FY 2011-12, the
Department successfully returned 117 employees on
long-term leave back to work through the Return-to-Work
Program. Over 900 individuals on long-term leave have
returned to work since 2008.
The Electronic Document Management System (EDMS) is
expanding to all district offices. EDMS implemented a process
for managing all relevant program-related documents using a
single electronic case file that is stored, managed, and
accessed through the Los Angeles Eligibility, Automated
Determination, Evaluation and Reporting (LEADER) system.
DPSS has implemented EDMS at 27 district offices and has set
up five centralized Electronic Scan Centers (ESC) throughout
the County. Eleven offices have local scanning operations and
16 district offices are sending their cases to be imaged by one
of the five ESCs. To date, EDMS offices have imaged
531,621 cases comprised of 7,466,546 documents. Once all
eligibility cases have been scanned into EDMS by mid-2013,
DPSS’ core eligibility operations will be fully paperless. DPSS is
expanding the use of document imaging to Human Resources,
Contracts, and Fiscal Operations Divisions as well. The
Documentum software continues to shed light on new ways it
can be applied to the Department’s needs, thus making it a
valuable tool in meeting DPSS’ future goals.
The Department implemented telephone redeterminations/
recertifications for CalWORKs and CalFresh participants with
the goal of reducing the need for participants to visit district
offices for service. The “Your Benefits Now” (YBN) online
application and quarterly reporting process via the internet
was successfully implemented to enhance customer access
and reduce case processing time by eligibility workers. In
addition, YBN was enhanced to support Healthy Way
Los Angeles applications and case management for over
200,000 cases in collaboration with the Departments of
Health Services and Mental Health.
The LEADER Replacement System (LRS) project was approved
by federal agencies in April 2012 and by the State in
August 2012. The Board approved the LRS contract with
Accenture on November 7, 2012. In January 2013, the LRS
project commenced the four-year development period that
will yield a system to integrate the various initiatives such as
EDMS, CSC, YBN, etc. The integrated LRS system will be the
backbone of the evolving business process re-engineering
vision to change our service delivery model, and will integrate
and modernize the functionality of disparate legacy systems
that currently support DPSS and DCFS administered programs.
DPSS has chosen a preventive course of action in identifying
potential fiscal and operational problems by developing a
fiscal/operational internal audit team to connect top managers
to every aspect of organizational performance. This effort
allows executive staff to use audit information strategically to
improve the operations of the Department. With the
implementation of various risk mitigation strategies such as
the Safe Shoe Campaign and dedicated Risk Management
Coordinators’ Meetings, the Department achieved a six percent
reduction in the workers’ compensation costs from
$36.6 million in FY 2010-11 to $34.5 million in FY 2011-12.
DPSS administers programs that provide a vast array of services
to families, children, single adults, and the elderly, which are
designed to alleviate financial hardship and promote family
health, personal responsibility, and economic self-sufficiency.
Over 2.3 million participants are served monthly, including
children. DPSS operates 79 facilities, in over 3.5 million square
feet of space including parking lots. The Department also
serves as the Los Angeles County Operational Area Coordinator
for care and shelter and the Operational Area Liaison with the
grocery industry and not-for-profit human services
organizations. In this capacity, the Department has the lead
responsibility for coordinating shelter support in the event of a
disaster or emergency.
The Department continues its leadership in providing quality
services as evidenced in its continued efforts in the Linkages
Program, a service coordination partnership with the
Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS) to provide
integrated services for mutual families and resources for other
needy DCFS families and caretaker relatives. As a result, in
FY 2011-12 approximately 5,700 families have benefited from
this program.
Funding for programs the Department administers depends largely on State and federal subvention. The 2013-14 Recommended
Budget assumes sufficient funding to support the current operational level. Because the final State funding allocations will not be
known until after the State’s FY 2013-14 budget is signed, the Department will continue to provide leadership in advocacy efforts
focused on adequate funding levels to effectively administer its programs.
The Department’s unmet needs for FY 2013-14 are primarily focused on additional staffing needed to meet the increased demand.
Over the past several years, State and County funds have not kept pace with increasing caseloads and program demands. Currently,
case workers for the approved caseload in the Department’s core programs are staffed significantly below the full need. All
eligibility determination programs including CalWORKs, CalFresh, Medi-Cal, and GR have been consistently staffed below the need
level. This means caseworkers are carrying close to double the appropriate level of cases. It is critical to bring the staffing need to a
reasonable level. This would require an additional 4,570 caseworkers to bring the staffing level to its full need.
The Public Social Services - Assistance Budget funds mandated
and discretionary public assistance and social services
programs by the federal, State, and County governments.
These programs include: California Work Opportunities and
Responsibility to Kids (CalWORKs); Indigent Aid General Relief
(GR); In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS); Refugee
Resettlement Program/Refugee Cash Assistance (RRP/RCA);
Cash Assistance Program for Immigrants (CAPI); Refugee
Employment Program (REP), Community Services Block Grant
(CSBG), and GR Anti-Homelessness (GRAH).
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects decreased NCC in
the IHSS, CalWORKs, and GRAH budgets, partially offset by
increased NCC in GR due to higher than budgeted caseloads.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget also reflects increased
appropriation in CAPI and RCA and decreased appropriation in
REP, fully offset by State and federal revenues.
The estimated $42.3 million net decrease in NCC is comprised
of the following:
¦ GR: A $6.0 million increase in NCC due to the projected
increase in the aided caseload.
¦ GRAH: A $6.5 million net decrease in NCC primarily due to the
reversal of one-time funding.
¦ IHSS: A $40.3 million decrease in NCC primarily due to the
implementation of the MOE, and a projected increase in
realignment revenue.
¦ CalWORKs: A $1.5 million decrease in NCC due to lower than
budgeted caseloads, and a projected increase in realignment
revenue.
The majority of services provided through the Public
Works - General Fund are required by federal, State, and local
mandates and are funded by fees for services. Crossing guard,
landslide mitigation, graffiti abatement, pre-County
improvement district studies, property rehabilitation and
nuisance abatement, and unincorporated area services
programs continue to rely on funding from NCC.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a $21.7 million net
NCC decrease primarily attributable to the elimination of
one-time funding for First and Fifth Districts’ road and
waterworks projects ($19.9 million); the Unincorporated Area
Stormwater Urban Runoff Quality Programs ($16.5); Carmenita
Road Median Enhancement Project - Phase II ($1.5 million); and
the Avocado Heights Multipurpose Trail Project ($0.8 million).
The decrease is partially offset by a $16.0 million increase for
the Unincorporated Area Stormwater Urban Runoff Quality
Program; $1.0 million increase for the Oxford Basin Vegetation/
Circulation Project; $0.3 million increase for various sidewalk/
road improvements in the unincorporated area of Chapman
Woods; and a $0.2 million increase for retirement, primarily
due to prior-year losses in Los Angeles County Employees
Retirement Association's investment portfolio and revised
investment return assumptions, and Board-approved increases
in health insurance subsidies.
¦ To maximize public safety, ongoing training is provided to the
employees to enhance employee and technical growth.
Specialized training is provided in mandated subjects such as
the California Building Code and provides for a higher
standard of compliance.
¦ The Public Works - General Fund budget relies on NCC to fund
various activities in the Department. Public Works projects the
available NCC from the previous year to determine the
funding level required for the activities in the coming year and
will adjust each activity accordingly so that NCC does not
exceed from the adjusted allowance approved by the Board.
¦ The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
programs and services. The four main components of the
Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process include program,
financial and staffing plans, and the budget request. Program
plans strategically establish management objectives for
outcomes/results, situation analyses, comprehensive needs
assessments, results-based work plans, and funding requests.
Financial plans project revenue sources and financing uses for
each operating fund and set preliminary budget allocations
for individual programs. Based on these funding allocations,
staffing plans are then developed as part of divisional
operational plans. The budget request is then prepared based
upon the program, financial, and staffing plans.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a $7.5 million
increase primarily attributable to increases in maintenance
requirements and capital asset-infrastructure for the following
channel improvement, water quality enhancement, and
groundwater recharge facilities projects: Sun Valley Drain
Phase I, Sun Valley Watershed-Strathern Wetlands Park,
Pacoima Spreading Grounds Enhancement, Cogswell Dam
Inlet and Outlet Works Rehabilitation, Big Dalton Spreading
Grounds Improvements, Peck Road Spreading Basin, and
Walnut Creek Spreading Basin Pump Station Projects. The
increase is financed with the cancelation of obligated fund
balance and increases in reimbursement projects from cities
and grant revenues, partially offset by a decrease in committed
for Sun Valley Watershed and Pacoima Dam Sediment Removal
projects.
The primary sources of revenue are property taxes and benefit
assessments. The objectives of the District are outlined within
the Flood Control Act, which mandates the District to carry out
flood protection and water conservation programs. These
objectives include to keep the existing flood protection system
in safe and effective condition to respond to emergencies,
perform maintenance and repair, and conserve water. The
District proactively seeks grants for construction and
rehabilitation projects; however, with aging infrastructure and
new and evolving regulations, the District will be challenged to
meet these needs without developing new ongoing funding
sources.
The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
public works programs and services. The four main
components of the Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process
include program, financial, and staffing plans, and the budget
request. Program plans strategically establish management
objectives for outcomes/results, situation analyses,
comprehensive needs assessments, results-based work plans,
and funding requests. Financial plans project revenue sources
and financing requirements for each operating fund and set
preliminary budget allocations for individual programs. Based
on these funding allocations, staffing plans are then
developed as part of divisional operational plans. The budget
request is then prepared based upon the program, financial,
and staffing plans.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a $97.9 million net
decrease primarily due to the deletion of one-time funding for
unincorporated area road projects and road construction and
maintenance activities, including the construction of roads,
highways, and bridges/tunnels, and a decrease in fund balance
available. These decreases are partially offset by a decrease in
requirements for the construction of traffic volume capacity
enhancement projects on roads and highways, and traffic
studies and maintenance of the Master Plan of Highways.
¦ The Recommended Budget was assembled with an emphasis
on optimizing the use of new gas tax (formerly Proposition 42)
funds for maintenance and preservation of the existing
roadway system. This strategy meets the County Strategic
Plan goals of Operational Effectiveness and Community and
Municipal Services by maximizing the use of available limited
revenues while providing residents in unincorporated County
areas with safe roads that provide the necessary mobility
options for work, education, and recreation.
¦ The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
public works programs and services. The four main
components of the Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process
include program, financial, and staffing plans, and the budget
request. Program plans strategically establish management
objectives for outcomes/results, situation analyses,
comprehensive needs assessments, results-based work plans,
and funding requests. Financial plans project revenue sources
and financing requirements for each operating fund and set
preliminary budget allocations for individual programs. Based
on these funding allocations, staffing plans are then
developed as part of divisional operational plans. The budget
request is then prepared based upon the program, financial,
and staffing plans.
The Internal Service Fund is designed to simplify billings for
services provided between the multiple funds that finance
Public Works operations. This fund allows for salaries and
employee benefits, materials and supplies, and equipment
charges for Public Works to be paid through the fund and the
appropriate amounts recovered from each special fund.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a $21.6 million net
increase from the 2012-13 Final Adopted Budget. The increase
is primarily due to increases in capital asset-equipment
purchases ($7.4 million); County retirement costs due to
prior-year losses in Los Angeles County Employees Retirement
Association’s investment portfolio and revised investment
return assumptions ($5.3 million); administrative support
services to align the budget to anticipated overhead costs
($3.0 million); capital project management services for County
capital projects ($2.4 million); health insurance subsidies
($1.2 million) and retiree health insurance premiums
($1.5 million); and the addition of 25.0 positions for the
Unincorporated Area Stormwater Urban Runoff Quality
Program to address regulatory stormwater and urban runoff
compliance requirements ($2.3 million). These increases are
partially offset by decreases in the business automation plan
and information technology upgrade costs, contingencies, and
other operational needs.
¦ The Recommended Budget presents Public Works with a
challenge in projecting future budgetary requirements for
services that will be rendered to other Public Works funds, for
the construction management of capital projects, and for
services to other County departments. The Capital Building
Projects Program relies heavily on the Board’s approval of
funding for County capital projects. A work plan is prepared
for the coming budget year to detail the capital project work
that will be funded. Rates and fees are analyzed each year and
adjusted to ensure that the Internal Service Fund recovers all
costs for services performed.
¦ The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
public works programs and services. The four main
components of the Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process
include program, financial and staffing plans, and the budget
request. Program plans strategically establish management
objectives for outcomes/results, situation analyses,
comprehensive needs assessments, results-based work plans,
and funding requests. Financial plans project revenue sources
and financing requirements for each operating fund and set
preliminary budget allocations for individual programs. Based
on these funding allocations, staffing plans are then
developed as part of divisional operational plans. The budget
request is then prepared based upon the program, financial,
and staffing plans.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget provides for the
maintenance of core mission activities including public
counseling services at the downtown headquarters office and
eight field offices, case processing, community planning and
outreach, and zoning enforcement. Environmental Impact
Review and the activities of the Environmental Review Board
and the Significant Ecological Area Technical Advisory
Committee will continue as well as specifically funded
programs, including public hearings and workshops on the
countywide General Plan update and Santa Monica Mountains
Local Coastal Program.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
$787,000 primarily attributable to the allocation of $2.0 million
in one-time funding for the Permit and Land Management
Solutions (PALMS) Project, which will improve business
processes and supporting technology that will increase the
effectiveness and efficiency of the County’s entitlement,
permitting, and land management functions. The
Recommended Budget also includes increases in County
retirement costs, retiree health insurance premiums, other
employee benefits based on historical experience, and
judgments and damages; offset by the deletion of one-time
funding for the East Los Angeles Third Street Transit Oriented
District Specific Plan, Los Angeles County Community Climate
Action Plan, Baldwin Hills Air Quality Study, Marina del Rey
Visioning, Santa Monica Mountains Local Coastal Program
Update, Healthy Design Ordinance, and Brackett Field Airport
Land Use Compatibility Plan.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to implement its Strategic Plan
while supporting the County’s Strategic Plan including the
following initiatives:
¦ Provide responsive and proactive code enforcement of
discretionary permits, zoning and subdivision regulations in
unincorporated areas, and participate in the countywide
Nuisance Abatement Team (NAT) and Neighborhood
Enhancement Team (NET);
¦ Enhance public service through improved permitting
processes and databases, web-based case filing pilot projects,
new electronic transactions, Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) based land use and zoning information, and smart
phone enforcement operation;
¦ Enhance communication with landowners, neighbors,
constituents, and other governmental agencies by carefully
allocating resources to incorporate local area network
enhancements and other web-based technologies;
¦ Build stronger and healthier communities through its
development of land use, circulation, open space, noise, safety
and housing elements of the General Plan Update; and
¦ Secure Regional Planning Commission and Board approval of
community plans and zoning standards for unincorporated
areas.
The Department’s critical needs include programs which will enhance services within the Current Planning, Land Use Regulation,
Advance Planning, and Information and Fiscal Services Divisions. Funding is being requested for the Historic Preservation
Ordinance pursuant to the Mills Act, implementation of the Santa Monica Mountains Local Coastal Program and Community
Standards Districts (CSD), GIS position reclassification, and the Willowbrook Transit Oriented District Specific Plan.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget includes resources
necessary to conduct the November 2013 Uniform District and
Election Law (UDEL) and the June 2014 Gubernatorial Primary
Election and perform Recorder/County Clerk operations. The
budget also includes funding to move forward with new
programs that promote efficiency while taking into
consideration tentative real estate market recovery trends and
continuing high costs of conducting elections.
The Department continues to find ways to reduce operating
costs through efficiency efforts and has carried forward
substantial curtailments incurred since FY 2008-09. While
recorder fee revenues appear to be improving, they have still
not reached the level necessary to sustain the Department’s
mission critical operations. As such, the Department still faces a
projected budgetary shortfall of $10.1 million.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department’s Critical/Strategic Plan will continue to
implement automated and enhanced processes to improve
public service and employee workforce in the elections, voter
registration, Recorder, and County Clerk services.
¦ Plan and develop a Countywide Archives and Records
Management Program that will assess and develop a process
for indexing and maintaining County records and items of
historical value.
¦ Begin the prototype phase of the multi-year Voting Systems
Assessment Project (VSAP) to modernize the County’s voting
system.
¦ Develop, maintain, and support the multi-county eRecording
system (SECURE).
¦ Develop, test, and implement an election contest and ballot
management system to replace the existing Automated Ballot
Layout System and incorporate candidate filing and reporting
capabilities.
¦ Complete the multi-year development of the Business Filings
Replacement System to improve services related to filed
documents, including oaths, bond filings, and fictitious
business names.
¦ Continue implementation of the Social Security Number
Truncation Program AB1168 to protect personal information
contained in recorded documents.
¦ Develop a plan to promote voter benefits of electronic sample
ballots through website enhancements and smart phone
applications.
¦ Implement an information technology efficiency plan to
consolidate data center servers utilizing virtualization
technology.
¦ Continue to expand efficiency initiative strategies to further
streamline processes, improve operations, reduce costs,
maximize program efficiencies, improve public service
delivery, and expand green energy conservation programs.
¦ Continue and expand the partnership with California State
University, Northridge to provide a Master’s Degree in Public
Administration for all County employees.
¦ Create opportunities for Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk
(RR/CC) staff to complete their Associate of Arts and Bachelor’s
Degrees through local community colleges and public/private
universities.
¦ Increase skill building workshops/certificate programs to
provide RR/CC staff with new tools to increase efficiency and
effectiveness.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a $12.8 million net
decrease in NCC due primarily to the deletion of one-time
funding for the new Long Beach Courthouse tenant
improvements, reduction in debt services for centrally financed
projects, partially offset by other debt service increases and
capital leases charges.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a net NCC
decrease of $0.8 million primarily due to the elimination of
$9.2 million in one-time funding comprised of: $4.4 million for
the purchase and installation of Mobile Data Computers (MDC)
in the Department’s vehicles; $3.6 million for Summer Gang
Suppression activities; $30,000 in carryover Utility User Tax
(UUT) funding for equipment purchases to patrol the East
Los Angeles Civic Center area; and $1.2 million for the Phase I
replacement of existing NEC Private Branch Exchange (PBX)
telephone systems with Voice-over Internet Protocol (VoIP).
Also reflected is a $39.3 million reduction in NCC due to an
anticipated increase in public safety sales tax receipts.
The above decreases are partially offset by: $5.7 million in
funding to support the collaborative efforts of the Sheriff and
Department of Health Services (DHS) to enhance the delivery
of specialty care services to inmates in the custody of the
Department; $39.2 million for Board-approved increases in
employee benefits; $80,000 to restore funding for the Graffiti
Tracker Program; $1.2 million for the Phase II replacement of
existing NEC PBX telephone systems with VoIP; $1.3 million to
replace failing network equipment; and $91,000 for increased
lease costs associated with the opening of the new Long Beach
Courthouse.
The Recommended Budget also reflects a net decrease of
333.0 positions due to the elimination of: 7.0 positions and
funding for the Vandalism Enforcement Team (VET);
328.0 positions due to the termination of the Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) contract; 4.0 positions for contract
law enforcement services as requested by contract agencies;
and 2.0 positions to correct prior year entries. Also reflects
1.0 million in funding for 4.0 positions recommended by the
Citizens’ Commission on Jail Violence (CCJV); the addition of
4.0 positions needed to address increased workload associated
with various programs, fully offset by increased revenues; and
the completion of the Phase I purchase of prisoner
transportation buses.
The Department’s most critical needs, in addition to restoring any proposed reductions in funding, are the following:
1) $22.0 million to restore the loss of one-time funding to aid the Department in maintaining its current level of funding;
2) $44.3 million for unavoidable cost increases in employee benefits ($37.0 million) and services and supplies ($7.3 million);
3) $36.6 million to eliminate the need for Cadre of Administrative Reserve Personnel (CARP); 4) $1.0 million and 2.0 positions for
post-book billings needed for medical treatment to inmates at non-County hospitals; 5) $61.1 million and 390.0 positions to
provide additional supervisory and support staff to ensure adherence to departmentmental policies and procedures as
recommended by the CCJV; 6) 297.0 positions for Public Safety Realignment (AB 109) as a result of an increase in workload;
7) $1.5 million and 6.0 positions for enhancement of the Jail Mental Evaluation Team to provide around-the-clock intervention
services; 8) $1.0 million and 6.0 positions for the Special Victims Bureau to handle the increasing workload and investigate adult
and child abuse cases in a timely manner; 9) $4.3 million and 8.0 positions for the Computer-Aided Dispatch replacement staffing,
network infrastructure, and the continuation of installing VoIP communication systems; 10) $8.8 million to backfill the loss of
federal State Criminal Alien Assistance Program funding; 11) $5.7 million revenue shortfall and a loss of 328.0 positions as a result
of the ICE contract cancellation; 12) $1.8 million and 9.0 positions for health specialty clinics; 13) $11.7 million for facilities
maintenance requirements, including roofing and paving; 14) $1.0 million and 6.0 positions for weapons training; 15) $76.7 million
to address the Department’s structural budget shortfall relative to Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST) bonus
($41.3 million) and leaves of absence ($35.4 million); 16) $40.9 million to fill 300.0 vacant Deputy positions that are currently being
used to offset a structural funding shortfall; 17) $45.4 million and 300.0 Deputy Sheriff positions to restore FY 2010-11 budget
curtailments; 18) 14.0 positions for the Electronic Communications Triage Unit to monitor internet communications and
6.0 positions for the Fiscal Assessment Unit, which leverages the Department’s buying power via consolidation of Department and
outside agency needs, offset by a reduction in capital assets; 19) $78.4 million for information technology needs; and
20) $61.8 million to address deferred facilities maintenance necessities.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects: 1) $0.2 million net
decrease in telephone utilities; 2) $0.6 million net decrease for
ENIA costs; 3) $19,000 net decrease for Criminal Justice
Information Systems (CJIS) projects; and 4) $0.7 million net
decrease for Voice-over Internet Protocol (VoIP) due to reduced
equipment lease and labor costs, partially offset by increased
equipment maintenance costs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiative
ISD will continue to enhance the performance of the County’s
telecommunications systems and simultaneously minimize
costs.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase in
NCC of $1.8 million primarily due to one-time funding for the
Remittance Processing System upgrade, the backfill of
property tax administrative fees (PTAF) lost due to the
California Supreme Court ruling on the Alhambra lawsuit,
2.0 positions to perform work related to refunding bonds
issued by former redevelopment agencies, and
Board-approved increases in employee benefits, partially
offset by the elimination of one-time funding for the Client and
Asset Management System (CAMS).
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The following are examples of the Department’s continuing
efforts to create efficiencies, work collaboratively with other
departments, and maximize revenue:
¦ Begin a refunding project, with the support of the Chief
Executive Office, for bonds issued by the former
redevelopment agencies that is anticipated to save the County
up to $100.0 million over the next 20-30 years.
¦ Continue with the Defaulted Property Tax Reduction Program,
which requires County vendors to be current on property
taxes before entering into a contract with the County. Since its
inception in October 2009, this program has recovered
approximately $3.7 million in delinquent property taxes for
the County.
¦ Continue e-Commerce initiatives including the addition of
Unsecured Property Tax for non-delinquent payments.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects funding for the
County’s $290.6 million MOE payment to the State, which is
comprised of $245.9 million base MOE, $37.6 million CFP,
$7.1 million representing 50 percent of any excess above the
AB 233 fines and forfeitures MOE. In addition, the budget
includes $107.6 million for court-related expenditures that are
the County’s responsibility. The Recommended Budget also
reflects Board-approved increases in employee benefits and
the reclassification of a position, fully offset by collection
enhancement revenue.
The 2013-14 Budget Request reflects a net NCC decrease of
$36,000 primarily attributable to the reduction in utility costs
for NCC funded facilities. The budget also reflects an increase in
funding for the California Public Utility Commission (CPUC)
programs and electricity, partially offset by decreases in
funding for natural gas, water and other utilities, power plant
operations, Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grants
(EECBG), and Southern California Edison (SCE) funding for the
Local Government Technical Resources Program.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Continues to complete energy retrofit projects and centrally
administer utilities costs throughout the County.
On November 4, 2008, unincorporated County voters approved the passage of the Utility User Tax - Measure U. The revenues are
generated from user taxes on gas, electricity, and communication. These revenues are fully offset with appropriations in the
Departments of Board of Supervisors, District Attorney, Health Services, Parks and Recreation, Public Library, Public Works, and
Sheriff for various programs within the unincorporated areas.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects an increase of
$24.7 million from the 2012-13 Final Adopted Budget based on
current trends and economic conditions.
