The State’s “Triple Flip” financing for economic recovery bonds, which reduced the County’s share of sales tax receipts
and replaced lost funds with property tax revenues from schools and community college districts, ended in 2016. As of
January 1, 2016, the County’s share of sales tax receipts has returned to 1 percent and in-lieu payments have been
discontinued. The requested budget reflects these changes with an increase in sales tax revenue and the elimination of inlieu
sales tax payments.
Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) revenue has continued to rise at unprecedented rates with Fiscal Year 2015-2016 (FY16)
revenues likely to exceed $14 million. Yet, staff urges caution in presuming that trend will continue in light of global
economic uncertainty, State warnings of pending recession and fourth quarter of FY16 that is beginning to show declines
in TOT for various reasons. The requested increase acknowledges that TOT revenues are unlikely to shrink below
budgeted FY16 levels while providing flexibility should observed declines continue or other economic forces create a
reduction in traffic and/or prices at local lodging facilities.
Revenue received from property taxes is increased based on current estimates of property tax values. Likewise,
supplemental taxes and property transfer taxes are expected to increase as assessments and real estate transactions
increase. Revenue from franchise fees, criminal fines and other penalties are adjusted based on current receipts
Cost Allocation is requested at a reduced amount based on the State-approved cost plan calculations for non-general
funds and takes into account that federal/State-funded programs have reduced their use County resources. No revenue is
expected from SB90 mandate reimbursement based on information from the State regarding the payment of past claims.
All other revenue streams continue to hold steady or show only modest fluctuation. Payment In-Lieu Taxes (PILT)
authorized by the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (PL 110-343) is budgeted at the amount estimated by the
federal government. The Revenue Stabilization represents funds received from Social Services 1991 Realignment funds.
Transfers in include interest earned from the SDA Camp Project Development fund and unused funding from the
Bridgeport Fire Station budget.
The estimated year end General Fund Balance is requested at an increased amount based on estimates for TOT receipts.
An increase of $260,000 in the General Reserve is needed to meet the minimum required amount.
Salary and benefit adjustments include the Board approved reallocation of the Office Assistant I/II position to the Clerk of
the Board function in this budget rather than the Administration and Human Resources Departments. Appropriations in
the Professional Services line item are requested to continue the preservation efforts for historical, hand-written Board
minutes. The Software line item reflects the annual cost of the MinuteTraq agenda hosting service. Travel and training
lines have been adjusted to ensure each supervisor has sufficient funding to attend specific conferences if desired, and to
account for new Board of Supervisor training.
Work with the Board of Supervisors and specific county departments to develop and implement a strategic plan to
reduce the risk of dead trees to the public infrastructure.
• In coordination with the Auditor’s office and Human Resources/Risk Management department, develop a
streamlined way to process Payroll Action Forms.
• Continue to work with County departments on developing a “paperless” budgeting process.
• Provide training to the new deputy administrative officer to introduce the California legislative environment and
enable a smooth transition into a productive role with the County.
Requested Changes:
Salary and benefit lines are reduced due to the reallocation of the office assistant position to the Clerk of the Board funding
in the Board of Supervisors budget. The acting assignment pay reflects the County Administrative Officer’s role as Acting
Health Officer until a new Department Head is installed and is requested in an amount sufficient through December 2016.
Funding and appropriations are adjusted to the anticipated performance audits that will be conducted this fiscal year.
Standard practice is to request General Contingency at 1-percent of the County’s previous fiscal year’s adopted operating
budget which was $52,319,107.
Hire and train replacements for accounting technician and account clerk positions.
• Adhere to changing Cost Plan regulations imposed by the State Controller’s Office.
• Incorporate software upgrades for the purpose of creating the Adopted Budget.
Requested Changes:
Revenue collected for services provided to the Mariposa County Superior Court and agencies outside of the General Fund
are increased based on the amount of service anticipated to be provided. Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect
Board approved reclassifications in the previous fiscal year. The increase in Memberships is based on the information
received from the member organizations. Professional Services includes the cost of receiving accounting information
about Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) 68 from CALPERS and Other Post Employment Benefit
(OPEB) accounting information from Demsey/Filliger. Minor adjustments in other line items are based on historical trends
and expectations for the coming year.
Purchase Check-21 processing equipment.
• Online bill presentation
• Replace investment software
• Remodel office
Requested Changes:
Office Expense is reduced because the printing of tax bills has been moved to its own line item, “Tax Doc Printing.”
Equipment is increased to allow for the purchase of a Check 21 system, which presents checks to the banks electronically,
and an envelope opening machine to be shared with the Elections division. Minor adjustments to other line items are
based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
Uphold and maintain the County of Mariposa’s Public Service Policy that was adopted with Resolution 98-231.
Requested Changes:
Salaries and benefits now reflect a fully staffed department. Minor adjustments to other line items are based on historical
trends and expectations for the coming year.
Provide responsive legal advice and client service.
• Provide critical assistance to the Board and to County offices to enable them to carry out their policy goals.
• Provide assertive representation in civil litigation and administrative hearings.
• Provide prompt and effective assistance in negotiation and drafting of contracts and other legal documents.
• Continue to be a key member of the County’s leadership team.
Requested Changes:
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the Board approved reclassification. An increase to Professional Services is
requested to retain outside legal counsel to help meet the demand for legal services, particularly as it relates to
guardianship/conservatorship cases. Minor adjustments in other line items are requested based on historical trends and
expectations for the coming year.
Select successful vendor(s) for the administration of the County's Workers' Compensation claims.
• Select a successful vendor for the administration of the County's General Liability claims.
• Transition to a computer-based performance management software system.
• Implement an employee recognition program.
• Implement County-wide management and supervisory training.
• Implement the department's record retention schedule by purging records.
Requested Changes:
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the Board approved reclassification of positions, the reallocation of the Office
Assistant I/II position to the Clerk of the Board function in the Board of Supervisors budget, as well as the Board approved
new allocation of a 0.60 Permanent Part-Time (PPT) Senior Office Assistant position. Professional Services is requested
to increase to allow for an outside vendor to perform a classification study of the Sheriff’s positions and county-wide
clerical positions, and the Board approved performance evaluation system. Negotiation lines are adjusted to reflect actual
costs to address meet and confer issues. Publications is increased for recruitment advertising and for the creation of a
recruitment video. Rents and Leases reflects the contractual increase coming in November 2016 for the Human
Resources office space. Software cost is decreased to only the cost for an online application system. Minor adjustments
in other line items are based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
The department is requesting to increase the allocation of the 0.60 PPT Senior Office Assistant to 0.80 PPT.
Appropriations for the increase in allocation is not included in the Requested Budget pending review of the financial status
of the Recommended Budget.
Research cost of filing Form 700 online.
• Continue to review new software needs for County Clerk functions.
• Remodel office
Requested Changes:
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the Board approved reclassification. Minor adjustments in other line items are
based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
Improve website and voter information.
• Prepare and conduct a successful presidential general election.
• Monitor new voting equipment requirements.
• Remodel office.
Requested Changes:
Minor adjustments are requested based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
Create an inventory system for maintenance products and tools.
• Identify inventory needs of every county building and facility.
• Train staff in specialized areas including HVAC, playground certification, and CAMS software.
• Perform repairs at Mariposa Tennis Courts, Courthouse clock tower, Mariposa Pool, and Auditor’s Office.
• Build a fence at the Yosemite West maintenance yard.
• Continue repairing dry rot on county buildings.
Requested Changes:
Revenue for Facilities Maintenance Services is increased based on expected work at the courthouse, the airport, Yosemite
West and the Yosemite Area Regional Transit System (YARTS) bus stop. Lease-based revenues for county facilities have
been moved from Miscellaneous Revenue to Leases line item for accounting reasons.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the Board approved reorganization. Additionally, to better account for clerical
support, the Senior Office Assistant is requested to be reallocated to the Public Works Administration budget. Extra-Help
and Overtime are adjusted based on anticipated need.
Insurance has been increased based on experience in workers’ compensation claims. Professional Services is requested
to increase to acknowledge the growing number of outside technicians and professionals called upon to perform service
work at County facilities. County Vehicle Expense is increased to reflect actual usage and the expectation that Facilities
Maintenance activity will continue to grow as County facilities age. Utilities is also increased based on a three-year average
of actual utility costs. Minor adjustments in other line items are requested based on historical trends and expectations for
the coming year.Continue to seek out grants and programs to benefit Mariposa County businesses and overall community.
• Increase community awareness regarding the business assistance loan program in order to maximize utilization of
available funds.
• Continue to explore and provide educational and training opportunities for Mariposa County businesses.
• Work with the selected consultant on updating the EVS.
Requested Changes:
Revenues recognize an increase in anticipated revenues from the Disaster Recovery Initiative (DRI) grants for grant
management expenses and the Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) grant awarded again this year. Salaries and benefits reflect
the Board approved reclassification. Professional Services is increased to include services to complete the update of the
EVS. The PG&E Grant line item recognizes as yet unspent grant money that was received in the previous fiscal year for
repairs to the Courthouse clock tower. Minor adjustments in other line items are requested based on historical trends and
expectations for the coming year.
Funding requests from the Mariposa County Arts Council, Northside History Center, the Mining & Mineral Museum,
Mariposa History Center, Fair Parade and the Coulterville Visitor Center are being made in the same amounts as the
previous fiscal year. The Mariposa Visitor Center contract is increased slightly to recognize an increase in the minimum
wage that will go into effect on January 2017 and that will be included in the proposed agreement. The Yosemite
Renaissance and Tourism Bureau line items were increased in the previous fiscal year to cover a prior year shortfall and
are now requested in traditional funding levels. The Board approved funding request to the Mariposa County Resource
Conservation District (MCCRD) Integrated Regional Watershed Management Program (IRWMP) is now included.
Additionally, the funding request for the County Fair is included for Board consideration.
The MCCRD has also made a request for funding of $24,000 to offset the increase in operational expenses that will be
incurred this fiscal year. The Board received an information report on the need for this funding in the previous fiscal year,
but this funding request is not included in the Requested Budget due to time constraints in developing the Recommended
Budget.
Complete and close out all projects under construction in 2015-2016.
• Begin work addressing issues with various fire stations.
• Continue progressing with county bridge priorities.
Requested Changes:
Requested revenues recognize a decrease in anticipated State Transit Improvement Projects (STIP) funding for inspection
services. Fees received from other county departments for engineering services and lot line adjustments are increased
based on prior year receipts and anticipated service demands. The Transfers In line item is also increased to reflect
reimbursement for work to be done on the Coulterville Drainage project.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the Board approved reorganization which included the allocation of a Survey
Technician position. The Out-of-Class line item recognizes the work of an Engineering Technician position performing
Transportation Planning duties. Service lines include a new clothing budget for hats, rain gear and uniforms; a requested
increase for the Small Tools budget for staking equipment, and a request to purchase the remainder of full-station survey
equipment in the Fixed Asset Survey Equipment. Increases in Memberships, Training, and Safety Equipment are intended
to support a new emphasis on safety and professional development including establishing professional organization
exposure for engineers and surveyors. Minor adjustments in other line items are requested based on historical trends and
expectations for the coming year.
Continue to maintain system availability
• Complete the VoIP phone system deployment and user training
• Complete improved backup strategy to include SW&R and Ag Commissioner
• Manage the website redesign effort
• Update department policies and procedures
• Continue succession management to sustain department operations
Requested Changes:
Salaries and benefits recognize a full year of funding for the allocation of a PC Technician that the Board approved in the
previous fiscal year. Communications is reduced to recognize the recent changes on telecommunication systems. Office
expense is increased to include new chairs and backup tape replacement. Professional Services is increased to include a
redesign of the County website. The Department is also requesting to upgrade two servers as fixed assets. Minor
adjustments to other line items are requested based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
Requested transfers include an increase in Yosemite West Maintenance to address significant water and sewer issues, a
request for funding to Fleet Maintenance to cover anticipated shortfalls in revenue, a new contribution to Solid Waste as
revenue is not anticipated to be sufficient to meet operational needs, an increased contribution to Plant Operations to meet
personnel and operational demands in dealing with maintenance issues in our Special Districts, an increased transfer to
the Coulterville Maintenance District for maintenance needs, and a requested increase in the contribution to the Road fund
is based on reduced revenue estimates.
A new requested transfer to the Forest Reserve is requested in order to continue funding the Fire Safe Council and SWIFT
Coordinator because revenue from the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-Determination Act is not anticipated to
reauthorized by the Federal Legislature. Miscellaneous Transfers is reduced as the contribution to Plant Operations is
now budgeted in a separate line item, and this line item now only accounts for a requested contribution to the Local Area
Formation Commission (LAFCO). The contributions to Senior Nutrition (C-1 C-2 & Restaurant) and Senior Service funds
are based on anticipated available federal revenue and projected year-end fund balances.
Improve conviction rates and provide more consistent and appropriate sentencing through the use of the vertical
prosecution unit.
• Reduce the trauma to survivors and witnesses of crime through crisis intervention, by helping victims and
witnesses cope and navigate through the criminal justice system, and by assisting with referral to local resources.
• Continue to provide professional assistance to survivors and witnesses of crime.
Requested Changes:
The District Attorney’s Office is anticipating the award of grant money that will fund a portion of the salaries and benefits
for the following positions: Victim Witness Coordinator, Extra-Help Victim Witness Advocate, Victim Witness Advocate,
Deputy District Attorney, Extra-Help Senior Office Assistant and an Extra-Help Criminal Investigator. Grant funds are also
anticipated to cover a professional contract with Mountain Crisis Services and other costs associated with providing
vertical prosecution services including insurance and office expenses. This budget has a zero net county cost.
Funding is requested to reimburse Grand Jury members for attending training sessions and using their personal vehicles.
The decrease in Transfer In revenue represents funding from AB109 (Fund 432) that is no longer available and now only
represents funding from realignment funding designated for this purpose (Fund 437).
Increase the number of families receiving support.
• Increase the reliability of child support payments to families.
• Expand methods to assist non-custodial parents in meeting obligations.
• Provide consistently high quality customer service.
• Work cooperatively with the Court and other county agencies to meet mutual goals.
• Continually improve standings in the federal performance measurements.
Requested Changes:
Child Support Services has been combined with Merced Child Support Services to allow for a more efficient regional
approach. Adjustments to salaries and benefits reflect that the County no longer has its own director and the Board
approved reclassification. The Professional Services line is requesting an increase for a process server and a possible
partnership with another agency for special projects to increase collections. The Regionalization Memorandum Of
Understanding (MOU) line item refers to miscellaneous expenses—these are essentially available funds for which there is
not yet a designated use and is used to balance the budget with allocated revenues. The Equipment line is increased for
the purchase of a new color printer and scanner. The Training & Seminars line item is also increased to allow for
development opportunities that are beneficial for staff and the County. Minor adjustments to other line items are requested
based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year. This budget has no net county cost.
See that justice is done and that criminal laws are fully and fairly enforced.
• Continue to work toward implementing a record retention / archive project to include scanning old cases into digital
form to greatly reduce the need for storage space.
• Expend the deputy district attorney classification to level IV to increase our ability to recruit attorneys for long-term
employment and promote stability in the office.
• Continue to train and promote professionalism among staff by implementing additional training and continuing
education through the California District Attorneys Association (CDAA).
Requested Changes:
Revenues are adjusted based on available grant funding. The most notable changes are the end of the Drug Court grant,
new revenue tied to civil penalties related to the Business and Professions Code 17206 (“Unfair Competition”). Salaries
and benefits are adjusted to reflect the Board approved reclassification. Longevity pay is reduced because a lower number
of employees are eligible. Additional funding is requested for training due to a number of new employees being hired.
Reduce the trauma to survivors and witnesses of crime through crisis intervention, by helping victims and
witnesses cope with and navigate through the criminal justice system, and by assisting with referral to local
resources.
• Continue to provide comprehensive professional assistance to survivors and witnesses of crime.
Requested Changes:
Grant revenues are increased based on information received from the federal government. Adjustments to salaries and
benefits reflect the department’s request to increase the allocation of the existing Victim Witness Advocate position from
0.80 Permanent Part-Time to Full Time and with adding another 0.80 Permanent Part-Time Victim Witness Advocate
position. Minor adjustments to other line items are requested based on historical trends and expectations for the coming
year. This budget has no net county cost.
Complete the digital upgrade to the Sheriff’s Emergency 911 Dispatch Center.
• Implement mobile data terminals (MDT units) in Sheriff Deputy patrol vehicles for Computer Aided Dispatch
(CAD), mapping applications and police reporting programs.
• Working with the Mariposa County School District and the Mariposa County High School to introduce a Police
Science accredited education course (CTE).
Requested Changes:
Revenues remain relatively constant except for decreases in funding from Supplemental Law Enforcement (SLESF) and
the Drug Enforcement Task Force Grant (Fund 444). SLESF funds are now in their own line rather than being included in
Transfers In which was previously under Other Financing Sources / Transfers In.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the most recent negotiations and benefit rates, the additional Deputy Sheriff
position that was approved by the Board in the previous fiscal year, the Board approved temporary over-hires due to
injuries, and the Board approved reclassification. The Extra-Help RCCP line item accounts for expenses related to training
new Deputy Recruits and is offset with RCCP funding. Professional Services includes towing expenses, cleaning services,
psychological exams, and K-9 training; it is requested to increase with an offsetting decrease in the Maintenance of
Buildings line item. The Transfer Out – Vehicles represents funding to help purchase replacement vehicles this fiscal year
that do have sufficient replacement value accumulated, and this new funding request is offset with a reduction in fuel
expense. Minor adjustments in other line item are based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
Continue to maintain of Mariposa County’s navigable waterways in low water level conditions.
• Maintain staffing to continue public safety of Mariposa County’s navigable waterways.
Requested Changes:
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the most recent negotiations and benefit rates. The Insurance line item is
decreased based on existing workers’ compensation claims and the removal of claims aging past seven years. No fixed
assets are requested this fiscal year.
Successful completion of the Jail Addition Project.
• Successful completion and installation of the new jail HVAC system.
• Development of a permanent auxiliary water storage source to support the jail facility during an emergency and/or
interruption of standard water services
Requested Changes:
Revenues are increased for a variety of reasons. The Transfer In line includes an increase from the Community
Corrections AB 109 (Fund 432) based on available funding to partially offset the cost of two jail officer positions and the
effect parolees could have on the jail population. Additional funds from the Community Corrections AB 109 Fund are
requested to be transferred in to help pay for the new HVAC system. Other revenue increases include the SSI
Recoupment Program, which is higher due to an aging jail population. A new Transfer In line item has been established to
account for Supplemental Law Enforcement (SLESF). The State Criminal Alien Assistance Program (SCAAP) funds are
decreased based on the State’s restrictions on illegal alien detentions.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the most recent negotiations and benefit rates. Overtime is increased due to
vacancies. The Insurance line item is increased based on specific claim experience for Workers’ Compensation and
Liabilities. Building maintenance is requesting an increase to complete previously deferred work on the HVAC system,
plumbing repair, the development of water storage and replacement of all six cell block skylights. Medical and laboratory is
increased based on historical trends and an aging jail population. The fixed asset jail office A/C / heater line is increased to
accommodate HVAC work and the increase in this line item is offset by additional Community Corrections AB 109 funds.
Minor adjustments in other line items are requested based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
Continue to recruit and hire Extra-Help Probation Corrections Officers to fulfill the staffing needs of the juvenile
hall.
• Reduce juvenile hall costs by using alternatives to incarceration for youth, when deemed appropriate, to hold them
accountable while protecting the community.
Requested Changes:
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the most recent negotiations and benefit rates. Minor adjustments in other line
items are requested based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
Decrease probation violations by applying rehabilitative services and appropriate supervision levels targeted at
criminogenic risk and needs.
• Continue to improve and enhance jail alternative programs for lower risk offenders.
• Provide programming opportunities and educational classes to jail inmates.
Requested Changes:
Increased revenues from the Juvenile Justice Crime Prevention Act (JJCPA) Fund (351) represent the amount allocated
by the State for this program, which offsets the salary of a Deputy Probation Officer. No funding from the Wrap-Around
program is requested this fiscal year as allowable uses from this funding source managed by the Human Services
Department have been declining in recent years. Funding from the drug abuse grant is reduced based on available grant
resources.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the most recent negotiations and benefit rates, the Board approved
reclassification, and a reallocation of positions due to grant funding resources. The Insurance line item is reduced based
on old claims that are no longer considered in calculating premiums. Minor adjustments in other line items are requested
based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
The sub-budget unit (001-0224-535) is for the Juvenile Justice Crime Prevention Act (JJCPA) program and reflects the
salary and benefits associated with a Deputy Probation Officer assigned to this program.
Completion of Fire Department Five Year Strategic Plan.
• Provide training and education opportunities for all members.
• Complete the County Emergency Operation Plan (EOP).
Requested Changes:
Assistance by Hire revenue is increased based on recent actuals. Fire warden review revenue is reduced based on lower
demand for services. Fire Department miscellaneous revenues are reduced based on actual receipts from the previous
fiscal year.
Extra-Help is adjusted based on prior year expenses and accounts for the Assistant Fire Chief and Division Chief. The
Insurance line item is increased based on Workers’ Compensation claims used in calculating the charges. The
maintenance of buildings line is reduced to help offset other costs and in anticipation of use County Service Area #3 funds
for larger maintenance/remodeling costs with fire stations. The CAL FIRE contract line is increased in anticipation of an
Amador program for one fire station.
The Sub-Budget (001-0228-542) is offset by the Emergency Management Planning (EMP) grant and funds an Office
Assistant I/II position and an Emergency Planner position. The Equipment line item represents grant funding available for
minor equipment purchases.
Provide 2 continuing education workshops per year
• Monitor new and emerging agricultural pests which might impact our agricultural industry
• Implement GIS mapping of invasive noxious weed species throughout the County and continue to work with our
various agency partners and stakeholders on integrated weed management and control programs.
• Implement the US Private Forestry Grant for the control of A- and B-rated weed species in the county as well as
control of yellow starthistle and tocalote in the Merced River Canyon.
• Implement weights & measures inspection programs to ensure a level playing field for businesses and consumers
• Work with State and Federal legislators on increased funding for USDA/APHIS/Wildlife Services, the Land
Conservation (Williamson) Act, marketplace equity and consumer protection (Weights & Measures), invasive
species programs, and invasive noxious weed management funding as program funding decreases.
Requested Changes:
The Agriculture Commission – State revenue is increased based on the State Budget and reimbursable program
expenses. Revenue from Fees and Sale of Supplies is increased to reflect a higher number of anticipated pesticide
registrations.
Salaries and benefits reflect a fully funded Deputy Agricultural Commissioner position to support Department succession
planning efforts, that the Board approved in the previous fiscal year. Increases in the integrated weed management budget
are allocated for expenses related to the Merced River Canyon Invasive Weed Program. Minor adjustments in other line
items are requested based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
Commence 10-year General Plan Review and comprehensive General Plan Implementation project.
• Complete processing of General Plan Housing and Safety Element Updates.
• Complete Mariposa Transportation Center Feasibility Study; commence Phase II work.
• Commence processing of Zoning Ordinance amendments to implement the Catheys Valley Community Plan
• Complete work on the GIS Zoning Layer Map (GIS staff); obtain Board of Supervisors approval.
• Obtain Board approval for Planning Department Fee Schedule Update.
• Work with the Treasurer’s office to enable applicants to pay by credit card.
• Establish Planning Department Office policies.
Requested Changes:
The permitting system line item is a new line for building and health permit plan check fees and is budgeted based on
actual revenues received in the prior year. The Silvertip transfer in concludes the Silvertip Resort Environmental Impact
Report (Fund 349) and allows for reconciliation of staff time with any residual funds to be returned to the developer. The
Seventh-Day Adventist Camp Wawona and Explorer Cabins Transfers In are to allow for reimbursement of staff time on
those projects. The Planning Department portion of the Disaster Recovery Initiative (DRI) grant has been completed and
no revenue is requested this fiscal year. Likewise, all work associated with the Community Corrections program is
completed and no revenue is requested.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the new GIS Specialist position that the Board approved in the previous fiscal
year. The requested increase in Miscellaneous Expense is to help pay for two anticipated position recruitments. Office
expense is increased to include print management services for a plotter. In the General Plan sub-budget, professional
services is increased to include consultant services on the 10-year General Plan review and to evaluate and select a costeffective
sustainable housing program. Minor adjustments in other line items are requested based on historical trends and
expectations for the coming year.
Continue recruitment and retention efforts for volunteer firefighters.
• Continue offering stipends for training and response.
• Support Volunteer Coordinator efforts.
Requested Changes:
The Fire Safer Grant revenue is requested in the amount of the grant award. The grant funds a volunteer coordinator to
help recruit, train and retain volunteer fire fighters. The budget has no net county cost.
Continue the division’s success in meeting all fiscal, administrative and budgetary requirements and deadlines.
• Achieve greater utilization and integration of management and accounting software
• Develop and implement policies and procedures for contract management and general administration.
• Create procedures manuals for fiscal/administrative staff providing detailed instructions for recurring tasks.
Requested Changes:
Revenue received from reimbursable services performed by Pubic Works Administration staff is increased based on
estimated billable administrative time to be performed for other Public Works divisions. Increases in salaries and benefits
include the hiring of a new Deputy Director, a new Executive Assistant (reclassification), the Board approved
reclassification of the Administrative Analyst position, increasing the Accountant position from Permanent Part-Time to full
time, the Board approved reallocation of a Senior Office Assistant position from the Facilities division, and an Accounting
Technician being moved from the Fleet division. No Extra-Help is requested this fiscal year as this line item accounted for
an Extra-Help Deputy Director position last fiscal year and the full-time position has now been filled.
Insurance line item is reduced based on specific claims experience. Office Expense and Building Rents & Leases are
increased to accommodate additional staff in the office. Professional Services is for Cascade Software Systems to develop
and provide training for the unused modules of the existing accounting software used by the Department. The Publications
and Legal notices line item is decreased because of a diminished demand for recruitment advertisements. The Software
line item is for task management software. Minor adjustments in other line items are requested based on historical trends
and expectations for the coming year.
The department is requesting an additional Administrative Analyst, an Administrative Technician position, and a
Transportation Planner position. The appropriations for these positions are not included in the Requested/Recommended
Budget, per budget instructions and pending the financial status of Recommended Budget.
Appropriations in the Transit Contract represent the Board approved increase in the YARTS contract in the previous fiscal
year. Funding for this contract is from the Local Transportation fund.
Increase and improve community partnership capacity to increase involvement in community health collaborative.
• Pursue opportunities to improve the medical health impact of drought on the community and facilitate education
about climate effects, preparing the community to adapt to increased air pollution events, extreme weather events,
wildfire, and drought with a focus on medical and health.
Requested Changes:
State allocation and grant revenues are adjusted based upon preliminary estimates from the State. A new SNAP-ED
(Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Education) Grant is added to FY 16/17 Budget. The Ebola line item is
reduced from last fiscal year as this is a carry-over from FY 15/16 funding. Funding from the Fire Department’s Support
and Aid for Everyone (SAFE) is now correctly budgeted as a transfer in. Revenue received from Vehicle License Fees
Realignment is increased based on a restructuring of the distribution of these funds. Funding received from Sales Tax
Realignment is decreased to more accurately reflect the new realignment revenue stream. Transfers in line items from the
various grant programs are adjusted to match current grant awards and anticipated operational costs of these programs.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the Board-approved reclassification, a new Permanent Part-Time
Development Services Technician position approved by the Board in the previous fiscal year and a fully-funded Registered
Nurse position. The SNAP-ED grant provides funding for a position; these funds are appropriated here while the
classification of the position will be brought to the Board at a later date. Extra-Help line items are requested to increase to
account for additional clerical support and clinic assistance. Professional Services accounts for the recently mandated
Electronic Medical Record System. Medical Professional Services represents the costs for a contracted Medical Health
Officer due to the vacancy of the Health Officer. Minor adjustments in other line items are based on grant allocations,
historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
Strengthening services and supports to the community through the addition of new staff and leadership, providing
effective training and solidifying systems to support programs
• Continue development a new Quality Assurance Team to oversee compliance and quality of services and use
data effectively to manage and guide program efforts
• Develop children’s services to effectively serve children in the Child Welfare Program as per new state
requirements (CCR)
Requested Changes:
Substance Abuse Mental Health Services Act (SAMHSA), Medi-Cal and Early and Period Screening, Diagnosis and
Treatment (EPSDT) Medi-Cal revenues are adjusted based on allocation information received from the State and
anticipated. Medicare revenue is requested due to the Department’s ability to handle some of this caseload rather than
contracting it all Patient Fees and Other Insurance revenue line items are reimbursement from clients and third party
insurance companies for Mental Health services that are now allowable under Health Care Reform guidelines and are
adjusted based on current receipts. Fees for Conservator activities are increased based on observed demand and some
new conservators. Transfer In from Mental Health Realignment is based on revenue projections from the State and is
requested in an amount to meet anticipated service demands. The Transfer In from Wraparound Fund 422 is no longer
utilized as there is no longer a demand for this service.
Salaries and benefits include the Social Worker Supervisors approved by the Board in the previous year and additional
Nurse Practitioner hours. Professional services is increased to include contracts for services not provided by county
employees. The contract for inpatient services line is increased due to more hospitalizations in the previous year. The
Institutions for Mental Disease (IMD) contracts line is reduced because of the elimination of Utah placements. Training and
private vehicle use lines are requesting an increase to accommodate the training needs of new staff.
The transfer out to Human Services Administration has increased due to staff reallocations. Minor adjustments in other
line items are requested based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year. The net County cost represents
the State-mandated contribution.
Implement program evaluation tools and strategies necessary to report on program outcomes and successes.
• Develop additional services for North County based on articulated community needs.
Requested Changes:
The Drug Court Grant revenue is decreased because that grant program is ending in July 2016. The transfer in from
Alcohol & Drug Prevention (Fund 380) is the available funding from funds 380 and 384 for alcohol and drug prevention
programs. The Transfers In - Realignment revenue is budgeted in an amount to meet anticipated service demands.
The food line item is now being used to provide a snack to the Boys & Girls Club. Professional services is decreased
because the end of the Drug Court grant also terminates associated agreements. Client incentives, drug testing, training
and transfer out lines for Probation and the District Attorney’s Office are also decreased because of the end of the Drug
Court grant. The Drug Inpatient Echoes line is increased because of a greater number of referrals for that service. The
homeless subsidy line is for temporary homeless assistance. The transfer out to Human Services Administration is
decreased based on the reallocation of staff. Minor adjustments in other line items are requested based on historical
trends and expectations for the coming year. This budget has no net county cost.
Unroll Continuum of Care Reform efforts to include Resource Family Approval, Foster Parent Recruitment and
Retention, and Child and Family Teaming efforts.
• Strengthen Adult Services Program to include better data tracking, implementation of housing supports and
improving community engagement.
Requested Changes:
The Employment and Community Services budget (001-0528) was partitioned out from the Social Services budget for this
request, causing several items to appear to have significant declines. State and federal revenues, including realignment
funds, remain relatively stable but are instead shown now in two budgets instead of one for tracking purposes.
Allocations are also divided between the two budgets resulting in adjustments to salaries and benefits. Adult protective
services and foster parent training are increased to meet the demands of new state mandates. Appropriations for Child
Abuse Prevention, Intervention and Treatment (CAPIT) are being requested at a higher level this year due to a change in
our contract with the service provider. The In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Maintenance of Effort (MOE) line item is
calculated by the State using various factors including hours authorized to recipients of services and the hourly wage paid
to the providers and is increased in this budget. The Child Welfare Services (CWS) direct client service item is increased
to include agreements with Madera County Adoption Assistance and Working Choices.
Cost allocation is reduced based on a decreased demand for services from other departments within the County. Software
is increased for the purchase of the Adult Protective Services (APS) database. The decrease to the Transfer Out to
Human Services is based on the calculation of the staff position allocations and cost sharing to the supporting budget
units. The Contingency line represents available funding for unanticipated operational needs. Minor adjustments to other
line items are requested based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year. This budget unit has no net
county cost.
The Miscellaneous Revenue lines represent various repayment categories for Assistance Programs. The Transfers In
lines reflect funding from State, federal and Realignment sources and are budgeted based on current caseload demands.
Minor adjustments to services/supplies are requested based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
This budget has no net county cost.
Development of a Marketing and Outreach Plan to ensure programs and events are successfully communicated
to the community
• Build efficiency and effectiveness in contract and project management
• Development of a technology replacement and vehicle replacement plan
• Development of a new employee orientation for HSD employees and a staff development plan to address all
training and professional development needs of new and continuing staff.
Requested Changes:
Miscellaneous revenues include refunds from the Board of Equalization and a small grant from the Department of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD). Funding received through transfers from other Human Services divisions are adjusted
based on the level of administrative/overhead support provided to the respective divisions. Wrap Around (Fund 422) has
been discontinued.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to include a reallocation of management and clerical staff, new positions approved by
the Board during the previous fiscal year, and Board-approved reclassifications. Memberships are increased to include
professional associations for conservators. Office expense is increased based on actual usage. Professional services are
increased and include agreements for the General Plan Housing Element and investigative services. Purchased services
is also increased and accounts for janitorial, software security, and building maintenance needs. Utilities are requested to
decrease based on anticipated usage and cost allocation is declined based on decreasing demand for services from other
County departments. Equipment is increased to provide for new workstations. Software is decreased because it no longer
includes money for the AS400 replacement budgeted in the prior year. Training is increased to include additional trainings
and conferences for staff.
The fixed asset line for vehicles is increased to replace three vehicles. The fixed asset line for the air conditioner unit is
increased to prepare for future replacement. Reimbursements from other Human Services General Fund budgets are
included in the Intrafund Transfers line items and are adjusted based on the calculated ratio of staff in those units. The
Department is funding a contingency for unanticipated service demands. This budget has no net county cost.
Requested revenue is based on federal allocations for this program. Extra-Help is increased to accommodate anticipated
needs based on recent trends. Minor adjustments in other line items are requested based on historical trends and
expectations for the coming year.
Revenues and expenses for this budget, were previously accounted for in the Social Services budget are now being
accounted for separately for ease of accounting and reporting requirements. This budget has no net county cost.
Provide action oriented programming with positive community outcomes.
• Continue to partner with community and governmental organizations.
• Establish a branch library in Catheys Valley.
Requested Changes:
State revenue for libraries is being budgeted in addition to the State literacy grants. Increases in the Professional Services
line item is for literary services associated with the state grant. Minor adjustments in other line items are requested based
on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
Livestock and Natural Resources Program - continue to develop relevant educational and extension programs
addressing the issues identified by the community; monitor forage production on rangelands; grant proposals for
research and trials pertinent to livestock production.
• Master Gardener Program – train on drought related issues; continue to offer fire-safe workshops; build on public
outreach.
• 4-H Youth Development Program – increase enrollment; add new clubs in the Greeley Hill and El Portal areas;
initiate a day-camp program for K-3rd Grades to promote the program; add new projects (biking, hiking,
automotive, etc.).
Requested Changes:
Copier expense is increased to reflect the cost of a new quarterly newsletter from the Farm Advisor. Minor adjustments in
other line items are requested based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
The Department is requesting that the Extra-Help Master Gardener position be increased to a Permanent Part-Time
Master Gardener position. The appropriations for this allocation are not included in the budget, pending the financial
status of the Recommended Budget.
Apply for grants including the CMCAA Funding for our day camp scholarship, the California Department of Public
Health’s California Kids’ Plates Program Child Safety Distribution for life jackets and helmets, and U.S. Tennis
Association Funding for resurfacing the Mariposa Tennis Courts.
• Coordinate with other departments and community agencies to utilize resources in creative ways to create
additional parks, recreational programs and community events such as art and theater classes for children ages 7-
12, free movie nights, theater productions and family fun fairs.
• Improve existing recreational facilities.
• Provide advanced training to staff to enhance programs and services offered. Offer First Aid and CPR training to
all employees, provide conflict resolution training, and hold weekly inservices to debrief staff on ongoing or
potential issues.
Requested Changes:
Day Camp Fee revenues are decreased out of an abundance of caution in over estimating revenue. Salaries and benefits
are adjusted to reflect the Board approved reorganization. The Equipment line item includes funds for a computer and a
public address (PA) system. Minor adjustments in other line items are requested based on historical trends and
expectations for the coming year.
No Interest earnings are requested this year based on estimated cash balance. The amount of funding requested to be
transferred out to the specific programs is based on available funding. The reduced request for funds in the Roads Article
8 Section 99402 line item reflects a lower anticipated beginning balance than the prior year. All other lines have been
reviewed with no other changes requested.
Revenues from interest earnings are not expected this year based on the estimated cash balance and the beginning
balance is reduced based on projects completed in the prior year. All available funds are requested to be transferred out
to the Transit fund.
Revenue estimates are based on funding received from the State Rural Planning Assistance (SRPA) program and the
State Transportation Improvement Program: Planning, Programming, and Monitoring Program (STIP-PPM) and are based
on allocation information received from the State as well as current rollover estimate. Transfers In includes funding from
the Local Transportation Commission for Unmet Needs.
The Contracts line item is reduced to account for projects that have been completed. Reimbursement for staff time in
Public Works Administration budget for work on transportation projects and in the Engineering/Surveyor budget for
engineering services on STIP projects are budgeted in the In-County Services line item. The increase in the Administration
line item is to account for general administrative overhead services provided by Public Works administration staff to this
budget unit. The Transfers Out line item represents funding for the Transportation audit in the Audits budget. Minor
adjustments in other line items are requested based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
The Transfers In from the LTF is constant as funds continue to accumulate in this account.. Appropriations are adjusted
based on available revenue.
Complete West Whitlock and Triangle Road construction projects
• Emphasize and dedicate efforts to ditch maintenance along all paved County roads
• Continue to identify and prioritize maintenance grading on County-maintained, soft-surface roadways
• Take appropriate actions to mitigate dead and dying trees along County roadways and critical infrastructure
• Continue Bridge Maintenance Program efforts
• Investigate possible efficiencies of using contracting for roadway and fog line striping
• Continue employee safety and training efforts
Requested Changes:
Revenues received from various Highway User Taxes are budgeted based on estimates from the State. There is a
significant decrease in HUTA Section 2103 revenue due to reduced tax collections at the State level. The Road
Department Services line item represents Road staff time on the maintenance of Zone of Benefits (ZOB) and is decreased
based on prior year collections. The Miscellaneous Revenue line represents fees received from Road Permits and is
decreased based on prior year receipts. Transportation Permits is revenue received from permits issued for the movement
of large items, such as mobile homes, over county roads. Funding transferred in from the Local Transportation Claim
(Fund 031) is requested in an amount based on available funding from that fund. Due to the overall reduction in State
revenue, the Department is requesting an increase in the General Fund contribution in order to maintain existing services.
The Beginning Balance is decreased based on year-end estimates.
Adjustments to salaries and benefits reflect an unfunded but allocated Maintenance Worker III position. Insurance is
increased based on claims experience for the past seven years. Maintenance of Equipment is reduced based on actual
needs in prior years. Memberships includes a requested increase for inclusion in the International Municipal Sign
Association. Professional Services is reduced based on existing agreements. Rents and Leases of Equipment is reduced
based on actual needs in prior years. The Materials line items for road repairs and the sign shop are both reduced to
minimal levels based on the reduction in revenue. The Administrative Fee line item is increased based on anticipated
demand for administrative services from Public Works Administration. All other lines have been reviewed and minor
adjustments in other line items are requested based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
Appropriations are requested in an amount that corresponds with available revenue. No requests for funding had been
received at the time the budget was prepared.
The revenue from court fees is adjusted based on receipts received in the previous fiscal year. The appropriation for books
is adjusted based on available revenue and in an amount sufficient to continue the subscription services at the Library and
the Jail.Appropriations are requested in amounts that correspond with anticipated revenue and estimated administrative costs.
Revenue from Fire Assessments is based on the calculation of the number of properties to be assessed. The Transfers In
amount represents the County’s contribution and this amount comes from the Tobacco Settlement fund. The
Miscellaneous Expense line item represents funding for capital improvements to fire stations and is based on available
revenue. The Fire Assessment Services line item accounts for reimbursing the Auditor and Tax Collector for their staff
time and associated costs with collecting and managing the fire assessment. The requested funding in the Transfers Out –
Debt Service line item is the payment on the fire engines, while the Transfers Out – Fund 520 represents funding for
maintenance/remodeling of fire stations.
Revenues are adjusted based on current assessment receipts. Appropriations are budgeted in the Fire Protection
Services line item based on available funds.
Miscellaneous Revenue represents the payment from the Merced Irrigation District. The Loan Repayments line item
reflects payment from the Coulterville Service Area sewer bonds. The Office Technician I line item is for possible staff time
provided in preparing Water Agency agendas and minutes. Remaining appropriations are requested in the Professional
Services line item.
Revenue remains stable. Appropriations in the Professional Services line item are for reimbursable work provided by
Facilities Maintenance as well as any possible outside repair service.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts. Because of deferred maintenance needs the department is again
requesting a loan from the General Fund, which is budgeted in the Transfer In line item. The water equipment
maintenance line item includes replacement of six broken water meters, a new meter reader (a cost split with Yosemite
West), installation of an emergency electrical transfer switch at the well, and miscellaneous other spare parts. Professional
services on the water side includes the replacement of twelve main water valves, an environmental compliance cost
estimate to support a Coulterville Water System upgrade grant proposal, plant operations staff time and a small amount
for emergency repairs.
The maintenance line item related to sewer includes the repair of a collapsed culvert drain, replacement of the genset at
the plant, installation of a new flow meter at the plant, a maintenance lift station, spare pumps and motors, and
miscellaneous other materials. Professional services on the sewer side is decreased based on existing contracts and
anticipated plant operations staff time.
Miscellaneous Revenue represents money received from leasing county owned property for cattle grazing and is increased
to recognize the new Board approved lease agreement. The appropriations for operating expenses are requested in
amounts that correspond with available revenue and estimated service demands.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual collections. The Transfer In line reflects funds from the Don Pedro Utility
Capital Fund 532 to offset costs associated with Plant Operations staff and maintenance of equipment. The Professional
Services line item is reduced to reflect the anticipated costs for the completion of the rate study, reimbursement to Plant
Operations for staff time, and funding for possible emergency repair needs from an outside contractor. The Administrative
Services line is reduced based on anticipated charges for administrative overhead staff time. The Special Fees line item is
represents charges by the State Water Resources Control Board.
Revenue and appropriation adjustments are based on prior year collections, the estimated beginning balance and
anticipated expenses.
Revenues are adjusted based on prior year actual receipts and estimated year-end fund balance. Various service and
supply appropriations are adjusted to correspond with available revenue and anticipated service demands. The
Rents/Leased Equipment line item reflects rental of an 80-foot man-lift to for the possible need of repairing/replacing street
lights. All other items have been reviewed and adjusted based on historical trends and expectations for the budget year.
Remaining appropriations are requested in the Professional Services line item.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts. Appropriations are adjusted based on available funding and
includes sufficient funding in the Professional Services line for the consultant to assist with the Proposition 218 process.
Funding from the Mariposa Pines Utility Capital fund is requested to offset the cost of equipment including a repair to the
pond levee and walkway, installation of emergency electric auto switch gear, purchase of a trough heater and other related
parts and equipment found in the Maintenance of Equipment line item. Reimbursement for Public Works staff for
maintenance work is reflected in the Professional Services line item. A new aerator, which was requested but not
purchased in the prior year, is being requested in the fixed asset category. No funding is being requested to be
Transferred Out to the Utility Capital Fund this fiscal year. All other lines have been reviewed and minor adjustments are
requested based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
Revenues are adjusted to reflect current collection levels. Appropriations are adjusted based on the amount of available
funding, with the Professional Services line item representing costs associated with the bulk item pick up and pine needle
cleanup programs. The Contracts line item is reflective of the contract with Total Waste for waste disposal services.
Revenue amounts are adjusted based on actual amounts collected in the prior fiscal year, current interest rates, and
anticipated delinquencies. The Transfers In line item requests a General Fund contribution for water and sewer
maintenance and equipment as outlined below.
Professional services in the roads portion of the budget is increased to reflect Facilities Division staff time. The snow
plowing line is significantly reduced based on recent trends while still mindful of potential needs. The maintenance of roads
is reduced based on expected needs and now reflects Public Works Administration time.
The Maintenance of Equipment line in the sewer portion of the budget includes sewer sludge removal, repair of the
diffusers, expanding the spray field, spare pumps and motors, and the Return-Activated Sludge (RAS) project. The
Laboratory Expense line item is increased for additional process control requirements. Professional services is reduced
and includes emergency contract services, an agreement with Pinnacle and Plant Operations staff time. The Equipment
line item includes a power sewer auger, a small water tank for head works and other small equipment items. Training &
Seminars is increased to allow for wastewater training for the Utilities Manager.
The Maintenance of Equipment line in the water portion of this budget includes the replacement of two fire hydrants,
abandonment of two wells, installation of well #9 pump block, purchase of a new water meter reader (cost split with
Coulterville Service Area Fund 314), emergency repairs and spare parts. Professional services is reduced and includes an
agreement with Pinnacle, Plant Operations staff time, emergency repairs and miscellaneous small services.
Minor adjustments in other line items are requested based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
The Beginning fund balance and interest earned make up the available residual funding being requested in the
Unclassified line item for use by the Sheriff for law enforcement purposes related to illegal drug investigations.
Revenue from Equitable Sharing is the County’s share of revenue received from the Federal and State asset seizures.
The Federal Government has ended this practice and no revenue is budgeted. The Beginning Fund balance and Interest
earned make up the available residual funding that is requested in the Unclassified line item for use by the Sheriff for law
enforcement purposes related to criminal investigation activities.

Revenue from the State Community Based Child Abuse Prevention Grant is based on allocation information received from
the State. No funding from the Realignment Social Services Fund is requested this year, as there is sufficient funding to
carry out the anticipated program activities. The requested amount in the Family Resource Programs is for child abuse
prevention activities, while the Transfers Out line item represents funding transferred to the Children’s Trust Fund (#374)
for Child Abuse Prevention Council activities.
Revenue is requested based upon allocation schedules distributed by the State. The Transfer Out to the Sheriff’s
operating budget helps to offset the cost of two Deputy Sheriff positions and is reduced from the previous fiscal year based
on the State’s funding allocation. The Transfer Out to the Jail and District Attorney are based on State allocations and
available funding.
No grant revenue is anticipated in this fiscal year. No Cost Allocation is budgeted as this program has little to no activity
and the Construction line item reflects available grant funds for qualified housing rehabilitation projects.
Host an open house in Coulterville to introduce North County residents to services that can be provided currently
and assess further unmet needs.
? Develop additional services for North County based on articulated community needs
Requested Changes:
Grant revenue is adjusted based on estimated anticipated grant funding to be received this fiscal year. Salary line items
represent county employees but are in categories that correspond to the reporting requirements of the grant.
Appropriations for services and supplies are adjusted based on the level of grant funding and estimated service demands.
The fund continues to be budgeted using the residual fund balance. The Transfer Out is for the reestablished Employment
and Community Services budget (001-0528) to help with related projects. All remaining funding is budgeted in the
subcontractor line.
The General Fund contribution is requested to increase to keep pace with service demands and the costs of providing
these services. Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the Board approved reclassification. Maintenance of
equipment is increased for repairs to an aging ADA door opener. Memberships include the National Association of
Nutritional and Aging Services Programs. County events is increased based on higher rental rates at the fairgrounds for
the annual Senior Health Fair and Expo. Equipment is increased to purchase a new laptop for staff. All other lines have
been reviewed and minor adjustments are requested based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
The Department is requesting a reorganization and any personnel adjustments will be considered in a separate Board
agenda item pending review by Human Resources staff.
Increase to 7,400 meals delivered or served in a secure social setting through continued community outreach.
Requested Changes:
Revenues in this budget are primarily from State and federal sources based on estimated units of service provided and the
prevailing reimbursement rate. Small donation receipts are also included as well as a General Fund contribution that is
requested to increase to keep pace with the cost and demand of providing these services. Salaries and benefits lines are
adjusted to reflect the Board approved reclassification. Across the C-1, C-2 and Restaurant portions of the budget are a
requested increase in Extra Help for a Kitchen Assistant to compliment the efforts of existing staff and volunteers,
additional requested funds for raw and catered food due to rising prices and a portion of anticipated costs for a new laptop
in the Equipment line. All other lines have been reviewed and minor adjustments are requested based on historical trends
and expectations for the coming year.
The Department is requesting a reorganization and any personnel adjustments will be considered in a separate Board
agenda item pending review by Human Resources staff.
Increase to 7,400 meals delivered or served in a secure social setting through continued community outreach.
Requested Changes:
Revenues in this budget are primarily from State and federal sources based on estimated units of service provided and the
prevailing reimbursement rate. Small donation receipts are also included as well as a General Fund contribution that is
requested to increase to keep pace with the cost and demand of providing these services. Salaries and benefits lines are
adjusted to reflect the Board approved reclassification. Across the C-1, C-2 and Restaurant portions of the budget are a
requested increase in Extra Help for a Kitchen Assistant to compliment the efforts of existing staff and volunteers,
additional requested funds for raw and catered food due to rising prices and a portion of anticipated costs for a new laptop
in the Equipment line. All other lines have been reviewed and minor adjustments are requested based on historical trends
and expectations for the coming year.
The Department is requesting a reorganization and any personnel adjustments will be considered in a separate Board
agenda item pending review by Human Resources staff.Continue to provide intervention services to the school district to reduce truancy rates.
• Continue to provide intervention services that help reduce suspension/expulsion of problematic students.
Requested Changes:
Revenue is requested based on preliminary State allocations. Appropriations are requested to be transferred out to the
Probation operating budget in a corresponding amount to partially offset the cost of the Deputy Probation Officer
responsible for this program.
Revenue is requested based on the availability of federal grants and a transfer in from the Mental Health Services Act
Fund (410). Appropriations are requested based on the availability of revenues and demand for services.
The transfer to the Sheriff’s operating budget represents funding for one Sergeant, four Deputy Sheriffs, and one
Dispatcher. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is requested in an amount necessary to balance the fund.
The Extra Help line item funds staff for assistance with the collection of DNA evidence and remaining funding is
appropriated in the Miscellaneous Expense line item for expenses related to this program and to balance the fund.
The Beginning Fund Balance indicates the remaining funds associated with the Explorer Cabins project. Professional
services includes sufficient funds to complete existing contracted work. Transfers Out is for transfers to the Planning
operations budget for staff time and administrative services associated with the project.
The Extra-Help line provides maintenance/repair services for the Jail facility. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is
adjusted based on available funding and to balance the fund.
The Transfer In line reflects possible collection of Social Service funds repaid to the department that cannot be identified
to a particular program. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is based on available funding and to balance the fund.
The Assistance Advance (363-0535) and Administrative Advance (363-0536) sub-fund revenue amounts are requested
based upon preliminary projections provided by the State and federal Governments. Transfers Out for specific programs
are adjusted accordingly. The Assistance Repayment sub-fund is budgeted based on anticipated receipts. The
appropriations represent the State share of the repayment that must be refunded to the State and the Transfers Out line is
the County share of the repayments that are used to support Social Service programs through the Incentive Fund (362).
Appropriations are adjusted based on the estimated year-end fund balance. The line item Discount on Tax Due is to cover
shortages of less than $10 on tax bills.
Revenue is budgeted based on actual receipts from the previous fiscal year. Appropriations are adjusted to correspond
with available revenue.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual collections and appropriations are adjusted based on available revenue
and estimated year-end fund balance.

The Miscellaneous Expense line item is increased based on the estimated year-end fund balance and available revenue.
The Transfers Out line represents the County’s contribution to the County Service Area (CSA) #3.
Revenue is requested in the amount necessary to reimburse the County for costs occurred in previous fiscal years, while
the estimated costs for the storage of the vehicle and defense records for this fiscal year are included in the
Miscellaneous Expense line item.
Complete budgeting process as required by Government Code.
• Continue research and commence communications with LDPCSD regarding possible transfer of the Don Pedro
Sewer Zone.
• Train staff on LAFCo, as prior LAFCo staff has retired.
Requested Changes:
LAFCO fees are adjusted based upon anticipated fee receipts. A small General Fund contribution to offset nominal
expenses is requested. The Professional Services line item represents contractual costs for SOI and environmental
studies. The Transfer Out to the Planning operating budget is to account for staff time on current projects.

Revenue and appropriations are budgeted based on preliminary funding estimates from the federal and State
Governments and to meet anticipated service needs.

Revenues are budgeted based on preliminary estimates from State sources and actual receipts from the prior year. The
Transfer In line includes funds from the Family Preservation Fund (328) to meet the required minimum funding level for
community-based child abuse prevention needs and to support Child Abuse Prevention Council (CPAC) activities.
Appropriations are adjusted to correspond with available revenue and the estimated year-end fund balance.
Revenue is based on prior year actual collections. Appropriations are budgeted in the Miscellaneous Expense line item for
future needs of the department and are based on available funding and the estimated year-end fund balance.
The Medical Services Providers line item represents funding available to local physicians for emergency care provided to
the indigent and for which the physician is personally liable. The appropriations in the Hospital line item are distributed to
John C. Fremont Health Care District based on a legislative formula for unreimbursed medical services provided to the
indigent. The Transfers Out line item reimburses the Health operating budget for the management of this fund.

The Transfer In line item represents a partial repayment from the Social Security Truncation Fund (419) for the purchase
of software to remove the first five digits of social security numbers from recorded documents and create a “public record”
document. Appropriation adjustments are based on available revenue, the estimated year-end fund balance and
anticipated equipment maintenance.
Appropriations are adjusted based on available funding and the estimated year-end fund balance. The Transfer Out is to
the Alcohol & Drug operating budget to help offset program costs.
Miscellaneous revenue represents the possible receipt of funds from unclaimed estates and appropriations are adjusted to
balance the fund.
There are no requested changes. Appropriations may be used for expenses that are not covered by other Human
Services programs.
Appropriations are adjusted to correspond with available revenue and the estimated year-end fund balance. The Transfer
Out is to the Alcohol & Drug operating budget to help offset program costs.
There are no requested changes to this budget. The Transfers Out line item reflects money available to the Health
operating budget for tobacco cessation education program costs and is adjusted to correspond with available revenue.
The Miscellaneous Expense line item is adjusted to balance with the estimated year-end fund balance.
The Professional Services line item contains appropriations to continue with the preservation of historical records.
Equipment expenses are requested slightly higher for a required upgrade of the operating system and the replacement of
two computers. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is used to balance the fund.
Appropriations are adjusted based on prior year actual costs and anticipated service demands. The Miscellaneous
expense line item is increased to balance the fund. A transfer to the Treasurer/Tax Collector budget is requested to help
cover the cost of delinquent statements.
Revenues are requested based on State estimates using a relatively new distribution structure. The County Medical
Services Program (CMSP) VLF represents the amount withheld by the State to fund this program. Transfers out are
requested to offset expenses in the Health Department operating budget and are adjusted to correspond with available
revenue. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is used to balance the fund.
Revenues are requested based on current State estimates. The Transfers Out line item is adjusted according to
anticipated needs in the affected operating budgets – Behavioral Health, Alcohol & Drug, and Mental Health Services Act.
The Miscellaneous Expense line item is to balance the fund.

Realignment revenue adjustments are reflective of State shifts in the funding levels of the various components of this
funding stream. The Transfers In amount in the previous fiscal year from Fund 363 was to account for reconciliation from
a previous fiscal year. Appropriations being transferred out are adjusted based on anticipated service demands. The
Miscellaneous Expense line item is to balance the fund.
The Miscellaneous Expense line item is increased to account for interest earnings and fees received in the previous fiscal
year, and no expenses being incurred.
Revenues are adjusted based on actual receipts from the prior year. No changes are requested in this fund. The request
includes appropriations in the equipment line in case there is a need to replace a computer.
Revenue and appropriations are requested in amounts based on the estimated number of positions eligible for this
training.
The requested revenue represents a State grant provided by the federal government for bioterrorism/public health
emergency preparedness activities. Revenues are based on projections of available federal funding. Transfers out
requests all available funds be included in the Health Department operating budget for eligible costs associated with the
bioterrorism/public health emergency program.
The Miscellaneous Expense line item represents accumulated interest earnings and is used to balance the fund. The
funding being transferred out to the Health operating budget is in an amount equal to the grant award.
The fund has been separated into four sub-budget units for accounting tracking purposes: 410-0436 accounts for
Children’s and Adult’s System of Care; 410-0437 accounts for Prevention Education and Intervention; 410-0438 accounts
for Workforce Education, and Training and 410-0439 accounts for Innovation. Revenues are based on the availability of
State and federal funding and a transfer in from the Mental Health Realignment Fund (393) that is used to support core
services.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted based on the most recent negotiations and benefit rates and continue to reflect a
distribution of staff positions based on caseload, demands for services and available funding in concurrence with the
corrective action plan. Revenue and appropriations are adjusted so that corresponding transactions can be tracked to the
appropriate funding component of the fund. Contingency line items in each sub-budget unit has been used to balance that
sub-budget and the overall fund. All other lines have been reviewed and minor adjustments may be requested based on
historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
Revenues are adjusted based on estimated allocations from State and federal governments. The Transfers In amount
from the Social Services Realignment Fund (394) reflects a portion of the required Maintenance of Effort, with the majority
now being budgeted in the Social Services operating budget for ease of accounting and payment to the State. The
amount of funding transferred to the Social Services operating budget (#001-0501) is increased to match the current
contract level. The Contingency line is being requested to balance the fund. Other adjustments to appropriations are
based on prior fiscal year actual amounts and anticipated program needs.


The USDA Grant revenue line reflects remaining grant funds. Requested allocations for professional services would pay
for staff time working on the project. Miscellaneous expenses include for marketing and other materials and constitute all
remaining funds.

Increase collections by working closer with Probation Officers to hold clients more accountable.
• Increase delinquent collections by becoming more current on back billing and sending clients to the Franchise
Tax Board for further collection efforts.
• Reduce number of uncollectable accounts.
Requested Changes:
Revenue from Collections is estimated based on prior year receipts. The Transfers In from the Community Corrections
Program (AB 109 Fund 432) is based on work and collection efforts related to this program. Changes in Salary and
Benefit lines reflect Board-approved staffing changes and recent labor negotiations. Increases to the Franchise Tax Board
Fees are due to an increased number of cases being sent to this Board for collections. Increase to the Software line item
is for computer system software upgrades. There is no net-county cost in this program.



Complete the implementation of a juvenile case management system that will reduce time spent compiling data
for reporting purposes.
• Continue to provide intensive supervision and service referrals for high risk offenders and their families.
Requested Changes:
Grant funding is received in advance for the next fiscal year and is expected to stay at the same level. Changes in Salary
and Benefits line items reflect staff reallocation – now partially funding a Deputy Probation Officer III as well as salary
adjustments contained in the current Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). Unfunded Liability Payment represents the
new amortization and rate smoothing policies set by CalPERS for the employer’s contribution towards retirement plans.
This amount has been separated from the traditional employer contribution line item as it has been determined by an
actuarial study to be a new “risk pool” created by the Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA) and will
need to be funded directly to avoid an underfunded situation in the future. Appropriations are requested based on prior
year actual expenditures and available funding.
Appropriations are budgeted based on anticipated revenue collections and estimated year-end fund balance. The
Transfers Out represents available funding to be transferred to the Recorders Modernization fund for the reimbursement
of the truncation software purchased several years ago.
Program Interest revenue line items are the interest portion of payments being received by existing loan recipients. The
Principal portions of the loans are not shown in the budget because of accounting practices and how loans are accounted
for on balance sheets. No new grant revenue is anticipated. The Miscellaneous Expense line item represents the fund
balance available for loans to qualifying Mariposa County businesses and promotional and operational expenses.
The Transfers Out line items represent available funding to reimburse the Health operating budget for allowable grant
expenses.
Revenue consists of interest earned and the residual fund balance. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is used to
balance the fund.
Decrease probation violations by applying rehabilitative services and appropriate supervision levels targeted at
criminogenic risk and needs.
• Provide programming opportunities and educational classes to jail inmates.
Requested Changes:
Revenue is requested in an amount provided by a State formula. Appropriations are requested in specific line items to
carry out the requirements of AB 109 as recommended by the Executive Committee of the Community Corrections
Partnership and approved by the Board of Supervisors.
The local innovation revenue is a new, ongoing source included in this fund to support the justice system (juvenile and
adult) through innovative programs as defined by local staff and the Board of Supervisors. An offsetting expense line is
also requested in this budget.
The Extra-Help line item will fund a Deputy Probation Officer I/II and Overtime will offset costs associated with Deputy
Probation Officers and Deputy Sheriffs for performing Probation Enforcement Apprehension Team (PEAT) operations. The
Board-approved contract with Mountain Crisis Services, a subsidiary of the Alliance for Community Transformation, is
included in the Professional Services line item.
Homeless assistance is increased based on an increased demand for services. The Education and Direct Client Services
line item is increased to support the goal to increase classes for inmates. Fixed assets include the continued Jail
expansion project. The Transfers Out line item reflects funding being transferred out to the Jail, Probation, Revenue and
Recovery, Planning and Indigent Defense, to offset costs associated with the additional job duties created by recent
legislation. Contingency is requested in an amount necessary to balance the fund. All other lines have been reviewed and
adjusted based on historical trends and expectations for the coming year.
Revenue estimates are based on preliminary State allocations and revenue formulas for specific programs, and are now
consolidated for ease of accounting. The Transfer In line item represents possible reclaimed program funds issued to
clients in error. Appropriations are budgeted in specific line items to be transferred out to the respective Human Services
operating budgets as eligible expenses are recorded and reported.
Decrease probation violations by applying rehabilitative services and appropriate supervision levels targeted at
criminogenic risk and needs.
• Continue to improve and enhance jail alternative programs for low risk offenders.
• Provide programming opportunities and educational classes to jail inmates.
Requested Changes:
Revenue is requested based on State allocations of the grant awards to counties. The Transfer In from Fund 444 is the
Probation Department’s share of the Drug Task Force and Project School Climate grant in support of one existing Deputy
Probation Officer I/II position.
Adjustments to salaries and benefits are reflective of the current Memorandum of Understanding. Extra help continues to
be requested to assist with the potential workload as needed. Unfunded Liability Payment represents the new amortization
and rate smoothing policies set by CalPERS for the employer’s contribution towards retirement plans. This amount has
been separated from the traditional employer contribution line item as it has been determined by an actuarial study to be a
new “risk pool” created by the Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA) and will need to be funded directly
to avoid an underfunded situation in the future. All other appropriations have been reviewed and a requested in specific
line items to carry out the evidence-based program requirements. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is increased to
balance the fund.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the most recent negotiations and benefit rates. Unfunded Liability Payment
represents the new amortization and rate smoothing policies set by CalPERS for the employer’s contribution towards
retirement plans. This amount has been separated from the traditional employer contribution line item as it has been
determined by an actuarial study to be a new “risk pool” created by the Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013
(PEPRA) and will need to be funded directly to avoid an underfunded situation in the future.
The Miscellaneous Expense line item represents unspent grant funds from the prior fiscal year and is used to balance the
fund. No new fixed assets are requested this fiscal year.
Revenue is requested based on the State allocation funding schedule. Funding is requested to be transferred out to the
District Attorney and Indigent Defense budgets to offset costs related to parole revocations. The miscellaneous expense
line item is used to balance the fund.
Revenue is requested based on the State grant award and appropriations are budgeted accordingly for eligible expenses
related to the program – air surveillance activities and overtime.
Revenue is based on the estimated amount necessary to provide sufficient court security. Appropriations are requested
based on the cost of the assigned Deputy Sheriff and the estimated cost of Extra-Help Bailiffs.
Salaries and benefits are increased based on the existing Memorandum of Understanding. Unfunded Liability Payment
represents the new amortization and rate smoothing policies set by CalPERS for the employer’s contribution towards
retirement plans. This amount has been separated from the traditional employer contribution line item as it has been
determined by an actuarial study to be a new “risk pool” created by the Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013
(PEPRA) and will need to be funded directly to avoid an underfunded situation in the future. Some additional safety
equipment is requested. All other lines have been reviewed and adjusted to reflect historical trends and anticipated needs.
This grant funds a portion of two social worker supervisors, one full time mental health assistant II, and contracted mental
health workers to provide 24/7/365 mental health crisis response. The Transfer Out is the allowable portion of funding for
overhead expenses and is transferred to the Behavioral Health operating budget. The contingency is requested to balance
the fund.
This grant partially offsets the salaries of staff assigned to Drug Task Force activities and funding is transferred out to the
District Attorney, Sheriff and Probation operating budgets according to the approved grant budget. Project School Climate
is will be charged via invoice and according the Board-approved contract. This fund also includes line items for data
collection, evaluation, and training.
Revenues are calculated based on federal grant formulas from the Office of Homeland Security (OHS). Allocations are
requested in order to support extra help staff, purchase public safety equipment, and support activities associated with the
County’s Emergency Management Center.
501: The fund balance in Fund 501 is being used to fund the Park Stairs project.
• 502 & 504: The Courthouse Construction Funds are adjusted based actual revenue receipts received in the
previous fiscal year and the residual funding for continued courthouse construction and the possible remodel of
the downstairs courtroom.
• 503: Appropriations in the MCCJF Construction are adjusted based on work performed in the previous fiscal year.
• 507: The Public Transportation Modernization Improvement and Service Account (PTMISA) accounted for grant
revenue and appropriations for restrooms at the Park & Ride which were approved by the Board with Resolution
LTC 12-5. This project has been completed.
• 510: Revenue and appropriations in the Sidewalk Projects are for sidewalks at Mariposa Elementary School and
along Bullion Street.
• 511: Revenue and appropriations in the County Road Projects are adjusted to account for State Transportation
Improvement Program (STIP) and Safe, Accountable, Flexible and Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy
for Users (SAFETEA-LU) funding received for specific road projects. STIP funding will be used for the Triangle
Road project. There are no planned SAFETEA-LU projects for this fiscal year.
• 512: County Bridge Replacement represents funding for bridge replacement and repairs and appropriations are
budgeted for specific bridges in the appropriate line items.
• 513: Represents funding and appropriations associated with Coulterville Drainage Project as well as the
employment training program (Mother Lode Job Training). Appropriations in the Transfer Out line items represent
grant overhead to the Economic Development budget and to the Engineering/Surveyor budget for program
expenses.
• 515: Disaster Recovery Initiative is ongoing bridge and road maintenance in the areas affected by the Telegraph
fire. Appropriations in the Transfer Out represent grant overhead reimbursement to the Economic Development
budget for project services.
• 517: The Don Pedro Fire Station has been completed.
• 518: The Fish Camp Fire Station has been completed.
• 519: The Midpines Fire Station has been completed.
• 520: CSA-3 funds for fire station repairs and improvements.
• 521: The Bridgeport Fire Station has been completed.
• 530: The residual funding in the Coulterville Utility Capital Fund is budgeted in the Miscellaneous Expense line
item to balance the fund.
• 532: The funding from the Don Pedro Utility Capital is requested to be transferred to the Don Pedro Sewer Fund
(316) to offset costs related to the maintenance of equipment and work done by the Plant Operations staff.
• 534: The Transfers Out in the Mariposa Pines Utility District is requested to be transferred to the Mariposa Pines
Fund (320) to offset costs related to equipment maintenance and work done by Plant Operations staff.
• 535: Residual funding in the Yosemite West Utility Capital Fund is requested in the Miscellaneous Expense line
item to balance the fund.
• 540: This fund reflects residual money available for the Don Pedro Waste Water Treatment Plant.
• 560: Previously accounted for grant funding associated with special Airport projects. Residual funding was
transferred out to the Airport Fund in a previous fiscal year.
• 566: This fund reflects residual monies available for the Catheys Valley park expansion.
Revenue from construction permits is increased based on anticipated projects occurring during the fiscal year and to
account for an increase in building permit activity. Miscellaneous Revenue is reduced based on the previous year’s actual
collections. General Fund support is requested in an amount necessary to offset code enforcement activities. Extra-Help
is reduced based on actual expenditures from the previous fiscal year. The increase in Office Expense is a request to
replace computers and chairs, and Publications/Legal Notices is increased to account the need of publishing ordinances
noticing Building Code revisions that the department will be requesting the County to adopt. Books is increased to allow
for the purchase of updated Building Code reference books. The Vehicle and Fuel expense lines are based on anticipated
demand for inspections. The Software line item reflects an anticipated upgrade and yearly maintenance costs. Training &
Seminars line is reduced to reflect a realistic training schedule based on requirements to maintain International Code
Council Certifications.
Plan the future direction of the landfill.
• Increase diversion by adding animation to the sorting process (convert facility to materials recovery facility).
• Complete construction of the new recycling area.
Requested Changes:
Fund # 601 – Solid Waste Operations: No funding is anticipated this fiscal year from the Household Hazardous Waste
grant. Modest increases in fees from Commercial and Residential waste collections are requested while revenue received
form Recycling Reimbursement is decreased to account for a reduction in the California Redemption Value (CRV) and to
more closely align with revenues received in the previous fiscal year. Salary and benefits are adjusted to account for
recently concluded labor negotiations. Due in part to an accounting correction made by the Auditor’s office to reconcile
past Accounts Receivables and with appropriations exceeding revenue collections, a loan from the General Fund is
requested this fiscal year.
Extra Help is requested at a slightly reduced amount based on last year’s actual expenses. Communications is increased
to reflect the cost of providing access to the Public Works cost accounting system for greater efficiencies with accounting
procedures and processes. In addition to contracted services, the Professional Services line item also represents
reimbursement to the Public Works Administration budget for administrative services. The required contribution towards
landfill closure costs is now budgeted in a Transfers Out line item for accounting purposes. CRV Purchase line item is
increased to reflect greater use of the function with the recycling center at Pioneer Market now being closed. No fixed
assets are requested this fiscal year and the Transfers Out only represents funding to the Solid Waste Closure fund and
not to the Solid Waste Heavy Equipment fund due to budget concerns. No Contingency is requested this fiscal year. The
Retirement of Long Term Debt represents the principal and interest payments on the USDA Loan for the Compost Facility.
The Capital Lease Principal and Interest represents payments on the bulldozer, bailer, and compactor.
The costs to operate the Transfer Stations are shown as sub-budgets. County bins have been placed at the Transfer
Stations and county staff is now performing the hauling activities. Other appropriation line items are adjusted based on
prior year actual expenditures and anticipated service demands.
Fund #602 – Solid Waste Closure: There are no requested changes to this fund.

Grow transportation services ridership through the outreach and expansion of Area 12 Agency on Aging
• Expand possibilities based on revenue prospects for transportation between North County the county seat
• Grow fare box ratio each year above the required ten-percent.
Requested Changes:
Revenue amounts are adjusted based on preliminary allocations received from the State and Federal programs. Section
5311 State funding has decreased from the previous year based on the State budget. The Transit Fares projected
revenue is based on a conservative average of actual receipts. No Local Transportation Claim funding is requested this
fiscal year due to sufficient revenue from other sources to meet anticipated services demands. Adjustments to
salary/benefits reflect the addition of a new Transit System Bus Driver that the Board approved in the previous fiscal year,
in addition to the reclassification and reallocation of job duties of the former Secretary position to Program Assistant. The
need for Extra Help is reduced with the addition of the new Transit Driver position and Overtime is requested when the
Transit Drivers are needed to work over their allotted work schedules because of unforeseen traffic delays and medical
appointments taking longer than anticipated. The Equipment line item represents this budget’s share of cost for a new
notebook computer. No Contingency is requested this fiscal year. Other appropriation adjustments are based on prior
year costs and to meet anticipated service demands.
The Department is requesting to purchase a small SUV type of vehicle to for medical transportation when negotiating
driveways and/or roadways that are difficult for a larger vehicle. This vehicle will also be used by the Community Services
Director and office staff for meetings. A nominal amount is requested in Contingency to balance the fund.
No revenue from Fuel Sales are requested as the sales and purchasing of the fuel are now the responsibility of the FBO.
The Miscellaneous Revenue line item reflects reimbursement from the FBO for their share of the utilities and
communication expenses. Appropriations are adjusted to take into account expenses that are now the responsibility of the
FBO. The Professional Services line item represents funding for the Board approved consultant contract for various
airport improvement projects. The retirement of the long term debt represents the loan repayment on hangars.
Improve treatment process at all of the sewer plants to better meet State standards and requirements.
• Improve the Coulterville and Yosemite West water systems.
• Schedule and complete repairs at the Coulterville and Mariposa Pines sewer plants.
• Repair and upgrade Lake Don Pedro sewer plant.
• Improve the operations of the small water systems at county parks
• Continue to coordinate and work with the contracted rate study and capital improvement consultants.
Requested Changes:
Revenue is requested in amounts based on the anticipated on the need for staff time and operating expenses at the
various Special Districts. The Miscellaneous Revenue line reflects reimbursement of standby charges for afterhours work
and is based on previous activity. A General Fund contribution is requested in the Transfers In line item until such time as
costs are known and rates charged to the Special Districts are revised. Salary and benefits are adjusted to include the
new allocation of Utilities Manager. No Extra-Help is requested this year. Overtime and Standby/Call back are increased
based on prior year expenditures and anticipated need. Maintenance of Building is requested to increase to allow for
additional office space for the Manager and Professional Services represents accounting/clerical support provided by the
Public Works Administration division. Rents/Leases Building is increased to account for the additional office space of the
Manager and County Vehicle is increased to allow for an additional vehicle being assigned to this budget. The Equipment
line item includes appropriations for a portable compressor and hoist, office chairs, truck tool boxes, and a high pressure
sewer cleaner. No fixed assets are requested this fiscal year.
Perform maintenance and repairs to fleet facility and shop equipment to improve repair efficiency and decrease
sublet expenses.
• Improve outside tire inventory protection and organization with the addition of a stand-alone structure.
• Update and increase fleet technicians’ skills and knowledge through at training and seminars offered by
manufacturers, vendors, and industry agencies to improve diagnostic and repair processes.
• Perform an analysis of fleet maintenance charges to ensure self-sufficiency.
Requested Changes:
Revenue received from departments for maintenance on vehicles is adjusted to reflect estimated workload and receipts
from the previous fiscal year. Revenue and offsetting appropriations for New Vehicle set up are reduced based anticipated
need for this type of work. A General Fund loan is requested this year as rate charges for vehicle maintenance costs do
not appear to be keeping pace with expenditures. Salary and benefits are adjusted to reflect the Board approved
reorganization that was approved last fiscal year, as well as the request to now allocate the Account Technician position in
the Public Works Administration budget. This will allow greater utilization of this position for all of the divisions in Public
Works and assist in making the Department more efficient. It should be noted that the Equipment Mechanic Supervisor
position is allocated but unfunded.
The Insurance line item is increased based on claims experience calculations and Equipment Maintenance is increased
based on expenses from the previous fiscal year. Minor roof repairs and repairs to the roll-up door are being requested
this fiscal year. The Administration line item accounts for reimbursements to the Public Works Administration budget for
overhead costs and is increased to account for the requested change in allocation of the Account Technician position.
Outside Labor line item reflects costs of sending vehicles to outside vendors and is reduced in an effort to keep repairs inhouse.
The Fire Equipment Maintenance line item is reduced based on the amount of major maintenance needs that
were completed in the previous fiscal year. Training is increased to allow for staff to attend seminars pertaining to fire
apparatus maintenance. Various appropriation line items are adjusted based on available revenue and anticipated service
demands. The Transfers Out line item represents the department’s payment on the Fleet Maintenance Shop building
loan. No Fixed Assets are requested this fiscal year.
Due to shortfalls in the Solid Waste operating budget, no revenue is requested this fiscal year. Appropriations are
adjusted to correspond with the estimated fund balance.
The Depreciation and Replacement line items are requested for the command and patrol vehicles, and one water tender,
and are adjusted based on the depreciation schedule. The CSA#3 Replacement line item accumulates
depreciation/replacement charges for the equipment that was purchased with County Service Area #3 funding. The
funding for these line items is budgeted in appropriation line items in the Fire operating budget. The Vehicles line item
reflects accumulated and new funding for future replacement purchases of fire apparatus.
The Replacement and Depreciation line items are adjusted based on existing county vehicles/equipment and the
estimated cost to replace these vehicles. Appropriations are adjusted to balance the fund with expected revenue. In the
Heavy Equipment fund, no funding is being requested in the Loan Repayment line item as the loan has been paid off.
The vehicles requested to be replaced include 5 Sheriff vehicles: Ford F250, Chevy Van, Dodge Durango (2), and a
Dodge Ram; and the District Attorney’s Ford Expedition. No Heavy Equipment replacements are requested at this time.
Fund #705 – General Insurance: Revenue and appropriations are adjusted to reflect the reimbursement for insurance
premiums, Group Health for Retirees costs, and Unemployment charges. The Special Insurance line item accounts for
the Employee Assistance Program (EAP).
Fund #706 – Workers’ Compensation: Revenue is adjusted based on reimbursement needed from departments for
premiums and workers’ compensation medical and administrative costs. Appropriations for Workers’ Compensation
expenses are increased based on actual costs incurred in the previous fiscal year and to account for a slight increase in
insurance premiums. The reserve in the Workers’ Compensation fund is requested at an amount equal to the previous
fiscal year.
Fund #707 – Liability: Revenue is adjusted based on reimbursement needed from departments for premiums and liability
claims. Excess Liability premiums have decreased slightly. The Reserve is funding set aside for existing and potential
claims, based on claim experience and is increased from the previous fiscal year.
Revenue is budgeted in the amounts necessary to satisfy the Principal and Interest payments based on the terms of the
loan.
The beginning balance and budgeted reserve reflect the maximum allowable by the bond. Revenues from the bond are
receipted in fund #755.
Revenue is adjusted based on anticipated receipts and funding transferred in from the Lake Don Pedro Waste Water
Treatment Plant Bond Reserve fund (#757), and appropriations are budgeted accordingly.
Appropriations are requested in an amount to balance the fund are budget to be transferred out to the Lake Don Pedro
Waste Water Treatment Plant Bond fund (#756) when required.
Revenue is requested in the amount necessary to satisfy the principal and interest amounts contained in the loan, and
Miscellaneous Expense is requested in order to balance the fund.


























