No changes are requested in revenue received from Property Taxes based on current estimates of property tax values. The delinquency rate has grown and revenues for delinquent payments and penalties are increased to reflect this current trend. The Supplemental revenue line item is budgeted in a positive amount as the County is beginning to see a slight increase in assessments. In-Lieu Vehicle License Fee (VLF) and Sales Tax represents the State’s Triple Flip (property tax revenue from the schools and special districts in lieu of vlf and sales tax) per SB 1096 guidelines and are requested in the same amounts as the previous fiscal year pending revised estimates from the State. The County’s Sales Tax is estimated to increase modestly as business activity is remaining steady. Revenue received from Property Tax Transfer is increased reflecting a more active housing market. Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) revenue is budgeted at the same amount, which is fiscally prudent due to uncontrollable factors that could affect this revenue stream as occurred with the federal government closure last fall. Revenue from Interest earnings is decreased based current interest rates. The SB90 mandate reimbursement is requested based on information from the State regarding payment of past claims. Payment In-Lieu Taxes (PILT) authorized by the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (PL 110-343) is budgeted at an increased amount as the actual funding as been received from the Federal Government. Cost Allocation is increased to adjust to State/Federally funded programs and non-General Fund departments requiring more general government services than in the previous fiscal year. Funding is requested in the Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU) Additional Capacity line item and is based on a stable level sanitation usage. Penalties and fines received from Superior Court are adjusted based upon revenues received to date. The Restitution TOT revenue received in the previous fiscal year was from a Liability Insurance reimbursement and no revenue is budgeted this fiscal year. The Transfers In amount reflects the closing of projects in the Capital Improvement funds that initially received General Fund support.
The estimated ending Fund Balance is requested in an amount just slightly less than last fiscal year’s actual amount. The General Fund Designation is not requested to increase as there is sufficient funding for possible payments oChanges in salaries and benefits reflect recently concluded negotiations. Longevity is budgeted for personnel that will qualify for this benefit beginning this fiscal year. The Insurance line is increased as a result of significant liability claims from last fiscal year now being included in the calculations used to determine department charges. The Membership line item is increased to account for the Yosemite/Sequoia Resource Conservation District. Office expense is decreased to match trend in expenditure level. Appropriations in Professional Services last fiscal year were for annexation fees associated with the Field of Dreams and First Baptist Church properties, and no appropriations are requested this fiscal year. Publications/Legal Notice is increased based on the anticipated number of activities that will need to be publically noticed. The Equipment line item represents the purchase of laptops for the two newly elected Supervisors. The Software line item reflects the annual cost of the MinuteTraq Agenda hosting, as well as the software for the laptops for the two newly elected Supervisors. The New Supervisors Training line item represents costs associated with the annual California State Association of County’s (CSAC) New Supervisor training. The upgrade to the Board chamber Sound System was completed last fiscal year and no funding is requested.
f employee benefit accruals.Work closely with new department heads to assist in smooth transitions.
? Develop formal policies regarding delineation of Administration and Human Resource duties.
? Working with Human Resources, assure that labor negotiations are conducted in a manner consistent with providing for the County’s long-term stability, as directed by the Board.
Requested Changes:
The reduction in Rents & Concessions revenue is because the sublease with the National Park Service for the building on Stroming Road ends January 2015. Changes in salaries and benefits reflect the recently concluded negotiations. Increase in Longevity reflects newly established benefit for qualifying staff. Increase in Insurance is reflective of charges based on current calculation of rates. Professional Services is reduced because of the completion of the compensation study and Rents & Leases/Buildings is reduced because the sublease for the Stroming Building will end in January 2015.
Funding and appropriations are increased to account for the triennial performance audits for the Transportation and Transit programs that will be conducted this fiscal year.
Standard practice is to request General Contingency at 1-percent of the County’s previous fiscal year’s adopted operating budget which was $45,538,059.
Revenue collected for services provided to the Mariposa County Superior Court and agencies outside of the General Fund are increased based on the amount of service anticipated to be provided. Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect recently concluded negotiations. Longevity is increased based on employees being eligible for this benefit. The Insurance line item is increased based on past claims history and current calculations. The increase in Professional Services is for the cost of completing the Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) study as required by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) 45.
Implement phase II of the new Transient Occupancy Tax collection program. This project is carried over from last fiscal year.
? Conduct tax sale online.
? Provide electronic bill presentation.
? Continue to provide excellent service to the taxpayer.
Requested Changes:
Revenues are adjusted based on anticipated increase in investment fees. Money received from recovering delinquent bond fees in the Lake Don Pedro district is decreased based on actual receipts received in the prior fiscal year. The revenue in Miscellaneous Revenue in the previous fiscal year was from a class action settlement case with an investment firm, and no further revenue from this source is anticipated. Funding from the Tax Collectors Cost fund (#390) is increased to balance the budget unit. Salaries and benefits are adjusted based on the recently concluded negotiations. Longevity is increased based on employees qualifying for this benefit. Appropriations for Postage are now being requested and the Maintenance Equipment represents maintenance costs on the newly installed security camera. The anticipated number and cost for publishing legal notices is accounted for in the Publication/Legal Notices line item. Expenses related to Lake Don Pedro Bond delinquency/foreclosure proceedings are decreased based on a lower number of anticipated actions. Costs for the Transient Tax Occupancy collection program are budgeted in the Software line item, as well as the traditional maintenance/upgrade costs for the County’s financial system. The reduction in the Equipment line item reflects completion of security project. Other service and supply line items are adjusted based on anticipated service demands and actual expenses in the previous fiscal year.
Uphold and maintain the County of Mariposa’s Public Service Policy that was adopted with Resolution 98-231.
Requested Changes:
Revenues are projected to remain stable with a slight increase in Copy Fees offset by a slight decrease in Assessor Fees. Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect recently concluded negotiations and newly hired employees. Group Health is increased based on recent retirements. Appropriations in the Accrued Benefits line item last fiscal year represented the payment of accrued benefits to former employees. The Maintenance Equipment line item is decreased as the upgrade to the Auditing Program has been completed. No appropriations in the Professional Services line are requested as the document scanning project has now been implemented.
The Department is requesting an equity adjustment of approximately 9-percent for the Assessment Office Manager position (estimated total increase of $8,479). This increase is not included in the Requested Budget per the budgeting guidelines established by the Board. This request will be analyzed further by the Human Resources department and brought to the Board for consideration in a separate action. Attached is a memorandum from the Assessor/Recorder regarding the requested budget.
Provide responsive legal advice and client service.
? Provide assertive representation in civil litigation and administrative hearings.
? Provide prompt and effective assistance in negotiation and drafting of contracts and other legal documents.
Requested Changes:
Revenue remains stable for services being provided for Child Welfare, Public Guardian/Conservator and agencies outside of the General Fund. Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the recently concluded negotiations. The Insurance line item is reduced due a reduction in “experience” or claims that have occurred in the last several years. Minimal increases to Memberships and Books are requested based on anticipated expenditures.
Work with the Board of Supervisors to implement the Compensation Study.
? Commence and complete negotiations with the Service Employees International Union and Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential Organization.
? Coordinate and complete an on-site Americans with Disabilities Act training for department heads, supervisors and managers.
? Continue to work closely with department heads to manage disciplinary issues.
? Reduce the number of open Worker’s Compensation claims.
? Increase participation of department heads, supervisors and managers in County-provided trainings.
Requested Changes:
Salary and benefits changes are reflective of the recently concluded negotiations. The Communications line is decreased as the installation of the phone system for the new office space is complete. The Insurance line item is slightly increased due to an increase in “experience” or claims that are included in calculating departmental share of costs. No appropriations are requested in the Professional Services line item as the classification and compensation study has been completed. The Service Employees International Union and Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential Organization bargaining unit contracts expire in the fall of 2014, and funding is requested to contract with a professional labor negotiator. The bargaining contracts with the two Sheriff organizations do not expire until 2015 and thus no appropriations are requested. The Rents & Leases/Building line item is decreased due to the completion of the office space remodeling project. Utilities are increased to represent a full year in the new office space. No appropriations are requested in the Equipment line item as all purchases for the new office space have been completed. Other minor adjustments to services and supplies line items reflect anticipated expenditures.
Continue to review new software needs for County Clerk functions.
? Complete the Biannual Conflict of Interest.
Requested Changes:
Salaries and benefits have changed based on the recently concluded labor negotiations. Minor adjustments are requested in various service/supply line items based on anticipated service demands.
Prepare and conduct a successful General Election in November 2014.
? Inventory obsolete voting equipment and supplies for sale and disposal.
Requested Changes:
Revenue and appropriations for the Help America Vote Act (HAVA) Grant are not budgeted as this grant has been completed. Election Fees are reduced as elections fees were collected in the previous fiscal year. Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the recently conclude labor negotiations. Longevity is increased based on employees eligible for this benefit. Insurance is decreased due to a reduction in claims over the past several years. The Equipment line item reflects the Department’s request to replace a computer. Other minor adjustments to services and supplies are due to anticipated expenditure levels.
Install a new roof on McCay Hall in Cathey’s Valley.
? Install new roof on the Public Works Administration building.
? Resurface the tennis courts at Mariposa Park.
? Replace the carpet in the Board Room at the Government Center.
? Paint and repair Government Center.
? Repair kitchen floor and dry rot at Probation Department.
? Install new sprinkler station at the Woodland ball field.
? Continue to provide quality service to the public and County employees.
Requested Changes:
Revenue for Facilities Maintenance Services is reduced slightly based on the anticipated service demands of Yosemite West for road maintenance and snow plowing needs, the contract with Yosemite Area Regional Transit Service (YARTS) for maintenance at their bus stops and for maintenance/cleaning from the rental of county facilities and non-custodial services for the Human Services Department. Miscellaneous Revenue is reduced as the reimbursement for YARTS maintenance is now budgeted in the Facilities Maintenance Services line item. Salaries and benefits are increased to reflect changes resulting from the recently concluded labor negotiations. Overtime and Standby are reduced based on anticipated need. Longevity is increased to reflect employees now being eligible for this benefit. Out of Class pay is due to a maintenance staff employee temporarily working out of class because of a vacancy. Shift Differential is increased based on expenditure levels of the prior year.
Clothing is reduced based on projected needs and Communications is decreased based on prior year expenditures. As a result of several workers’ compensation claims in recent years, the Insurance line is increased. Maintenance of Equipment is decreased based on prior year actual expenses and to meet the requested budget constraints. The increase to Medical & Laboratory is due to Title 22 requirements related to water testing. To account for maintenance contracts with an electrician, plumber, and air/heating units, the Professional Services line item is increased. The increase in Rents & Leases for Equipment is offset by the decrease in Utilities due to the re-categorization of the expenditures relating to the rental garbage bins at county parks and facilities. The County Vehicle line item is reduced based on prior year actual expenses and projected usage of county vehicles. Other adjustments to service/supply line items are based on actual expenses from the prior year and anticipated service demands.
Continue to seek out grants and programs to benefit Mariposa County businesses and overall community.
? Increase community awareness regarding the business assistance loan program in order to maximize utilization of available funds.
? Continue to explore and provide educational and training opportunities for Mariposa County businesses.
Requested Changes:
Revenues are increased to reflect the recent grant awards and staff time being charged to the Microenterprise Assistance Grant (#424). Salaries and benefits are adjusted based on the recently concluded labor negotiations. The majority of service/supply line items are reduced based on anticipated service demands and prior years’ expenditures. The PG&E line items represents the Board approved lighting for the amphitheater that was not able to be purchased last fiscal year as well as the anticipated award of another PG&E grant this fiscal year.
Funding for the Way-Finding project is not being requested as this project has been completed. Funding requests from the Mariposa County Arts Council, Visitor Center, Yosemite Renaissance, Tourism Bureau, Northside History center and the Mining & Mineral Museum are being made in the same amounts as the previous fiscal year.
Continue environmental/design process for 10 bridges as part of the Bridge Replacement Program.
? Construction services to paint, re-roof, repair clock and clock tower, and provide some minor structural bracing to the project identified under the Courthouse Renovation project.
? Plans, specifications, construction services, and estimates for the re-construction of Mt. Bullion Cut-Off Phase II.
? Construction services for Triangle Road, Dogtown Road, Bondurant Mine, and Schilling Road.
? Engineering, design and construction services for the Midpines Restroom Facilities.
? Development of a five-year Capital Improvement Program.
Requested Changes:
Revenue received from the State Transit Improvement Projects (STIP) for inspection services is reduced based on the anticipated road maintenance projects to be completed with this funding source. Revenue from the Highway Bridge Program represents preliminary engineering services and the Bridge Preventive Maintenance Plan which will be completed by outside consultants. Reimbursement for engineering services related to the Disaster Recovery Initiative (DRI) Grant is reduced to reflect only the Whitlock Road portion of the Grant. Fees received from other county departments for engineering services is increased based on prior year receipts and anticipated service demands.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted as a result of recently concluded labor negotiations and reallocating the Associate Civil Engineer position that the Board approved last fiscal year. The Department does not anticipate the need for Extra-Help at this time. Longevity is increased based on the staff eligible for this benefit. PERS Incentives are now projected for employee(s) eligible for this benefit. Appropriations are now budgeted in the Insurance line item to reflect the department’s share of this cost as the amount is calculated using the Fiscal Year 2012/13 actual expenditures. The Professional Services line item accounts for map checking services and for a consultant on the Highway Bridge Preventative Maintenance project. Rents & Leases Building represents payment to the Road Fund for rent and utilities associated with the use of office space. County Vehicle charges are reduced based on calculations from the Fleet Department for vehicle usage. The increase to the Major Vehicle Repairs line will bring this appropriation to a more realistic amount needed to cover a major repair or accident. Expenses related to the operation of the map machine, copy machine, and plotter in the Copier Expense line item are reduced to closer align with actual expenditure from the prior year. The department is requesting to replace four computers with new systems that will have Automated Computer Aided Design (auto-cad) capacity in the Equipment line item and the increase in the Software line item is associated with the software and licensing that comes with the purchase of new computers.
Continue to maintain system availability and customer service by providing staff with productive tools to perform their tasks.
? Support department systems upgrade initiatives by assuring new application system are the correct architecture for Mariposa County.
? Continue to support County broadband initiatives.
? Implement a help desk system to document workload and improve computer asset management.
? Improve data network, computer infrastructure and County phone systems pending budget approval.
Requested Changes:
The increases to salaries and benefits are reflective of the recently concluded labor negotiations. The Longevity line item is increased to reflect employees eligible to receive this benefit. The Communications line item is adjusted to account for an increase in the monthly charges for network connections and additional internet bandwidth. The Maintenance of Equipment line is increased based on prior year actual expenditures. The department is requesting an increase in the Equipment line item for the purchase of miscellaneous replacement equipment such as battery back-ups, server hard drives and remote switches. The Software line item is requested at a reduced amount and includes Help Desk software that was not purchased in the prior year.
The Department is requesting to purchase the following fixed assets:
Voice Over Internet Protocol (VOIP) phone system. The current voice mail system is failing and becoming extremely difficult and expensive to repair.
Data Network Switches. The existing switches have reached end of life and are essential to county computer system functions.
The Miscellaneous Transfers Out line item represents appropriations again being requested to be transferred to support the Plant Operations fund which was formerly included in the Facilities Maintenance budget as well as a small contribution to the Local Area Formation Commission (LAFCO) as this fund’s activity is insufficient to support basic operations. Fleet Maintenance is requesting a contribution to support budgeted standby costs (#700). The Airport is not requesting General Fund support due to using special aviation grant funding to offset operation expenses. The Building Department is again requesting a contribution from the General Fund based on projected revenues and the estimated year-end fund balance.
The contributions to Senior Nutrition and Senior Service funds are based on anticipated available federal revenue and projected year-end fund balances. General Fund support is requested to increase to the Road Fund based on reduced revenue estimates and increased service demands. Funding for the Government Center debt service fund is reduced based on the loan payment schedule.
Continue to provide assistance to survivors and witnesses in navigating the criminal justice system.
? Reduce the trauma to survivors and witnesses of crime through crisis intervention, court accompaniment and referrals to local resources.
? Continue to provide assistance to survivors and witnesses of crime.
Requested Changes:
The Department is anticipating the award of grant money that will fund a portion of an existing Deputy District Attorney I position, one-half of the Victim Witness Services Supervisor position and Extra-Help Victim Witness Advocates. Appropriations are requested based on the approved grant budget and includes a contract with Mountain Crisis Services for work with victims of domestic violence, stalking and sexual assault. This grant is also funding the associated software for the new computer system. Travel and Training are requested for newly hired staff.
Increase the number of families receiving support
? Increase the reliability of child support payments to families
? Expand methods to assist non-custodial parents in meeting obligations
? Provide consistently high quality customer service
? Work cooperatively with the Court and other county agencies to meet mutual goals
? Maintain a professional and skilled workforce
? Continually improve standings in the federal performance measurements
Requested Changes:
Revenue and appropriations are requested in amounts based on allocation schedules received from the State Department of Child Support Services. The increases in salaries and benefits reflect the recently approved reorganization and labor negotiations. Extra-Help is decreased based on the anticipated workload of the Child Support Attorney III position. The Longevity line item is increased based on the number of staff that will be eligible for the benefit this year. Unemployment is requested based on prior year expenses. The overall decrease to service and supply line items is based on anticipated service demands and available revenue. The Transfers Out line item represents payment to Human Services for office space.
Funding for this program has been removed from the State Budget. Government accounting practices require that this budget remain in the Final Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
Obtain approval to reorganize the District Attorney’s Office.
? Pursue centralized and secure office space for the entire District Attorney’s Office.
? Implement a new complete record retention/archive project to include scanning old cases into digital form that will greatly reduce the need for storage space.
? Implement a new case management system, to increase efficiency and reduce the need for record storage.
Requested Changes:
Funding received from the Parole Revocations (Fund #437) in the Transfers In is reduced to match available revenue from this source. No funding from the Supplemental Law Enforcement Services (SLESF) Fund is being requested based on a decrease in available funding from this source. The Transfer In from Alcohol & Drug reflects reimbursement from the Drug Court Enhancement Grant for participation in the Drug Court program and is to offset expenses relating to this program. The Transfer In from the Rural County Crime Prevention fund partially offsets salary increases approved during recent negotiations for the District Attorney Investigator position.
Adjustments to salary and benefits are reflective of the recently concluded labor negotiations and new employees hired at a lower step. The Longevity line item is reduced due a retirement of an employee who received this benefit and the Group Health for Retirees is increased because of this retirement. Accrued Benefits in the previous fiscal year represents the payment for accrued time to a former employee. Minor adjustments are requested in various services and supply line items based on anticipated service demands and prior year actual expenses.
Grant revenue for this program is declining and the General Fund is now picking up a larger portion of the salaries of a Deputy District Attorney and a Legal Secretary. Both of these positions are also funded in the District Attorney – Prosecution budget (#001-0212). This budget now has a net county cost.
Continue to provide assistance to survivors and witnesses in navigating the criminal justice system.
? Reduce the trauma to survivors and witnesses of crime through crisis intervention, court accompaniment and referrals to local resources.
? Continue to provide professional assistance to survivors and witnesses of crime.
Requested Changes:
The grant funding is slightly increased based on information received from the Federal government. The Transfer In from Community Corrections (fund#432) is not being requested this year as the grant is sufficient to fund the program when combined with the Vertical Prosecution Grant. The salary for the Victim Witness Supervisor position is reduced as the Vertical Prosecution Grant is now funding a portion of this position. Extra-Help is increased because to fund a number of Advocate positions. Various service and supply line items are adjusted based on available revenue and prior year expenditure amounts. The Training & Seminar and Private Vehicle appropriations are requested for the newly hired Victim Witness Services Supervisor.
Upgrade Briefing Room/County Emergency Operations Center (EOC)
? Obtain stable funding for Deputy Sheriffs positions that were reduced due to fiscal constraints in previous fiscal years.
Requested Changes:
The decrease in reimbursement revenue for Police Officer Standard Training (POST) is based on a lower number of new hires attending training. The revenue from the Office of Criminal Justice Programs is decreased based on a reduction of available Drug Abuse funding. The National Forest Service revenue line is for narcotic investigations on federal forest lands and is reduced slightly this year based on a recently negotiated contract. The Transfers In line item represents funding transferred in from the Supplemental Law Enforcement (SLESF) fund and is based on anticipated revenue from this program and offsets the salaries of two Deputy Sheriff positions. The Transfers In from the Rural Law Enforcement fund (#353) is requested in an amount necessary to offset the costs of one Sergeant, five Deputy Sheriffs, and one Dispatcher. A new line item is established to account for additional funding from the Rural County Crime Prevention fund offsetting a portion of the salary increases for safety members as a result of the recently concluded labor negotiations.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to account for recently concluded labor negotiations, the Board approved salary increase for the Sheriff, as well as the Board approved reclassification of an Office Technician I to an Office Technician II position. An increase in Extra-Help is requested in order to provide support for all sheriff functions and is offset by the decrease in the Forestry Contract line item. The Longevity line item is increased based on the number of employees that are eligible for this benefit. The Increases to Out of Area Pay and POST Certificate Pay are a result of more
employees qualifying for these benefits and because of the salary increases. The Insurance line item is increased because of costs associated with new and existing workers’ compensation and liability claims. The Rents and Leases line item is increased to account for rental increases associated with radio vaults, animal control, and the North County station. The Removal line item represents the transportation costs of human remains to autopsy facilities and is increased to correspond with the new contract for these services. The POST line item accounts for mandated training for new officers and is decreased based on a smaller number of staff needing this training. County Vehicle is increased based on current expenditures and projections. The Training & Seminars line item is increased based on anticipated non-POST training needs. Last fiscal year the telecommunications equipment for dispatching was updated and no Fixed Assets are requested this fiscal year.
Expand training opportunities to boating safety officers to enhance skill sets in accident investigations and Boating Under the Influence enforcement.
? Continue to patrol Mariposa County’s waterways in a time of unprecedented low levels of water. The hazardous water levels have and will cause congestion and unusual hazards to boaters and recreational users alike.
Requested Changes:
Revenue received from the State is budgeted at the traditionally level. Last fiscal year the revenue was increased to account for a very late last quarter payment. The adjustments to salaries and benefits are reflective of concluded labor negotiations. The Insurance line item is increased based on new and existing workers’ compensation claims.
Continue research on the implementation of a pre-fabricated jail addition.
? Continue research on making the facility self-sufficient in an emergency.
? Replace the system wide HVAC due to its age and increasing need for repairs.
? Continue management with respect to mitigating escalating medical costs.
Requested Changes:
The Transfer In line represents funding from the Community Corrections AB 109 (Fund #432) to partially offset the cost of two Jail Officer positions and the effect that parolees could have on the jail population. The amount is reduced as a result of no Supplemental Law Enforcement (SLESF) being available this fiscal year. An additional Transfer In line item is established to account for funding from the Rural County Crime Prevention fund (#353) to partially offset the salary increases for safety members that were approved during the recent negotiations. Salaries and benefits are increased based on the recently concluded labor negotiations. The Overtime line item is increased to account for demand created by turn over and increased wages used in pay calculations. The Longevity line item is decreased to match actual benefit calculations. The Post Certificate Pay item is decreased based on the number of employees qualifying for this benefit. The Field Training line item is increased as a result of having a Field Training Officer supervisor model at the jail. The Insurance line item is increased to cover the cost of new and existing Liability and Worker’s Compensation claims. The Building Maintenance line item is increased to account for repairing/replacing the Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning system.
Successfully recruit and hire a full time Probation Corrections Officer for a current vacancy.
? Successfully recruit and hire Extra-Help Probation Corrections Officers to fulfill the staffing needs of Juvenile Hall
Requested Changes:
The fees from Electronic Monitoring have decreased significantly over the last two years therefore no revenue is expected this year based on declining needs. The fees associated with the Juvenile Hall have increased and are now budgeted to reflect this greater demand. Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the recently concluded labor negotiations. The Extra-Help line is decreased based on calculations to fully cover operational hours and the filling of a vacant Probation Corrections Officer position. The increase in Group Health is associated with a recent retirement. Maintenance Buildings is increased to account for the annual fire alarm inspection. Various service and supply line items are adjusted based on upon actual expenses in the previous fiscal year and anticipated service demands.
Decrease probation violations by applying rehabilitative services and appropriate supervision levels targeted at criminogenic risk and needs.
? Continue to improve and enhance jail alternative programs for lower risk offenders.
? Double PEAT operations during the next budget year.
Requested Changes:
The Juvenile Accountability Block Grant for Evidence Based Practice (JABG-EBP) is a new grant and is budgeted for a full fiscal year of funding. The grant revenue for bullet proof vests was a one-time project and no further revenue is to be received. Revenue from Probation Fees and Drug Testing is decreased while revenue from Electronic Monitoring is increased based on current trend of actual receipts, The Department is no longer sealing probation files as a courtesy for clients, therefore no further funding is requested. The Transfers In line item represents funding from Community Corrections - AB 109 (Fund 432) and is used to offset costs associated with implementation of prison realignment. The funding received from the Wrap-Around fund (#422) represents a 40-percent share of a Deputy Probation Officer I/II and allowable overhead costs. Previously this has funded one hundred-percent of a Deputy Probation Officer III, but due to a decline in service demands relating to this program the funding is decreased. Funding received from Title IVE claiming from Social Services is reduced based on prior years’ claiming trend and a redefinition of claimable costs by the Federal government. Money from the Alcohol & Drug – Drug Court Enhancement grant is increased to reflect a full year of funding. The Transfer In of Rural County Crime Prevention (RCCP) funding is to partially offset the salary increases of safety members as a result of labor negotiations.
Salary and benefit line items are adjusted to account for recently concluded labor negotiations as well as the shift of one Deputy Probation Officer III to the Youthful Offender Block Grant (Fund 417). Formerly a Deputy Probation Officer I/II had been budgeted in this fund, but with the loss of funding from the Wraparound program, this change will offset that loss in funding. Additionally, a Probation Technician position is budgeted and a Sr. Office Assistant position is

deleted as a result of the Board approved reorganization in June. The Extra Help, Longevity, Standby and POST Certification line items have been adjusted to more closely align with anticipated expenditures.
The Insurance line item is decreased to account for some workers’ compensation and liability claims no longer being included in the calculations as they now exceed the seven year calculation period. The Building Maintenance line item is increased to account for painting and repairs of the Departments office building. The Professional Services line item represents the Evidence Based Practice – To Improve Public Safety (EBP-TIPS) grant awarded for the use of Caseload Pro software for the development of Juvenile Case Management. Other services and supplies line items are adjusted to align with anticipated expenditure levels.
The sub-budget unit (001-0224-535) for the Juvenile Justice Crime Prevention Act (JJCPA) partially offsets a Deputy Probation Officer I/II position and associated overtime and standby pays.
Complete Bridgeport Fire Station and place it into public service.
? Start web based training (Target Solutions) for department members.
? Provide training and education opportunities for all department members
? Continue efforts in completing the County Emergency Operation Plan (EOP).
? Reconcile and close out all past grants awards.
? Prepare a strategic plan for the future of the department.
Requested Changes:
The Emergency Planning Grant revenue is budgeted in the amount of the grant award. Last fiscal year this revenue was increased to account for a reimbursement not being received until October. Salaries and benefits reflect adjustments based on recently concluded labor negotiations and new employees at a lower step. The Group Health line item is increased based on the retirement of the former Fire Chief. The Insurance line item is reduced due to some workers’ compensation claims no longer being used in calculating the charges because of the age of the claim. Building Maintenance is increased due to necessary repairs on the new fire stations. Because of an anticipated increase in the number of volunteers and type of trainings to be offered the Training for Volunteers line item is increased. The increase in Safety Clothing is associated with replacing worn out safety clothing and providing clothing to new volunteers. The Department is requesting appropriations in the Fire Prevention – Public Education to provide outreach/prevention activities to the community. The increase in County Vehicle expense represents the depreciation/replacement charges on existing command, patrol vehicles, Rescue 22, and one water- tender, as well as increases in maintenance costs. The County Service Area #3 line item accounts for replacement costs associated with the new fire apparatus and will increase slightly each fiscal year.
The Sub-Budget (001-0228-542) is offset by the Emergency Management Planning (EMP) grant and funds an Office Assistant I/II position and an Emergency Planner position. No appropriations are requested in the Equipment line item as the new radios and pagers have been purchased in the previous fiscal year with offsetting grant monies.
Provide 2 continuing education workshops per year on worker safety regulations, personal protective equipment, identification and control of invasive weed species and other pests, private applicator training and certification, and other topics of local interest.
? Monitor agricultural pests which might impact our agricultural industry and educate the public on the importance of being aware and pro-active.
? Implement GIS mapping of invasive noxious weed species throughout the County and continue to work with our various agency partners and stakeholders on integrated weed management and control programs.
? Implement weights & measures inspection programs to ensure a level playing field for businesses and consumers and ensure equity in the marketplace.
Requested Changes:
The revenue for Sealer of Weights is increased to account for the recently Board approved Weighmaster Enforcement Agreement. The Agriculture Commission – State revenue is decreased based on the State Budget. The Arundo Eradication Project revenue line is now budgeted based on the new project agreement. Revenue from Fees and Sale of Supplies is decreased to reflect a lower number of anticipated pesticide registrations. Adjustments to salaries and benefits are reflective of the recent labor negotiations as well as recent the Board approved reclassification and change in the allocation of positions. Longevity is now included for employees that are eligible for this benefit. The Integrated Weed Management line is increased based on grant funding for the Arundo Eradication project. The Trapper line item is increased in accordance with the recently approved contract for this service. The purchase of GIS software for invasive weed mapping is complete and the Software line item is reduced to maintenance costs only. The Training and Seminars line is increased for training needs for the new Ag Inspector and Program Technician. Other service and supply line items are adjusted based on anticipated service demands.
Continue General Plan Implementation, including work on the Midpines Community Plan, development of zoning to implement the Cathey’s Valley Community Plan, development of zoning for minimum density subdivisions, completion of Historic Sites Inventory Update Phase 1, commence 13-14 Biennial Review for LCA contracts, complete compliance activities needed as a result of 11-12 Biennial Review for LCA contracts, commence work on Environmental Conservation Program to give needed guidance to developers and decision makers.
? Complete General Plan Housing Element Update.
? Update 1988 Countywide Environmental Review Policies.
? Continue effective code enforcement programs, including sign compliance, medical marijuana cultivation compliance, and mining ordinance compliance.
Requested Changes:
The Transfers In represents reimbursement for staff time performed on LAFCO (Fund #370) job duties and the Transfers In- Probation is funding from the Community Corrections - AB109 (Fund #432) to offset increasing the Code Compliance Technician to full-time. Salary and benefit adjustments reflect the recently concluded labor negotiations and the reclassification of a Planning Technician to a Senior GIS Specialist. The Longevity line item is increased based on the number of employees who qualify to receive this benefit. The Insurance line item is reduced based on some liability and workers’ compensation claims no longer being included in the calculations because they exceed the seven year time period. The Microfilming line item is decreased base on county staff now performing the continued scanning of planning documents instead of contracting for this activity. The County Vehicle line item is decreased based on estimated maintenance and operational costs of a new vehicle to be used by the Code Compliance Technician. The Department is requesting to purchase replacement CPU units which is reflected in the increase in the Equipment line item. Software is increased to account for software replacement on the new CPU units and to purchase extra GIS

licenses. Other service and supply line item adjustments are based on prior year actual costs and to meet anticipated service demands.
The Fixed Assets/Vehicle line is increased for the purchase of a new vehicle to be used by the Code Compliance Technician.
In the General Plan sub-budget, the Professional Services line is increased to allow for a roll-over of the contract amount not yet paid for the housing element survey. The reduction in Publications & Legal Notices is based on prior year expenditures. The increase in the Equipment line reflects the purchase of computer upgrades and a Global Positioning System unit. The decrease in Private Vehicle Use is based on prior year expenditure amounts.
Attached is a memorandum from the Planning Director regarding the requested budget and unmet needs.
No grant revenue or appropriations are requested at this time. Any future grants will be brought to Board for approval in a separate action. Governmental accounting practices require that this budget be included for two years after transactions have ceased.
Continue recruitment and retention efforts for volunteer fire fighters.
? Continue offering stipends for training and response.
? Support Volunteer Coordinator efforts.
Requested Changes:
The Fire Safer Grant revenue is requested in the amount of the grant award. The Extra-Help line item funds a Volunteer Coordinator and is requested to assist with volunteer retention/recruitment with the remaining funds being used as training and response stipends for volunteers fire fighters.
Continue the division’s success in meeting all requirements and deadlines with the inclusion of having one less staff member and the possibility of a fifty percent reduction in another staffing position.
? Cross training for the Administrative Analyst and the newly hired Accountant II positions.
Requested Changes:
The revenue received from reimbursable services performed by Pubic Works Administration staff is decreased based on a reduction in billable administrative time to be performed for other Public Works divisions. Salaries and benefits lines are adjusted to reflect recently concluded labor negotiations and reducing the vacant Accountant I/II to a 0.50 Permanent Part-Time position as well as unallocating one Account Clerk III position. The Longevity line item is increased based on the number of employees that now qualify for this benefit. A replacement computer and new Cost Accounting Management System (CAMS) server are requested in the Equipment line item. The increase in Training and Seminars is requested for the Department Head’s various conferences and for a staff member to attend the CAMS Conference. Other services and supplies line items are adjusted to reflect a more accurate expenditure level.
Notify the Board of Supervisors six months prior to retirement of the Public Health Officer to allow sufficient time for a successful recruitment. Facilitate a smooth transition between Health Officers.
? Focus on Public Safety from the Health perspective for all residents and visitors to the County.
? Strengthen prevention of disease to reduce cots to the County and citizens for medical care.
Requested Changes:
The State allocations and grant revenues are adjusted based upon preliminary estimates from the State and anticipated amounts of grant awards. The California Children’s Services line item is increased based on anticipated Medi-Cal caseload. Air Pollution Fee revenue is reduced as the previous year included one-time only fees. The new Personal Health Fee line item represents fees associated with tuberculosis skin tests, hemoglobin tests, etc. and is based on fees collected in the previous fiscal year. The Transfers In line includes Interdepartmental Services for the Support and Aid For Everyone Program (SAFE). This is the second year of a two year agreement. Funding received from the Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA) Forum is reduced based to correspond with the new grant award. This funding will be used to purchase a computer and software. Revenue received from Sales Tax is decreased based on a restructuring of the distribution of these funds. The Transfers In from the various grant programs are adjusted to match current grant awards and anticipated operational costs of these programs.
Salary and benefit lines are adjusted to reflect recently concluded labor negotiations. The Extra Help and Clinic Extra-Help line are increased to account for additional nursing hours to meet anticipated service demands. Longevity is now included based on employees that will qualify for this benefit.

The Insurance line item is increased based on calculations from existing and new liability and workers’ compensation claims. The increase to Air Pollution expenses is based on the anticipated Ozone Study as required by the Federal Environmental Protection agency. The County Medical Services Program fee is has not been budgeted at this time based on a lack of information from the State regarding this fee in conjunction with the implementation of Health Care Reform. Other various service and supply line items are adjusted based on prior year actual expenses, available grant funding, and anticipated service demands.
Work with John C. Fremont Health Care District to create Patient Centered Health Homes to improve overall coordination of physical and behavioral healthcare.
? Review the Client Services Policy to determine the financial feasibility of including the two Managed Care Organizations, as well as private insurance companies into the Mental Health Plan.
? Continue working to create an electronic health record program where medical, mental health and alcohol and drug information can be shared with primary health providers to improve coordination of care.
? Review current hiring of after-hours crisis workers for better retention of employees.
Requested Changes:
The Substance Abuse Mental Health Services Act (SAMHSA) revenues are reduced based on allocation information received from the State. The Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT) Medi-Cal revenue has been incorporated into the standard Medi-Cal revenue based on the changes the State has made in the Department of Health Care Services in conjunction with Health Care Reform guidelines. Medicare revenue is decreased due to the Department referring this caseload to an outside professional. The State Projects for Assistance in Transition from Homelessness (PATH) grant is increased based on the allocation information received from the State. The Prior Year revenue lines represent reimbursement for prior fiscal years (2009-2010 and 2010-2011) cost report settlement claims from Medi-Cal and varies greatly year to year. The Department will request to recognize any revenue received from this source during Mid-Year Adjustments. The Other Insurance revenue line is reimbursement from third party insurance companies for Mental Health services that are now allowable under Health Care Reform guidelines. The Health Professional Shortage Area (HPSA) revenue is a grant for those areas designated as a shortage area based on the established Federal guidelines and revenue is not being requested as there are no Federal funds available at this time. The CalMHSA Grant revenue was a one-time grant of funds for the Mental Health Stigma reduction event. Transfer In from Mental Health Realignment is based on revenue projections from the State. The Transfer In from Fund 443 is the allowable overhead amount from the new Mental Health Services Act Triage Grant. This revenue will offset portions of salaries and other expenses related to implementing the new program.
The Department is requesting to add an Office Technician I, with the goal of increasing management/leadership time to effectively write and implement policies, provide clear direction and support to staff through supervisor, and enhance their overall leadership practices. Funding for this position is budgeted in the Contingency line item, pending review by Human Resources.
Salary and benefits are adjusted based on the recent concluded labor negotiations. The various adjustments in salary lines also represent redistributed staff allocations based on service demands. The Mental Health Clinician line now includes five staff positions that were previously budgeted in other Human Services divisions. This consolidation is due to the decreased caseload and associated funding in other programs such as Wrap Around and Mental Health Services Act. The Mental Health Assistant I was a contract funded position and the contract has now been terminated. The increase in Staff Services Analyst represents a 50% share of a recently filled position. The increase in Mental Health Aide is based on a larger portion of the position being paid from this budget using PATH grant funds. Extra-Help is decreased due to a reduced number of hours for the psychiatrist, based on actual expenditures from the prior year. Longevity is now included based on the number of employees qualifying for this benefit. The PERS Incentives are increased based on a larger pool of qualifying staff that receive this benefit. The Contracted-Transportation line item is reduced based on the anticipated success of the Mental Health Triage program where issues are resolved at the client’s location rather than transporting them to the hospital emergency room. The line item for Contracted Services for Inpatients is increased based on higher per day costs from contracted facilities. The implementation of the Mental Health Triage program is expected to help reduce the use of these facilities. The MIS Contract is the proportional share of the costs to operate and maintain the mental health computer system. The Purchased Services Other line is increased to account for newly contracted collections services. The Homeless Assistance line item is funded through the PATH grant and is intended to provide temporary housing on a very limited basis. The County Vehicle line item is reduced based on the redistribution of these expenses to the programs actually using the vehicles. The Cost Allocation line item is decreased to reflect the proportional share of the cost of services performed by other county departments. The Equipment and Software line items are increased for the purchase of replacement computers due to age and failing systems. The Training and Seminars line is increased to account for the training necessary due to newly hired personnel. The Department is requesting to purchase a new vehicle which will be shared with the Social Services division. The Transfer Out to Human Services Administration has increased due to the clerical staff now being budgeted in the Human Services Administration budget and negotiated salary and benefit adjustments. The Transfer From Social Services for Child Abuse Prevention, Intervention and Treatment (CAPIT) is no longer budgeted because of the Department’s shift to provide these services from a Community Based Organization.
Continue to implement an electronic health record program where medical, mental health, and alcohol and drug information can be kept for common clients.
? Continue to communicate with primary care providers to coordinate and eliminate duplication of services and medications for common clients.
Requested Changes:
The revenue received from Drug Medi-Cal reimbursements is reduced based on a reduced caseload. The Drug Court Enhancement Grant (SAMHSA) represents a full year of funding. The Prior Year Revenue line represents cost settlement funds from previous years and varies greatly year to year. No funding is requested at this time and the Department will submit a budget action item for this revenue at a later time when the settlement documents for Fiscal Year 2011-2012 are received. The 2011 Realignment revenue is budgeted in an amount to reflect a zero net county cost. Adjustments in salary and benefits reflect recently concluded labor negotiations. Longevity is now budgeted for employees that are eligible for this benefit. Appropriations are now requested in the Professional Services line item to account for the contracted services to be performed as part of the Drug Court Enhancement program. The decrease in the Management Information Systems (MIS) contract is based on actual usage of computer system. The Client Incentives line item represents a replenishing of stock incentive items and new purchases for the Drug Court Enhancement program. The Inpatient services line items reflect contracted residential stays for Drug Court participants and the Drug Testing line item is also reflective of costs associated with Drug Court participants. The Cost Allocation line is decreased based on the calculation of the use of county administrative services. To keep current on new Health Care Reform regulations and Drug Court Enhancements, the Training and Seminars line item is increased. Transfers Out to Probation and the District Attorney lines are also part of the Drug Court Enhancement program. The Transfers Out to Human Services Administration is increased based on clerical staff now being budgeted in the Human Services Administration budget. No appropriations for Contingency are requested this fiscal year. This budget has no net county cost.
Develop written policies and procedures and easy access to information and resources.
? Implement strategies identified in Child Welfare System Improvement Plan.
? Implement program changes, new programs, continue transition through health care reform and the next open enrollment.
? Evaluate internal systems and alternatives for management and training of changes in State-managed computer systems.
Requested Changes:
The funding received from “traditional” Realignment (fund #394) is decreased while funding from 2011 Realignment (fund #433) is increased based on anticipated revenue and available fund balances in both of these funds. The Transfers In for State and Federal revenues are adjusted based on allocation information received from the State.
Salary and benefit adjustments are reflective of the recently concluded labor negotiations. The Department is requesting to add one Office Technician I, and one Fraud Investigator. The Overtime line item is increased to account for the workload associated with Health Care Reform. The PERS Incentive and Longevity line items are increased based on the number of employees who qualify to receive these benefits. The Standby line is increased based on prior year expenditure amount. The department is budgeting appropriations for potential Unemployment and Accrued Benefit costs that may occur during the fiscal year.
Operational expenses in the services/supplies line items are adjusted based on actual costs in the prior fiscal year and on anticipated service demands. The Professional Services is adjusted to reflect the cost of anticipated contracts. No appropriations are requested for Subsidized Employment due to a lack of qualifying persons for the program. The Training line item represents a training contract with University California Davis and remains at 12 training days. Per SB 1036 the State now has a fixed Maintenance of Effort (MOE) for In Home Supportive Services (IHSS) rather than a cost sharing ratio and this is now shown in the IHSS MOE line item and will be adjusted based on the recently granted IHSS Provider wage increase. The timing of this adjustment is unknown, as the State continues to debate how to calculate it and when to make it effective. The department will submit a budget action item for the adjustment using Realignment funds when the State provides the necessary documentation. Appropriations in the Cal Works Transportation line item are adjusted based on prior year actual expenditures. County Vehicle is reduced based on estimated Fleet charges. The Cost Allocation line item is increased based on calculations for county services provided to this department. The department completed the upgrade to the computer system in the previous fiscal year and the Equipment line item is reduced accordingly. A new vehicle is requested that will be shared with the Behavioral Health

division and the Other Equipment represents the cost on adding Americans with Disabilities Act compliant automatic door mechanisms to the main entrance at the Human Services Center.
The increase in the amount of funding being transferred to the Human Services Administration budget accounts for the clerical positions in this unit and is increased as a result of the new labor contracts. Funding received from the Behavioral Health budget for on-call staff time during normal work hours, and funding out to Behavioral Health and Alcohol & Drug for the Child Abuse, Prevention, Intervention, and Treatment (CAPIT) are not being requested as these functions will be performed through contracts with community based organizations. Transfer Out to Behavioral Health for work done in relation to the CalWORKS program is requested to continue. The Contingency line represents the funding necessary to accommodate the additional staff requests and will be transferred to the appropriate salary/benefit line items if the positions are approved. There is no net county cost for this budget.
The revenue adjustments from the In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) waiver have been completed therefore it is not budgeted this year. The Transfers In lines reflect funding from State, Federal and Realignment sources and are budgeted based on current caseload demands. The adjustments to aid program expenditures are based on caseload demand for services. This budget has no net county cost.
To create a Department-wide action plan for improving the organizational climate and morale within the Human Services Department in an effort to best recruit and retain quality employees and to best serve the community.
? To strengthen a cohesive leadership team in order to best support staff within the organization and to address personnel issues as they arise.
? To build the knowledge and skills of the leadership team in budget and fiscal management and accountability in relation to local, State, and Federal funding sources.
Requested Changes:
The revenue received as HS Building Maintenance fund in the prior year was one time refund from the building owner therefore it is not included this fiscal year. Funding received from other Human Services divisions through the Transfers In line items are adjusted based on the level of administrative/overhead support provided to the respective divisions. Salary and benefits are adjusted as a result of the recently concluded labor negotiations and the Board approved reclassification of the Staff Services Manager to Administrative Analyst. The increase in Account Clerk II is reflective of filling a previous vacancy. The decrease in Account Clerk III is reflective of a portion of one position being funded through the Energy Grants budget. Appropriations are now included in the Longevity line item to account for the number of employees that qualify for this benefit. The Group Health line is increased based on a recent retirement.
The Communications and Postage line items are adjusted based on current expenditure trends. The Insurance line has increased based on the organizational change within the Department and calculation of claims over the past seven years. The Maintenance Building line item is increased to account for service contracts for the HVAC, water treatment on the HVAC system, elevator and other minor building maintenance issues. The Professional Services line is reduced based on completion of grant projects that used outside vendor services. The Purchased Services line item accounts for the email system, landscaping services, window washing, floor mats, alarm monitoring, internet connections and telephone system and is increased based on the contracts costs for these services. The Cost Allocation line item is increased based on administrative overhead charges as calculated by the Auditor’s department. The decreases to software licensing, and miscellaneous equipment lines represent one-time costs associated with a departmental computer domain project that is now complete. Other adjustments to service/supply line items are based on actual costs from the previous fiscal year. The reimbursements from other Human Services General Fund budgets are included in the Intrafund Transfers line items and are adjusted based on the calculated ratio of staff in those units. This budget has no net county cost.
Requested revenue is based on proposed Federal allocations for this program. Adjustments to salaries and benefits reflect the recently concluded labor negotiations. Minor adjustments are requested in service and supply line items based on prior year actual expenses and to meet anticipated service demands. The Equipment and Software lines were previously funded with one-time funds for computer hardware and systems upgrades. Additional funding is not anticipated this fiscal year.
Tutoring for students with dyslexia and other learning disabilities. ? Development of a quiet area for Literacy Tutoring. ? Extending WiFi to the Red Cloud Library. ? Establish a branch library in Cathey’s Valley.
Requested Changes:
The revenue from Library Fines and Fees is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts. Donation revenue is being budgeted in anticipation of funds to be received. Extra-Help is increased to reflect current staffing needs. Appropriations are now budgeted in Group Health for a retiree that is eligible to receive this benefit. Adjustments to service/supply line items are based on of prior year actual expenditures and anticipated service demands.
Livestock and natural resources program
? Prepare a needs assessment report from the input received from producers and develop relevant educational and extension programs addressing these needs.
? Monitor forage production on rangelands to track feed availability for livestock.
? Write grant proposals for research and trials on pertinent livestock production and weed management topics.
?
B. Master Gardener Program
? Host a successful 2014 MG statewide conference in October that includes a pre- and post-conference tour for about 500-600 participants.
? Continue offering fire-safe workshops and handouts.
C. 4-H Youth Development Program
? Take part in the statewide UC 100 year celebrations.
? Increase enrollment in 2014-15.
? Add a new club in the Greeley Hill area.
Requested Changes:
The Transfers In line item is Title III funding from the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-Determination Act that is used to fund fire prevention educational materials distributed through the Master Gardener program. Salaries and benefits are adjusted to account for recently concluded labor negotiations. Appropriations are now budgeted for Longevity based on employees qualifying for this benefit. There are minor adjustments to service and supply line items based on prior year actual expenditures and anticipated service demands.
Obtain grant fund from Calaveras-Mariposa Community Action Agency.
? Obtain funding for Movie in the Park.
? Continue to increase participation in our existing programs.
? Create new recreational opportunities for the community.
? Build new and strengthen existing working relationships with outside organizations.
? Obtain grant funding for recreational opportunities.
Requested Changes:
The revenue for this budget remains stable. The salaries and benefits are increased based on recently concluded labor negotiations. Appropriations are now budgeted in Longevity for employees who qualify for this benefit. The Extra-Help line item represents Day Camp, Lifeguard, Coaching and administrative staff needed for the anticipated use of the County’s swimming pools, day camp activities, and associated office support. The adjustments to service and supply line items are based on prior year actual costs and anticipated service demands.
The revenue from interest earnings is based on the estimated cash balance and interest rates. The funding received from the State is reduced based on estimated allocation amounts. Funding is requested to be transferred out to the Transit fund to offset operating expenses and the Miscellaneous Expense line item is decreased to balance the fund.
The revenue estimates are based on funding received from the State Rural Planning Assistance program and the State Transportation Improvement Program: Planning, Programming, and Monitoring Program (STIP-PPM) and are based on allocation letter received from the State as well as current rollover estimate. The Contracts line item is reduced based on completion of projects. Reimbursement for staff time of the Assistant Public Works Director – Support Services and to the Engineering/Surveyor budged for engineering services on STIP projects are budgeted in the In-County Services line item. The increased in the Administration line item is to account for services provided by Public Works administrative staff to this budget. The increase in Unmet Needs line item reflects anticipated demand. The Transfers Out line item accounts for the required Financial and Performance Audits and is paid from the Audit budget (001-0103). No Contingency amount is requested at this time.
The Transfers In are increased to provide Capital Improvement dollars from fund #501. Appropriations are decreased based on available revenue. The Transfer Out is to the Mariposa Creek project fund #506.
The revenues received from various Highway User Taxes (HUTA) are budgeted based on estimates from the State. The funding from the Intermodal Surface Transportation Exchange Act (ISTEA)/Exchange is increased based on preliminary allocations. The State HUTA revenue line is decreased based on estimates received. The Road Department Services line item represents Road staff time on maintenance of Zone of Benefits (ZOB) and is increased based on revenue received in the prior fiscal year. The Miscellaneous Revenue line represents fees received from Road Permits and is reduced based on prior year receipts.
The funding transferred from the Local Transportation Claim (fund #031) is requested in an amount based on available funding. Due to the overall reduction in Federal/State revenue, the department is requesting an increase in the General Fund contribution in order to maintain existing services. The Beginning Balance has increased based on estimates.
The Salary and benefits lines are adjusted based on recently concluded labor negotiations and staffing levels that include the hiring of a Road Superintendent at a lower salary, one less position in the Maintenance/Construction Supervisor line and an adjustment to Maintenance Worker III based on personnel issues. The Insurance line item is increased based on calculations of claims over prior years. The Professional Services line item is increased for engineering services provided by county engineering staff. The Professional Services – Construction is not being requested as the well testing project at the road maintenance yard is complete. The Cost Allocation line item is reduced based on the calculation for prior General Fund service usage. Other adjustments to service/supply line items are based on prior year actual costs, to meet anticipated service demands, and to adjust to the reduction in revenue.
Appropriations are budgeted at an amount that corresponds with available revenue. No requests for funding had been received at the time the budget was prepared.
The revenue from court fees is adjusted based on receipts received in the previous fiscal year. The appropriation for books is adjusted based on the estimated cost for legal subscription service. There are no Office Expense items anticipated at this time.
The revenue from Fire Assessments is based on the calculation of the number of properties to be assessed. The Transfers In amount represents the County’s contribution from the Tobacco Settlement fund. The Beginning Balance is increased based on estimates. The Miscellaneous Expense line item represents available funding for repairs to existing fire stations and is increased based on available revenue. The Fire Assessment Services line item accounts for reimbursing the Auditor and Tax Collector for their staff time and associated costs with collecting and managing the fire assessment. The requested funding in the Transfers Out – Debt Service line item is the payment on the fire engines. No funding is requested at this time to be Transferred Out for capital improvements to fire stations this fiscal year.
The revenue from interest earnings is based on current interest rates and available cash balance. The Loan Repayments line item reflects payment from the Coulterville Service Area sewer bonds. The Office Technician I line item is for possible staff time provided by Administration in preparing Water Agency agendas and minutes. The Professional Services line item is increased to recognize the anticipated cost of funding outside legal services relating to the agreement with the Merced Irrigation District (MID), County Counsel services, as well as the consulting contract with Mariposa Public Utilities District. The Non-Dedicated Funds line item reflects money available for special projects approved by the Board of Directors. The Cost Allocation line is increased based on calculations of support activities.
The revenue is adjusted based on actual amounts collected in the prior fiscal year. Appropriations in the Professional Services line item are for reimbursable work provided by Facilities Maintenance as well as any possible outside repair service.
The revenue is adjusted based on the prior year’s actual receipts. The Transfer In from the Coulterville Utility Capital Fund is not anticipated this fiscal year. The services and supply line items are adjusted based on anticipated service needs and available funding. The Special Fees line item is decreased based on prior year expenditures.
The Miscellaneous Revenue represents money received from leasing county owned property for cattle grazing. The appropriations for horse trails and operating expenses are requested in amounts that correspond with available revenue and estimated service demands.
The revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts and to recognize reduced property values. The line item Leachate/Septic Haul Fees accounts for charges collected from the County’s Landfill for accepting and disposing of leachate and none are anticipated at this time. The Transfer In line represents funding from the Capital Utility Fund and will be used to offset increased appropriations in the Maintenance Equipment line item for possible maintenance/repair needs. The Laboratory Expense line item is increased to account for new testing regulations. The Professional Services line item represents charges from the Plant Operator budget for maintenance costs.
The revenues are adjusted based on prior year actual receipts and estimated beginning fund balance. Various service and supply appropriations are adjusted to correspond with available revenue and anticipated service demands. The Rents/Leased Equipment line item reflects rental of an 80-foot man-lift to for the possible need of repairing/replacing street lights. The Contingency line is requested in an amount necessary to balance the fund.
The reimbursement to Public Works staff for maintenance work is reflected in the Professional Services line item and support functions are reflected in the Administrative Services line item. Funding is again being requested to be Transferred Out to the Mariposa Pines Utility Capital Fund.
The appropriations are adjusted based on the amount of available funding, with the Professional Services line item representing costs associated with the bulk item pick up and pine needle cleanup programs The increase in Contracts line item is reflective of the contract with Total Waste for waste disposal services.
The revenue amounts are adjusted based on actual amounts collected in the prior fiscal year, current interest rates, and anticipated delinquencies. The Transfers In line item represents funding being transferred in from the Yosemite West Capital Fund (#535) to help offset maintenance/repairs costs. The majority of appropriation line items are adjusted based on prior year actual expenses and anticipated service level demands. The Maintenance of Equipment – Sewer line item is decreased based on prior year expenditure. The Professional Services – Sewer line item represents the contract for plant operations. Based on projected expenses relating to maintenance the Maintenance Equipment – Water is decreased and the Professional Services – Water reflects the continuing costs for the services by Provost & Pritchard. Utilities – Water is reduced, but does include a calculated increase associated with the Lowry System Air Striper coming online.
The Beginning fund balance and interest earned make up the residual funding being requested in the Unclassified line item for use by the Sheriff for law enforcement purposes related to illegal drug investigations.
The beginning fund balance and interest earned make up the residual funding that is requested in the Unclassified line item for use by the Sheriff for law enforcement purposes related to criminal investigation activities.
The revenue from the State Community Based Child Abuse Prevention grant is based on the allocation information received from the State. The requested amount in the Family Resource Programs are for child abuse prevention activities, while the Transfers Out line item represents funding transferred to the Children’s Trust Fund (#374) and to the Social Services budget (001-0501) for reimbursement of staff time spent working on this program.
The revenue is requested based upon allocation schedules distributed by the State. There are no appropriations requested in the Miscellaneous Expense line item based on available funding. The Transfer Out to the Sheriff’s operating budget helps to offset the cost of two Deputy Sheriff positions and is reduced from the previous fiscal year based on the State’s funding allocation. There is no funding available for transfer to the Jail or District Attorney.
There is no grant revenue anticipated in this fiscal year. Appropriations are requested in amounts that reconcile with revenue received in previous fiscal years. The Construction line item reflects available grant funds for qualified housing rehabilitation projects. The administration of this CDBG budget unit has been transferred to the Economic Development Coordinator for ease of reporting.
To fully utilize the new software for the client database and implement interactions with the state system whereby providing the Energy program with better automation of information and claiming processes.
? To provide energy assistance and weatherization services in a prompt and efficient manner.
Requested Changes:
The Grant revenue is adjusted based on estimated unexpended 2014 grant funds and anticipated grant funding to be received this fiscal year. The Grant revenue for the purchase of the new software and computer upgrade is no longer requested as the project has been completed.
The salary line items represent county employees but are in categories that correspond to the reporting requirements of the grants, with the exception of the Weatherization Worker and are adjusted for the recently concluded labor negotiations. The Account Clerk III is an existing position that is now partly being allocated here for grant tracking purposes. The Extra-Help hours are reduced based on anticipated weatherization projects. The appropriations for services and supplies are adjusted based on the level of grant funding and estimated service demands. There are no appropriations being requested for software and equipment as the project is complete. The appropriations for community energy services are adjusted to match the budget schedule from the State.
The administration of the County’s CSBG funds was transferred to Calaveras County in fiscal year 2012-2013. There is no new revenue estimated to be received this fiscal year. The remaining fund balance represents the accumulated interest revenue and is budgeted in the Client Services line to balance the fund.
Continued community outreach growth through participation on various committees.
? Market department programs through outreach, updating brochures, participation and collaboration with other community entities.
Requested Changes:
The requested General Fund contribution is increased based on the reduced beginning balance. The salaries and benefits line items are adjusted to reflect recently concluded labor negotiations. Other requested changes in appropriations are based on prior year actual costs and anticipated service demands.
Grow participation in the congregate and home delivered meal services.
? Continued community outreach growth through participation in various committees.
Requested Changes:
The C-1 Revenue from Area 12 Agency on Aging and the Federal Nutrition Services Incentives Program (NSIP) are reduced based on estimates. The General Fund contribution is requested to increase due to declining fund balance and salary/benefit adjustments from recently concluded labor negotiations. The Extra-Help line is reduced based on prior year expenditure. The Insurance line item is increased to account for workers’ compensation claims experience.

The various service and supply line items are adjusted based on prior year actual expenses and anticipated service demands.
The C-2 Revenue from Area 12 Agency on Aging and the Federal Nutrition Services Incentives Program (NSIP) are increased based on an estimated increase in services units on which the allocation is based. The remaining revenue adjustments are based on prior year actual receipts and anticipated donation levels. The General Fund contribution is requested to increase based upon the estimated year-end fund balance and available revenue. The Extra-Help line is reduced based on prior year expenditure. The Insurance line item is increased to account for workers’ compensation claims experience. The Raw Food line item reflects increasing costs due to drought conditions. The Catered Food item is increased based on the increase of service units from Area 12 on Aging. All other adjustments to service and supply line items are based on prior year actual expenses.
The Restaurant Revenue from Area 12 Agency on Aging and the Federal Nutrition Services Incentives Program (NSIP) are reduced based on estimated units of service used to calculate the allocation. The Voucher Reimbursement line is increased based on prior year actual receipts and increased cost of meals served. The General Fund contribution is increased based on anticipated service demands. The salaries and benefits line are adjusted based on the recently concluded labor negotiations. The Voucher Reimbursement appropriations line item is increased based on an increase in the number of meals anticipated to be served. The adjustments to other service and supply line items are based on prior year actual costs and anticipated service demands.
The Federal government is expected to extend this funding source and the revenue is budgeted based on prior year receipts. The Professional Services line represents contracts with the Fire Safe Council and South West Interface Project. The Transfers Out line item represents the continued funding of the operational costs associated with the Master Gardener program in the Cooperative Extension budget.
This fund was established in Fiscal Year 2007/08 when the development application was submitted and there has been limited project work to date on this project. No new revenue is requested and all available funding is budgeted in the Professional Services line item for legal advisement on the proposed project.
This project has been inactive and all remaining funding has been transferred out to the Planning Department for reimbursement of staff time on the project. No revenue or appropriations are requested. Governmental accounting standards require that this fund be included in the budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
Continue to provide intervention services to the school district to reduce truancy rates.
? Continue to provide intervention services the help reduce suspension/expulsion of problematic students.
Requested Changes:
The revenue is requested based on preliminary State allocation. Appropriations are requested to be Transferred Out to the Probation operating budget in a corresponding amount.
The RCCP revenue remains stable. The Transfers Out lines to the Sheriff’s operating budget represents funding for one Sergeant, four Deputy Sheriffs, and one Dispatcher. The Transfers Out lines to Jail, Probation and District Attorney is in support of positions in those respective operating budgets. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is requested in an amount necessary to balance the fund.
The revenue requested is based on preliminary calculations provided by the State and the School District. A portion of the available funding is requested to be Transferred Out to the Behavioral Health budget for eligible program costs, while remaining funding is budgeted in the Office Expense line item in order to balance the fund.
Requested Changes:
The revenue is decreased based on receipts from the prior year. The Extra-Help line funds staff for assistance with the collection of DNA evidence and remaining funding is appropriated in the Miscellaneous Expense line item for possible future expenses related to this program and to balance the fund.
The Domestic Violence revenue line is reduced based on prior year actual receipts and appropriations are adjusted to correspond with available funding.
A portion of this funding is for Extra-Help that provides maintenance/repair services for the Jail facility. Insurance is now being charged based on the use of extra help staff. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is adjusted based on available funding and to balance the fund.
The Incentives revenue is based on prior year’s receipts. The Transfer In line reflects possible collection of Social Service funds repaid to the department that cannot be identified to a particular program. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is requested in an amount that is based on available funding and to balance the fund.
Based on reconciliation and tracking needs, the fund now has three sub-funds; ASSISTANCE ADVANCE 363-0535; ADMINITRATIVE ADVANCE 363-0536 and ASSISTANCE REPAYMENTS 363-0537. The Assistance and Administrative Advance sub-fund revenue amounts are requested based upon preliminary projections provided by the State and Federal Governments. The Transfers Out for specific programs are adjusted accordingly. The Transfers Out line in ADMINISTRATIVE ADVNACE represents funding to the Probation department for assistance with carrying out Title IV requirements and is reduced based on prior year expenditure and new Federal guidelines on allowable costs.
The ASSISTANCE REPAYMENT sub-fund is budgeted based on prior year receipts. The appropriations represent the State share of the repayment that must be refunded to the State and the Transfers out is the County share of the repayments that are used to support Social Service programs through the Incentive Fund (#362).
Appropriations are adjusted based on the estimated year-end fund balance. The line item Discount on Tax Due is to cover shortages of less than $10 on tax bills.
The revenue is reduced based on actual receipts from the prior fiscal year. Appropriations are adjusted to correspond with available revenue.
The revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual collections and appropriations are adjusted based on available revenue and estimated year-end fund balance.
The Interest earned revenue is reduced based on the estimated cash balance and current interest rates. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is increased based on the estimated year-end fund balance and available revenue. The Transfers Out line represents the County’s contribution to the County Service Area (CSA) #3.
Requests for reimbursement must be made by a certain date in order to be included in the State Budget, and for several budget cycles this deadline has been missed resulting in a negative cash balance. Staff in the Auditor’s Department have corrected this issue. Revenue is requested in the amount necessary to reimburse the County for costs occurred in previous fiscal years, while the estimated costs for the storage of the vehicle and defense records for this fiscal year are included in the Miscellaneous Expense line item.
LAFCO fees are adjusted based upon anticipated fee receipts. The Transfer In represents the General Fund contribution needed to balance the fund. The Professional Services line item represents costs associated with Municipal Service Review (MSR), SOI boundary studies, and annexation/reorganization proposals. The Transfer Out to the Planning operating budget is to account for staff time on annexation proposals.
Revenue and appropriations are budgeted based on preliminary funding estimates from the Federal and State Governments and to meet anticipated service needs.
The reclamation activities have been completed and all funds expended. Government accounting regulations require that this budget be included in the Annual Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
Funding is again requested to be Transferred In from the Family Preservation (#328) fund to meet the required minimum funding level for community based child abuse prevention needs and support the Child Abuse Prevention Council (CPAC) activities. Appropriations are adjusted to correspond with available revenue and the estimated year-end fund balance.
Revenue is based on prior year actual collections. Appropriations are budgeted in the Miscellaneous Expense line item for future needs of the department and are based on available funding and the estimated year-end fund balance.
This fund has been closed, but governmental accounting practices require that this fund be included in the budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
The Revenue from traffic fines is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts. The Medical Services Providers line item represents funding available to local physicians for emergency care provided to the indigent and for which the physician is personally liable. The appropriations in the Hospital line item are distributed to John C. Fremont Health Care District based on a legislative formula for unreimbursed medical services provided to the indigent. The Transfers Out line item reimburses the Health budget for the management of this fund.
The revenue from Interest earnings and recordings are adjusted based on current interest rates and actual receipts from the previous fiscal year. The Transfer In line item represents a partial repayment from the Social Security Truncation fund (#419) for the purchase of software to remove the first five digits of social security numbers from recorded documents and create a “public record” document. Appropriation adjustments are based on available revenue and the estimated year-end fund balance.
Interest earnings are based on current interest rates. Miscellaneous revenue represents the possible receipt of funds from unclaimed estates. Appropriations are adjusted to balance the fund.
There are no requested changes. Appropriations may be used for expenses that are not covered by other Human Services programs.
The revenue received from Interest earnings is reduced based on current interest rates. The Beginning Balance is based on estimates. The Professional Services line item contains appropriations to continue with the preservation of historical records. The Equipment line item is increased for the purchase of two replacement computers that are used for recording purposes. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is increased to balance the fund.
The revenue is based on receipt of assessment and tax collections fees. The appropriations are adjusted based prior year actual costs and anticipated service demands. The Transfers Out line item represents funding being transferred out to the Treasurer/Tax Collector budget to partially offset the cost of tax billing documents. The Miscellaneous expense line item is increased to balance the fund.
These funds have been depleted and the account closed. Government accounting regulations require that this budget be included in the Annual Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
The funding received from sales tax is slightly decreased and vehicle license fee (VLF) is increased based on State estimates using a new distribution structure. The County Medical Services Program (CMSP) VLF represents the amount withheld by the State to fund this program. The Transfers Out line items are to offset expenses in the Health operating budget and are adjusted to correspond with available revenue.
The 2011 Realignment is increased based on current state estimates. The Transfers out are adjusted according to anticipated needs in the corresponding operating budgets. The Miscellaneous expense line item is to balance the fund.
The Realignment revenue is increased to account for caseload growth and general sales tax growth owed to the County for previous fiscal years. The appropriations being transferred out to the Social Services, Social Service Programs, Wraparound, and In-Home Supportive Services Public Authority have decreased based on prior year expenditures and anticipated service demands. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is increased to balance the fund.
The requested revenue represents a State grant provided by the Federal government for bioterrorism/public health emergency preparedness activities. The Miscellaneous Expense line item reflects interest earnings and residual grant funds from the previous grant award. The Transfers Out line item transfers available grant funding to the Health operating budget for eligible costs associated with the bioterrorism/public health emergency program.
The First Five Dental program is estimated to increase. The Miscellaneous Expense line item represents accumulated interest earnings and is used to balance the fund. The funding being transferred out to the Health operating budget is in an amount equal to the grant award.
Funding from donations received during the Gambusia (mosquito fish) distribution day are requested at the same level as the previous fiscal year and appropriations for expenses related to the distribution day (media, bags, fish) are adjusted to correspond with available revenue and the estimated year-end fund balance.
The fund has been separated into four sub-budget units for accounting tracking purposes: 410-0436 will account for Children’s and Adult’s System of Care; 410-0437 will account for Prevention Education and Intervention; 410-0438 will account for Workforce Education, and Training and 410-0439 will account for Innovation. The Transfers In line item represents funding from the Mental Health Realignment Fund (#393) that will be used to fund core services. The adjustments to Salary and Benefit line items include recently concluded labor negotiations and a significant redistribution of staff positions to the Mental Health budget based on caseload, demands for services and available funding in concurrence with the corrective action plan. Due to the change in accounting, revenue and appropriations are all adjusted so that corresponding transactions can be tracked to the appropriate funding component of the fund. The Contingency line items in each unit are increased to balance that sub-fund and the overall fund budget.
The revenue lines are adjusted based on estimated allocations from the State and Federal governments. The Transfers In amount reflects the County’s Maintenance Of Effort (MOE) amount from Social Services Realignment (fund #394). The amount of funding transferred to the Social Services operating budget (#001-0501) is decreased to match the current contract level. The increase in Contingency is to balance the fund. The other adjustments to appropriations are based on prior fiscal year actual amounts and anticipated program needs.
The revenue lines are budgeted based on anticipated collections and prior year actual receipts. The appropriations are adjusted based on available revenue and the estimated year-end fund balance.
The County has received its allocated amount so no new revenue is requested and only a fund balance is requested. Appropriations are adjusted based on the estimated year-end fund balance.
Increase overall collections by increased contact with clients. Revenue & Recovery schedules meetings with clients after regularly scheduled meetings with probation officers.
? Increase victim restitution payments through a more coordinated partnership with Probation. Officers.
? Improve communication with victims.
Requested Changes:
The revenue from Collections is estimated based on prior year receipts. The Transfers In from the Community Corrections Program (AB 109 fund #432) is based on work and collection efforts related to this program. Appropriations are adjusted based on available funding. There is no net-county cost in this program.
Complete the implementation of a juvenile case management system that will reduce time spent compiling data for reporting purposes.
Requested Changes:
The Grant funding is received in advance for the next fiscal year and is expected to stay at the same level. The changes in the salary and benefits line items reflect staff reallocation as well as adjustments for the recently concluded labor negotiations. The appropriations are requested based on prior year actual expenditures and available funding.
The revenue being requested is based on the estimated number of recorded documents the department will receive this fiscal year and appropriations are budgeted accordingly. The Transfers Out represents available funding to be transferred to the Recorders Modernization fund for reimbursement of the truncation software purchase.
The APSA and ER grant programs have been completed and the revenue requested this fiscal year will be transferred to the Health operating budget to offset the costs of purchasing computer equipment that will be used in the field by environmental health staff assigned to the CUPA program.
The reimbursements from Medi-Cal billing are reduced based on current case load. The Miscellaneous Revenue line item is reduced as no revenue from the Social Security Administration is anticipated at this time. The Transfers In line items are based on caseload, available funding, and 2011 Realignment guidelines. The salary and benefits line items are adjusted due to a reallocation of certain positions based on job responsibilities and case load. Various service/supply line items are adjusted based prior year actual costs and on estimated service demands. The Professional Services line represents a contract for specific counseling services not offered by the Department. The Transfers Out to Human Services Administration represents this fund’s portion of overhead and administrative services. The Transfers Out – Probation line item provides funding to the Probation budget for 40% of a Deputy Probation Officer I/II assigned to this program. A Contingency is requested to balance the fund and for possible unanticipated program expenses.
The revenue is adjusted based on the respective grants and their timelines. The appropriations are adjusted to match available grant funds and are for the services provided by VSBDC, reimbursement of county staff time, funding available for loans to qualifying Mariposa County businesses, and promotional and operational expenses. For tracking and reporting purposes, this funding has been combined with the Microenterprise Assistance Loan fund (#425).
The outstanding loan balances and residual funding have been transferred the Microenterprise Assistance Grant fund #424 to allow for better accounting, tracking and reporting. Government accounting regulations require that this budget be included in the Annual Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
The Transfers Out line items represent available funding to reimburse the Health operating budget for allowable expenses.
Increase employment and educational services.
? Increase housing assistance programs or opportunities.
? Implement a graduated sanction program for technical violations of supervision.
? Implement a graduated incentive program to reward positive behavior.
Requested Changes:
The revenue is requested in an amount as provided in a State formula, including growth estimates. Appropriations are requested in specific line items to carry out the requirements of AB 109 as recommended by the Executive Committee of the Community Corrections Partnership and approved by the Board of Supervisors. The Extra-Help line item will fund 960 hours of a Deputy Probation Officer I/II, and Overtime will offset costs associated with Deputy Probation Officers and Deputy Sheriffs for performing Probation Enforcement Apprehension Team (PEAT) operations. The Work Program Expense line item is established in support of department goals to increase employment related to parolee transition costs back into the community. The Board approved contract with Mountain Crisis Services is included in the Professional Services line item. Fixed assets include continued Jail expansion project. The Transfers Out line item reflects funding being transferred out to the Jail budget to offset the additional Jail Officer positions that the Board approved in the previous fiscal year, to Probation, Revenue and Recovery, and Indigent Defense, to offset costs associated with the additional job duties created by this legislation. Contingency is increased to balance the fund.
The revenue line items are based on the preliminary State allocations and revenue formulas for specific programs, and are now consolidated for ease of accounting. Funding is budgeted in specific line items to be transferred out to the respective Human Services operating budgets as eligible expenses are recorded and reported. Funding being transferred to one budget is consolidated into one line item.
Increase employment and educational services.
? Increase housing assistance programs or opportunities.
? Implement a progressive sanction program for technical violations of supervision.
? Implement a progressive incentive program to encourage positive behavior.
Requested Changes:
The revenue being requested is based on State allocations of the grant awards to counties. The adjustments to salary and benefits line items are reflective of the recently concluded labor negotiations. The Extra-Help line is also requested to assist with the anticipated workload. Appropriations are requested in specific line items to carry out the evidence based program requirements. The line for Electronic Monitors, Vehicle Expense and Fuel are increased based on anticipated needs. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is increased to balance the fund.
Revenue is requested based on grant awarded by the State. The Transfers Out line item reflects funding available to be transferred to the Health operating budget once eligible grant expenses have been recorded.
The revenue is requested based on the State allocated grant award. The Salaries and benefits lines are adjusted to account for the recently concluded labor negotiations. The Insurance line item is increased based on the liability and worker’s compensation claims to the program. No Vehicle or Fuel expenses are anticipated. The Miscellaneous Expense line item represents prior fiscal year unspent grant funds and to balance the fund.
This grant has been completed. Remaining residual funding has been transferred out to General Purpose Revenue in order to close out this fund. Government accounting regulations require that this budget be included in the Annual Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
The revenue line time is based on the estimated amount necessary to provide sufficient court security. The appropriations are requested based on the cost of the assigned Deputy Sheriff and the estimated cost of the Extra-Help Bailiffs. The salary and benefit lines are increased to account for recent labor negotiations. The Insurance line item is increased as costs for previous years can now be calculated.
This is a onetime grant that has now concluded. The unspent balance will need to be returned to the grantor and is budgeted in the Miscellaneous line item. Government accounting regulations require that this budget be included in the Annual Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
The grant will fund a portion of two Social Workers Supervisors, one full time Mental Health Assistant I and Extra Help Mental Health workers to provide 24/7/365 mental health crisis response. The Transfer Out is the allowable portion of funding for overhead expenses and is transferred to the Mental Health operating budget. The Contingency line item is used to balance the fund.
The fund balance in Fund 501 is being used to fund the Park Stairs project with a portion of the remaining balance going back to Land purchase fund #034 from the Midpines land purchase and the remainder back to the County general Fund. The Courthouse Construction fund – #502 is adjusted based actual revenue receipts received in the previous fiscal year and the residual funding for continued courthouse construction and the possible remodel of the downstairs courtroom. The MCCJF Construction - #503 increase in revenue is based on prior year receipts. The appropriations line item increased to balance the fund. The Public Transportation Modernization Improvement and Service Account (PTMISA) Fund #507 accounts for grant revenue and appropriations for a generator at the Fleet building and for restrooms at the Park & Ride which were approved by the Board with Resolution LTC 12-5. The revenue and appropriations in the Sidewalk Projects #510 are to be used for sidewalks at Mariposa Elementary School and along Bullion Street. The revenue and appropriations in the County Road Projects – Fund #511 are adjusted to account for State and Federal funding received for specific road projects. Included in this fund are the State Transportation Improvement Program (STIP), the Safe, Accountable, Flexible and Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users (SAFETEA-LU) projects such as Mt. Bullion Cutoff, Bullion Street, Mariposa Creek Signage, Oak Grove Bridge, and Triangle Road. Fund #512 – County Bridge Replacement is newly established to specifically account for revenue associated with bridge replacement and repairs, which were previously budgeted in the Road Fund.
Full funding and appropriations associated with Coulterville Drainage Project are budgeted in Fund #513. No revenue or appropriations are requested in the Don Pedro Fire Station – Fund #517, Fish Camp Fire Station – Fund #518, the Midpines Fire Station – Fund #519 and the Bridgeport Fire Station – Fund #521 as these projects have been completed. The residual funding in the Coulterville Utility Capital Fund - #530 is budgeted in the Miscellaneous line item to balance the fund. The funding from the Don Pedro Utility Capital – Fund #532 is requested to be transferred to the Don Pedro Sewer Fund #316. Additional funding is being requested for Transfer In to the Mariposa Pines Utility Capital Fund - #534 from the Mariposa Pines operating budget and appropriations are adjusted to reflect this additional revenue. Available funding in the Yosemite West Utility Capital Fund #535 is requested to be Transferred Out to the Yosemite West Maintenance budget for repairs to the waste-water treatment plant.
The revenue from construction permits is increased based on anticipated projects occurring during the fiscal year. Due to building activity still not generating sufficient revenue, the department is anticipating again requiring General Fund support. The salaries and benefits line items are increased to account for full year of Development Services Technician and recently concluded labor negotiations. The Extra-Help line is increased to cover an inspector position. The Office Expense line item is increased based on anticipated increase in workload and computer upgrades. The Professional Services line item represents the anticipated use of contracted plan check services. The Vehicle and Fuel expense lines are increased based on anticipated increase in demand for inspections. The Training & Seminars line is increased based on requirements to maintain International Code Council Certifications. The Contingency line is increased based on request for additional personnel needs associated with increased workload.
Replace landfill bulldozer.
? Install bailer system and support equipment to save on shipping cost and increase the value of our commodities. (Find new markets)
? Increase diversion by adding animation to the sorting process. (Convert facility to MRF)
Requested Changes:
Fund # 601 – Solid Waste Operations: The funding from a Department of Conservation grant is not anticipated this fiscal year. No E Waste, scale fee, scrap metal recycling or CRV processing revenue is anticipated this fiscal year. The increase in salary and benefits account for recently concluded labor negotiations. The Extra Help line is expected to decrease while Overtime is increased.
The Maintenance of Equipment and Maintenance of Building line items are both decreased based on the amount of anticipated repair work on heavy equipment and the Compost Facility. The Professional Services line item is reduced based on anticipated contracts and administrative services provided by Public Works Administration. The Cost Allocation line is increased based on General Fund administrative services provided to this department. The Equipment line item includes purchases of: roll off bins for placement at the Transfer Stations, two-way communication radios and security cameras. The Software line item reflects the purchase of operating system upgrades on four computers. The Fuel Expense line is increased based on fuel prices. The Training & Seminars line is reduced based on available funding. The appropriation for Land represents the purchase of property at the Landfill for monitoring wells. The Transfers Out represents funding to the newly established Solid Waste Heavy Equipment fund for the eventual replacement of the equipment. The Retirement of Long Term Debt represents the principal and interest payments on the USDA Loan for the Compost Facility. The Capital Lease Principal represents payments on the bulldozer, roll-off truck, and compactor.
The costs to operate the Transfer Stations are shown as sub-budgets. Staff have placed county bins at the Transfer Stations and are now performing hauling activities, resulting in a decrease in the Transportation Hauling line items. Other appropriation line items are adjusted based on prior year actual expenditures and anticipated service demands.
Fund #602 – Solid Waste Closure: There are no requested changes to this fund.
Continue to provide transportation services to all county residents through Dial-A-Ride.
Requested Changes:
No Interest earnings are requested based on a low cash balance. The revenue received from Area 12 Agency on Aging is increased slightly based on estimates. The Transit Fares revenue line is reduced based on prior year actual receipts. The revenue from the Local Transportation Claim is requested in an amount necessary to balance the fund. The STAP allocation is increased based on state estimates. The adjustments to salary/benefits include recently concluded labor negotiations. The Extra help line is increased to provide a second bus driver for additional North County run on Wednesdays for Drug Court in collaboration with the Human Services Department. The Department is requesting to purchase a vehicle to replace one that has been decommissioned due to engine failure. The Contingency line item represents vehicle replacement or repairs due to service needs or accidents. Other appropriations adjustments are based on prior year actual costs and to meet anticipated service demands.
The Revenue lines for Hangar Space, CAAP funds, and Fuel Sales are all increased based on prior year trends. The Miscellaneous Revenue line item reflects the payment on the long term debt of the hangars that is collected by the FBO through hangar lease payments that are now budgeted in Hangar Space Rents. The Transfer In from the General Fund is not requested this year as the facility is expected to be self-sufficient. The Group Health for Retirees is decreased based on the medical benefits a retiree is eligible to receive. The appropriations are requested in the various line items to account for the necessary operations of an airport, including but not limited to; communications, building and equipment maintenance, utilities, replacement of runway lighting, fuels and Professional Services line item for consultant services. The retirement of the long term debt represents the loan repayment on hangars.
This project has been completed and remaining appropriations are requested to be transferred to the Special Aviation Fund - #613 for use on specific airport projects. Government accounting regulations require that this budget be included in the Annual Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
All airport operations have been consolidated into the Public Way and Facilities – Airports fund #610. Government accounting regulations require that this budget be included in the Annual Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
This grant project has been completed and no grant revenue is requested. Residual grant funding is requested to be transferred out to the Road Fund to offset a portion of unreimbursed expenses incurred on this project. Government accounting regulations require that this budget be included in the Annual Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
The revenue requested is an amount based on estimated staff time and operating expenses from the previous fiscal year. A General Fund contribution is requested until such time as costs are known and rates charged to the Special Districts are revised. The salary and benefits line items reflect the costs associated with the recently concluded labor negotiations. The Extra Help is increased for a maintenance worker at Yosemite West. The Longevity line item is increased based on employees who now qualify for this benefit. The Standby/Call back line is increased based on prior year expenditure. The variouis service and supply line items are based partially on estimated costs for operating the division and prior year actuals expenditures.
Maintain all 403 vehicles and equipment and provide support for County Emergency Services.
? Evaluate and adjust the vehicle and equipment rates to accommodate the increasing requirements and costs.
? Keep staffing levels up to accommodate County Department needs.
? Purchase and put into service replacement vehicles and equipment in the same budget year.
Requested Changes:
The revenue received from Interest earnings is reduced based on current interest rates. The revenue received from departments for maintenance on vehicles is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts. The Non-Fleet Policy Charges reflects reimbursement from departments for additional equipment (trailer hitches, fuel tanks, etc.) that are requested on certain vehicles. The Transfer In line is County General Fund contribution for increased standby expenditure. The salary and benefits line items are increased based on the recently concluded labor negotiations. The Longevity line item is increased based on the number of employees who qualify for this benefit. Various appropriation line items are adjusted based on available revenue and anticipated service demands. The Transfers Out line item represents the department’s payment on the Fleet Maintenance Shop building loan.
The Transfer In is from the Solid Waste fund #601. The interest and beginning balance line items are estimates based on prior year. The appropriations are adjusted accordingly.
The Depreciation and Replacement line items are requested for the command and patrol vehicles, and one water tender, and are adjusted based on the depreciation schedule. The CSA#3 Replacement line item accumulates depreciation/replacement charges for the new equipment that was purchased with County Service Area #3 funding. The funding for these line items is budgeted in appropriation line items in the Fire operating budget. The Vehicles line item reflects accumulated and new funding for future replacement purchases of fire apparatus.
The Replacement and Depreciation line items are adjusted based on existing county vehicles/equipment and the estimated cost to replace these vehicles.
Fund #705 – General Insurance: The revenue and appropriations are adjusted to reflect the reimbursement for insurance premiums, Group Health for Retirees costs, and Unemployment charges. The Special Insurance line item was used in the prior year to balance the fund balance and is not requested this year.
Fund #706 – Workers’ Compensation: The revenue is adjusted based on reimbursement needed from departments for premiums and workers’ compensation medical and administrative costs. The appropriations for the Workers’ Compensation line are increased based on actual costs incurred in the previous fiscal year. . An audit on our insurance funds determined that the County’s Workers’ Compensation fund is under-funded. To correct this situation, the reserve in the Workers’ Compensation fund is requested at an amount equal to the previous fiscal year.
Fund #707 – Liability: The revenue is adjusted based on reimbursement needed from departments for premiums and liability claims. To set aside sufficient funding for existing and potential claims the Reserve is requested to be increased as this is the funding that is used once claims are filed and begin to accrue expenditures.
The revenue is budgeted in the amounts necessary to satisfy the Principal and Interest payments based on the terms of the loan.
Revenue is adjusted based on anticipated receipts and appropriations are budgeted accordingly.
The revenue and appropriation adjustments are based on prior year actual collections and to balance the fund.
Revenue is adjusted based on anticipated receipts and funding transferred in from the Lake Don Pedro Waste Water Treatment Plant Bond Reserve fund and appropriations are budgeted accordingly.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual collections, and appropriations are requested to be transferred out to the Lake Don Pedro Waste Water Treatment Plant Bond fund.
Revenue is requested in the amount necessary to satisfy the principal and interest amounts contained in the loan.
