Implement measures to assure that the county is free
from the European Grape Vine Moth.
¨ Conduct delimitation for Light Brown Apple Moth in the
Fort Bragg area and prepare for possible additional moth
catches.
¨ Fulfill contracted requirements for work in the
following programs: Organic; Sudden Oak Death; Nursery
inspection; Glassy Winged Sharpshooter; Detection trapping
(three (3) different programs); Pesticide Use data entry;
Pest Exclusion; and Petroleum.
¨ Seek the adoption of new Williamson Act Policies and
Procedures by the Board of Supervisors.
¨ Maintain 100% commercial device inspections for
annually inspected devices.
¨ Acquire a Bell Prover for vapor meter testing.
¨ Update and improve the Department’s web page.
Continued participation in the County Leadership
Initiative program.
¨ Purchase and utilize a portable particulate matter
monitor to assist with identifying sources in remote areas
as well as effects from wildfires.
¨ Provide continuing educational opportunities for all
staff members.
Discover and locate all locally assessable property in
the County.
¨ Annually prepare a local assessment roll that includes
the reappraisal of personal property, decline in value
assessments and any real property that has undergone a
change in ownership or contains new construction.
¨ Deliver the annual roll to the County Auditor-
Controller by July 1 of each year.
¨ Perform mandatory audits of business personal
property and fixtures.
Make voter registration readily available to all who
are eligible to register to vote.
¨ Conduct fair and impartial elections.
¨ Produce accurate election results.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which is $100,000 less than the assigned Net
County Cost due to an increase in anticipated election reimbursements from other entities.
Continue to maintain the public record in a secure and
easily accessible environment.
¨ Continue to provide courteous and efficient service to
members of the public who require information
maintained by this office.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which is requesting a reduction in
contribution of Net County Cost by $43,731 due to a reduction in recording fees.
Provide accurate high quality scanned images of the
Clerk-Recorder’s records.
¨ Provide accurate high quality microfilm of clerkrecorder’s
records for archival storage.
Continue to provide accurate high quality microfilm
and scanned images of the Clerk-Recorder’s records.
Continue to review and update various County Policies
and Procedures.
¨ Work with Executive Office to evaluate and improve
the County’s Purchase card and Travel card programs.
¨ Continue to review the program chart and staff duties
to effectively plan for the future.
Began implementation of the new property system.
¨ Continue with technology replacement within the
County’s data center.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending an increase in Net County Cost of $3,000 due to higher communication costs.
Focus on customer service while maintaining
collections.
¨ Reach out to the local bar association to educate them
on the functions of Child Support.
¨ Continue to be aggressive with the Compromise of
Arrears Program (COAP).
¨ Examine alternative methods of collections proven at
other counties.
¨ Increase collections by 2%.
¨ Work with Health and Human Services to expand
services to the coast.The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted with budget returns more than the assigned
Net County Cost.
To continue to provide high quality legal advice and
representation to the County as a whole as well as to
individual departments.
¨ To continue to be reachable and accessible by the
Board of Supervisors, the Chief Executive Officer and all
Departments Heads whenever they have legal
issues/questions. To provide timely, coherent legal advice
and to assist the county and the departments to achieve
their goals.
¨ To continue to have a proactive approach to risk
management, which means to be involved with and
available to all Department Heads and the Board of
Supervisors on all projects as well as to also continue to
provide the same type of service for employment/personnel
matters.
¨ To continue to provide high quality training on various
topics – including sexual harassment training to line staff, if
possible.
¨ To ensure all Deputy County Counsels are well trained
and prepared to represent the County. This will be done by
sending deputies to trainings on a regular basis, including
training specifically geared towards the areas of law in
which they represent the County.
¨ Although this office handles the majority of the
County's legal business, some work is occasionally handled
by outside counsel. By ensuring that all Deputy County
Counsels, as well as all legal support staff, are thoroughly
trained and up-to-date on all the latest laws and practices
in their fields, the need will be reduced for use of outside
counsel even further.
¨ To reach out to tribal leaders to develop and grow a
supply of qualified individuals to serve as ICWA (Indian
Child Welfare Act) experts in dependency hearings.
¨ To continue to provide effective training on
dependency law to social workers to ensure safety,
consistency, and compliance with the law.
To continue to be vigilant re: helping victims of crime,
assisting witnesses, and promoting public safety
throughout Mendocino County.
¨ To seek ways to improve on attorney retention.
¨ To continue to improve on office efficiencies through
technology, new business plans and ideas.
¨ To complete the transition from hard-copy paper
discovery to cloud-based e-discovery.
¨ To continue the strong working relationships the
current District Attorney and office currently has
developed with the Mendocino County Sheriff’s Office, the
Ukiah Police Department, the Willits Police Department,
the Fort Bragg Police Department, the California
Department of Fish and Wildlife, the California
Department of Parks and Recreation, the California
Highway Patrol, and other law enforcement agencies.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which is an increase of Net County Cost of
$251,163 due to a request for three additional positions and increases in the Services and Supplies line items.
Implement the Action Plan collaboratively with various
county departments, contractors and community partners.
¨ Remain in compliance with the NPDES MS4
permit by completing tasks for year two (July 1, 2014
– June 30, 2015) and year three (July 1, 2015 –June
30, 2016).
¨ Complete Feliz Creek Monitoring required by
Helman Dam Removal mitigation tasks.
¨ Remain in Compliance with SBX7-6 – CASGEM
Program.
¨ Review basin ranking data and request DWR
review and reevaluate the Ukiah Valley Basin
medium priority ranking. Present Mendocino County
Board of Supervisors options for establishing a
Groundwater Sustainability Agency for the Ukiah
Valley Basin.
¨ Engage in mutually beneficial community
outreach and intergovernmental partnerships; conduct
constructive advocacy with all stakeholders including the
Federal, State, and Local legislators and agencies.
¨ Update and maintain the Mendocino County Water
Agency Library.
¨ Submit a Supplemental Statement of Water Diversion
and Use to the SWRCB in March 2016 on diversion
associated with the Middle Mill Dam for the years of 2013,
2014 and 2015.
¨ Proactively responded to county drought issues and
collaboratively work with all departments to increase
conservation efforts.
¨ Participate in the development of an Onsite
Wastewater Treatment System (OWTS) Local Agency
Management Plan (LAMP).
¨ Participate in the North Coast Regional Water Quality
Control Board Russian River total maximum daily load
stakeholder efforts to discuss potential actions.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which includes a transfer of General Fund
money to this non-general fund budget unit for costs associated with developing a Groundwater Sustainability Plan as
required by new state mandates. Fund balance as a result of the Pre-2004 Mandate Payment proposal is used to fund this
transfer.
Assume responsibility for the management and
retention of Water Agency Records.
¨ Continue to improve the public’s access to Board of
Supervisors records through online resources.
¨ Implement the use of technology tools to enhance
efficiency.
The Chief Executive Office is recommending an increase of Net County Cost of $10,000 due to Board of Supervisors’
Chambers equipment replacements. One-time money is utilized to fund the increase.
Complete the re-organization of the Executive Office.
¨ Prepare for a revised budget process for FY 2016-17
that includes budget adoption in June, and development
of a five year forecast for the budget.
¨ Continue to identify methods of replacing and
refurbishing deteriorating county facilities and
infrastructure as identified in the Capital Improvement
Plan.
¨ Improve public access to information, including
budget and financial information, as well as other records
and documents.
¨ Continue succession planning and employee
development through expansion of the Leadership
Development Initiative.
¨ Continue work on a master tax-sharing agreement
with the City of Ukiah.
¨ Continue a prudent and responsible oversight and
management of the County’s resources.
¨ Continue analyzing the County vehicle pool in order to
upgrade, but reduce the size of the overall fleet.
¨ Provide additional options for supplementing
employee retirement through expanded deferred
compensation programs.
¨ Oversee an operational and fiscal audit of Mental
Health.
¨ Determine and implement policies to reduce
unfunded pension liability and smooth employee and
employer contribution rates.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending an increase in Net County Cost due to transfer of funding for an unfilled
Human Resource Manager position to act as the Leadership initiative/Data Coordinator, from Human Resources
Department to the Executive Office.
Transition and update the County’s Pcard Program.
¨ Creation of automated electronic resources associated
with the County’s Policy No. 1 – Purchasing, Leasing, and
Contracting Policies and Procedures.
¨ Finalize a PACE program.
¨ Continue working with departments on a County wide
document imaging program.
¨ Develop a real estate management program utilizing
CAMS software.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which has a decrease in Net County Cost due
to a reduction in salaries and benefits as a result of a department re-organization with the Executive Office.
Refine internal procedures regarding capital projects
and bidding procedures.
¨ Continue to work toward completion of the County’s
capital improvement plan projects.
¨ Implementation of findings from HVAC study.
¨ Develop a five-year strategic facilities plan.
¨ Continue to work toward the completion of the
deferred maintenance backlog.
¨ Implement a new facility work order system utilizing
CAMS software.
¨ Improve customer communication and response
times.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted at the assigned Net County Costs. The
assigned Net County Cost is higher this year due to anticipated increases in utility costs of $100,000. The recommended Net
County Cost includes a reduction from Salary and Benefits line items savings related to the reorganization of General
Services Agency and includes one-time money to purchase roofing supplies and hire extra-help workers. The workers will
solely perform roof maintenance on County facilities this summer.
Upgrade the fuel inventory monitoring system.
¨ Replace the underground storage tank monitoring
system.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted. The budget is self-funded with department
charges; a Net County Cost was not requested.
Complete installation of IT Room Dry Fire Suppression
System.
¨ Complete installation of 911 Radio/Dispatch Fire
Suppression System.
¨ Continue UST Remediation at Willits and Ft. Bragg
sites.
¨ Complete upgrade and regulatory compliance of UST
at County Garage.
¨ Continue to implement countywide facility HVAC
system repair and operating compliance program.
¨ Continue comprehensive countywide facility electrical
systems evaluations.
¨ Continue completion of deferred maintenance issues.
¨ Continue to work toward completion of projects listed
in the 5-Year Capital Improvement Plan.
¨ Assess County-wide facility roof inventory in order to
prepare comprehensive roof multi-year repair plan.
¨ Assess County-wide facility deferred maintenance
issues to prepare multi-year repair plan.
San Hedrin site reliability upgrades and equipment
relocation.
¨ Implementation and deployment of IP based dispatch
for 9-1-1 consoles.
¨ New Court system migration and interface with
Justware.
¨ Finance system reporting functionality enhancement
for SSRS for extended reporting capabilities.
¨ Begin implementation of property system and
migration of data plan.
¨ Final integration of Pension Gold system with County
system for Retirement.
¨ Replace end of life “Storage Area Network” storage
system creating higher capacity.
¨ Vmware upgrades to new platform v 6.0.
¨ Complete 5-year strategic plan.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget with a reduction in Net County Cost due to salary savings
related to the General Services Agency re-organization. Additional equipment needs are budgeted with one-time money of
$40,000.
On-going evaluation to ensure high quality services are
being provided to the public, the Court, and criminal justice
agencies in Mendocino County.
Complete conversion to new Liability/WC claims
system.
¨ Streamline claims processing with integration of
paperless filing system.
¨ Continue user expansion of web based training for
Sexual Harassment, Ethics, NIMS and general Safety.
¨ Provide Risk Management in-service for Department
Heads/Managers.
¨ Develop a robust evacuation and safety drill calendar.
¨ Continue to process claims against the County.
¨ Address any safety or hazard concerns that arise.
¨ Continue reviewing and drafting safety procedures for
the County Safety Manual.
¨ Continue to provide various liability and safety
trainings to County departments.
¨ Continue to streamline workflow to improve the way
business is done as well as keeping up with industry
trends.
Utilize web based training in partnership with
California State Association of Counties Excess Insurance
Authority (CSAC-EIA) to mitigate future losses.
¨ Implementation of OUR System for the County’s
Return to Work program.
FORESTRY AND WILDLANDS ECOLOGY
¨ Synthesize, analyze and publish the result of 20 years of
avian use on a recovering oak woodland stream.
¨ Continue collecting data on nest tree selection by
Turkey Vultures in oak woodlands.
¨ If funding should materialize from State Parks a study
design will be initiated to address the need of natural
recruitment in coastal pine communities.
¨ Raise the public profile of UCCE in Mendocino and Lake
Counties.
FOOD SYSTEMS
¨ Expand regional food systems research and extension
that strengthen connections between farmers and
consumers, expands access to local food, and supports the
viability of agriculture.
¨ Support agriculture market diversification through
workshops and education on cottage foods and valueadded
production, wholesale market development, CSAs,
and approved source programs.
VITICULTURE
¨ Continue to work on both biological and chemical
control of new leaf hopper pest.
¨ Assist growers in managing limited water supplies
during the continuing drought.
¨ Continue the testing of evaluating copper and stylet oil
sprays for frost protection.
¨ Help organize and sponsor an IPM seminar to be held in
Mendocino County.
POMOLOGY
¨ The Pomology program will continue to focus on
updating practices to reduce labor need and cost, and
provide added revenue to growers.
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA (UC) 4-H
¨ The UC will be hiring a fulltime 4-H
Youth Development Advisor to support
Mendocino and Lake Counties in the coming
year.
¨ Plan to grow the program by a minimum
of 10% in youth participation.
¨ Continuing with the traditional events
that 4-H supports every year.
UC CALIFORNIA NATURALIST PROGRAM (CALNAT)
¨ Work with UCCE Mendocino/Lake County/HREC
Community Educator to increase opportunities for
Naturalists to assist with UCCE and HREC education and
interpretation programs, citizen science, and stewardship
activities.
¨ Continue to provide innovative and successful
outreach, training, and engagement programs for local
Naturalists.
¨ Continue to grow the CalNat Program in Mendocino
County, including exploring the option of offering a future
Coastal Mendocino program.
¨ Conduct a feasibility study for offering a future
Advanced High School California Naturalist Certification
Program in Inland Mendocino County.
¨ Continue coordination with UCCE Mendocino County
who provides essential CalNat program support for the
Volunteer Portal, issuing certificates, poster printing, and
meeting space.
MENDOCINO COUNTY MASTER GARDENER (MG)
¨ Organize a MG training class on the Mendocino coast
for 2016.
¨ Revitalize the Mendocino County Master Gardener
Facebook page.
¨ Continue support of events such as the ”Not So Simple
Living Fair” and Seed and Scion Exchange.
LIVESTOCK & NATURAL RESOURCES
¨ Increase clientele base nationally and internationally
making ANR’s information readily available and searchable
at one site.
¨ Conduct a Sheep Shearing School and Wool Classing
Class at the Hopland Research and Extension Center in
2016.
¨ Continue support for the woolen mill that serves wool
producers in the North Bay.
¨ Continue working on the
Feral Pig statewide study.
Presently in grant proposal
development.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which included a request for an increase of
$17,515 for contracted master gardener. One-time money is being utilized for this increase.
Continue to provide effective oversight of government
operations in Mendocino County
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which was $144 less than assigned Net
County Cost.
Continue to increase licensing and rabies compliance.
¨ Continue to increase successful animal adoptions.
¨ Continue to increase returns to owner.
¨ Continue to decrease owner surrenders through a
proactive pet retention program.
¨ Increase the live release rate for animal entering the
shelter.
¨ Increase the number of successful adoptions through
post-adoption follow-up by developing an on-line survey
as well as telephone contacts.
¨ Increase spay/neuter services, micro-chipping and
preventative health care promotion.
¨ Collaborate closely with Mendocino County Sheriff’s
Office and local police departments to provide the most
comprehensive animal care services possible.
¨ Continue to build close working relationships with
non-profit animal rescue groups.
¨ Collaborate with Mendocino County Office of
Emergency Services when a disaster is declared to provide
care for companion animals and livestock in need of care.
¨ Staff and volunteers will participate in two day
training with Aimee Sadler of Dogs Play For Life.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of budget as submitted, which included an increase in Net County Cost
due to additional staffing costs.
To increase animal services in outlying areas of the
county as staffing will allow.
¨ To complete the repair of the Care-A-Van so that it can
safely and effectively serve rural areas of the county.
¨ To work in conjunction with county non-profit
organizations to provide service to low income individuals in
rural areas of the county.
Increase healthy eating and active living among the
citizens of Mendocino County.
¨ Continue to research and apply for grants that promote
prevention and public health wellness in Mendocino
County.
¨ Continue and expand efforts to educate and assist
Mendocino County households affected by the drought.
¨ Initiate educational; activities in conjunction with
Mendocino Council of Governments and select county
school districts to meet the objectives of the CalTrans’
Active Transportation Program (ATP) grant.
¨ Continue to serve on the Healthy Mendocino
committee.
¨ Provide oversight and cooperation to internal and
external partners through the use of consistent
communication and audit tools.
¨ Continue to assist youth working with Public Health
staff to present the results of their efforts to promote
healthy choices.
Increase community awareness and prevention of
obesity:
o By providing education in order for community
members to advocate for policy, system and
environmental change to support nutrition education and
physical activity.
o By advocating for access to healthy foods for
vulnerable populations.
o By working with community partners to
encourage fresh food purchases from local farmer’s
markets.
o By promoting physical activity.
o By collaborating with the Mendocino County
Food Policy Council.
Goals for the next 3 year grant period are to:
o Work to expand the definition of tobacco product
to incorporate smokeless tobacco products.
o Work to reduce the amount of advertising on
store windows in Fort Bragg due to the demonstrated link
between heavy advertising and increased tobacco use
among youth.
¨ Increase youth involvement in the community
advisory group for the Tobacco Control Program.
Continue to collaborate with Public Health staff to
increase preparedness for possible emerging diseases such
as measles and Ebola.
¨ Continue to work with Solid Waste Management
Authority and Planning Department to implement
polystyrene food ware ban.
¨ Continue to meet with Regional Water Quality Control
Board staff and interested stakeholders to discuss the
proposed Total Maximum Daily Limit (TMDL) for pathogens
in the Russian River watershed.
¨ Continue to work with Planning and Building
Department to more efficiently serve the permitting needs
of the public.
¨ Hold regular stakeholder meetings to discuss new
septic regulations and to initiate development of Local Area
Management Plan required by State regulations.
¨ Collaborate with Planning and Building Services to
present workshops concerning storm water pollution
prevention requirements and compliance strategies.
¨ Promote water conservation measures, including grey
water use and rainwater catchment, through public
outreach and collaborative efforts with community
organizations.
¨ Deliver presentations on methamphetamine labs, largescale
marijuana grows, and butane/honey oil/hash labs to
community groups and local law enforcement and fire
agencies.
¨ Conduct bi-monthly food handler certification classes,
alternating between Ukiah, Fort Bragg and Willits.
¨ Continue to help provide funding to Ukiah Unified
School District school gardens program, and provide
support to other districts that wish to initiate similar
programs. Will be exploring expanding the program in other
areas of the county.
¨ Continue to implement Cottage Food program and
provide additional public education and outreach.
¨ Continue to promote the marketing of local produce
by providing technical advice to the Food Hub Advisory
Council.
¨ Continue to post food facility inspection results online.
¨ Assist local businesses to comply with State
requirement for electronic reporting of CUPA (hazardous
materials) data.
¨ Continue to oversee proper closure of two municipal
landfills.
¨ Collect water samples for bacteria testing at several
popular coastal beaches (in partnership with the
Mendocino county chapter of Surfrider Foundation).
¨ Post updated ocean water quality information on a
24-hour telephone line, informing the public when
bacteria levels are sufficiently high to impact recreational
usage.
¨ Mail annual newsletters to businesses on EH
inventory.
¨ Conduct routine inspections at retail food facilities,
public swimming pools, active and closed solid waste
facilities, petroleum storage tanks, and businesses that
handle hazardous materials.
¨ Evaluate, permit, and inspect water well and septic
system designs and installations.
¨ Maintain a leadership role in the Redwood Empire
Hazardous Incident Team (REHIT).
¨ Investigate citizen and Cal EMA complaints.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of submitted budget, which includes an increase in Net County Cost of
$154,298 to cover rising staffing costs. A transfer from Reserves will be utilized to cover increased costs.
Continue collaborating and refining the Family
Dependence Drug Court process.
¨ Continue to provide on-going professional training for
all staff.
¨ Research and apply for grants to allow for additional
funding opportunities.
¨ Continue the development and refinement of the
CALWORKS Substance Use Disorders Treatment services.
¨ Continue outreaching and educating the community on
Substance Use Disorders Treatment.
¨ Continue to improve the Intake Screening Enrollment
process to better serve clients.
¨ Collaborate and Coordinate Services with community
partners.
¨ Work with County Information Services to setup video
conference options for the Dora Street office in Ukiah to
facilitate Drug Diversion Programs on the Coast.
¨ Reduce alcohol use among youth.
¨ Reduce binge drinking among youth.
¨ Reduce the marijuana use rate among youth.
¨ Reduce prevalence of prescription drug use for nonmedical
purposes
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of budget as submitted, which was less than assigned and utilizes
designated reserves to cover an anticipated reduction in revenue for programs in the fiscal year.
Continue to deliver alcohol and drug prevention
curriculum to Fort Bragg Middle School students.
¨ Continue to strengthen community partnerships
through additional support for more complex projects
subcontracted to community-based organizations.
¨ Develop campaign/event that includes prevention
measures that raise awareness about the abuse of
prescription medications.
¨ Develop campaign/events that include prevention
measures that raise awareness of methamphetamine use
and danger to youth.
¨ Continue to expand the scope of CGAP’s prevention
work by adding more events/projects based on results of
the community climate survey.
In collaboration with the Fort Bragg Police Department
implement a social host ordinance enforcement strategy
that educates the community and shifts community norms
related to underage drinking and social hosting.
¨ Develop a plan to address issues related to retail
outlets supplying alcohol to minors that includes RBS
training and compliance enhancements to previous
Responsible Beverage Service (RBS) efforts in Fort Bragg.Provide health education and health promotion
programs, processes, and interventions to support chronic
disease prevention and wellness.
¨ Provide information on public health issues and
functions through multiple methods to a variety of
audiences.
¨ Complete Action Plan as part of Maternal Child
Adolescent Health (MCAH) five-year needs assessment in
collaboration with related community stakeholders.
¨ Continue to recruit for Public Health Nurses (PHN) and
Senior PHN if positions continue to be vacant.
• Implement Team Nursing model in order to employ
Registered Nurses (RNs) to augment the work being
performed by the PHN Field Nursing Staff.
Continue to build capacity to serve high-risk infants
throughout the County.
¨ Refine the plan for the delivery of PMADs
interventions.
¨ Submit finalized five-year needs assessment to State
MCAH.
¨ Expand the family planning/safe sex educational
program to other high schools within the County.
Assist participants to achieve optimum growth and
development goals.
¨ Provide education to families regarding how to
provide healthy foods, providing positive nutrition role
models, and learning to understand the behavior cues
from infants.
¨ Encourage participation in preventative health care
and accessing community resources to maximize a child’s
potential.
¨ Provide enhanced breastfeeding education and
support through our participation and leadership with
coastal and inland breastfeeding coalitions.
¨ Provide Farmers Market Checks and Nutrition
Education at markets in Ukiah, Willits and Fort Bragg.
¨ Collaborate with USDA funded programs and related
agencies such as: Head Start, 1st Five, and North Coast
Opportunities
Continue outreach and education to community
partners.
¨ Continuation of the distribution of grant funding to
community partners for education.
¨ To obtain equipment and supplies as identified by
Public Health leaders for response to real events during
the grant year.
¨ Increase participation of skilled nursing facilities.
Increase the number of HHSA leadership staff to
complete ICS 300,400 training by two.
¨ Revise and improve plans for response to medical
surge and recovery.
Continue working with EMS stakeholders, i.e. first
responder agencies to maintain sustainable emergency
medical services within the county.
¨ Assist with development of partnership opportunities
to provide Advanced Life Support care to rural
communities in Mendocino County.
¨ Develop a comprehensive training program for first
responder’s regarding Cardiac Arrest Management (CAM)
in the pre-hospital setting.
¨ Ensure compliance of EMS policies, procedures,
ordinances and laws.
¨ Implementation of policy revisions and mandate a
regional standard for effective chest compression.
¨ Implement regional effective CPR training using
SMARTMAN.
¨ Distribute an AED to every school in Mendocino
County.
¨ Review the current County Ambulance provisions
under the Mendocino County Medical Response ordinance
(Chapter 9.05). Approve, Implement and enforce revisions
¨ Continue to work with the oversight committee
throughout the Request for Proposal process.
¨ Continue to sustain the fragile EMS system.
¨ Continue work plan with The Abaris Group to create
and release an RFP for an inland EOA for ambulance
services for Mendocino County.
¨ Finalize purchase and implement Image trend as the
new EMS data system.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of submitted budget, which includes an increase of Net County Cost of
$144,904 due to the addition of funding to cover full potential cost of Cal Fire dispatch contract amount.

Continue working with the Administrative Service
Organizations to improve and enhance specialty mental
health services.
¨ Provide oversight and monitoring of the
Administrative Service Organizations.
¨ Continue to provide full-service partnership slots for
intensive “wraparound” support for the seriously mentally
ill, who are homeless or most at risk to be homeless,
hospitalized, incarcerated or placed out-of-county in
residential facilities.
¨ Continue integration with primary care/medical home
for consumers.
¨ Opening of the Anchor a Transitional Age Youth (TAY)
Youth Resource Center on the Coast.
¨ Increase access to housing for the most vulnerable
clients.
¨ Expand Resources to outlying areas.
¨ Continue to develop the Mobile Crisis Unit in
conjunction with the Sheriff’s Office to serve outlying
areas of the county.
¨ Continue to provide on-going professional training for
all staff and providers.
¨ Continue the process of moving BHRS records to a
fully electronic record system.
¨ Decrease out-of-county placements and increase the
percentage of BHRS clients living independently within the
community.
¨ Reduce stigma and discrimination with mental health
treatment
.
¨ Continue outreaching and educating the community
on specialty mental health services.
¨ Research and apply for grants to allow for additional
funding opportunities.
¨ Continue collaboration with Partnership Health Plan
on a “No wrong door” for access to services.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of submitted budget, which included the transfer of $250,000 in onetime
money to be used for a pilot project related to the Stepping Up Initiative to reduce the mentally ill jail population
($150,000) and for implementation of Laura’s Law ($100,000).
Implementation of the Innovation Project.
¨ Continue to Provide Full Service Partnership Care
Management services.
¨ Implementation of Senior Peer Counseling Services
provided by Coastal Seniors in Point Arena.
¨ Implementation of the MHSA Housing Project.
¨ Continue outreach with State Campaign Material
(flyers, brochures, pamphlets, etc) for the following Mental
Health outreach and education projects: Know the Signs,
Each Mind Matters and Directory Change.
¨ Create a service delivery system that provides a health
care home which treats the entire person.
¨ Reduce stigma surrounding mental health treatment
through community outreach and education.
¨ Review and apply for grants to allow for new funding
opportunities.
¨ MHSA Annual plan will be updated to include Laura’s
Law.
¨ Provide outreach, engagement and information about
BHRS services to different communities within the county.
¨ Award Mental Health Loan Assumption awards.
¨ Implementation of Workforce Education & Training
plan.
¨ Provide access to services for consumers, schools and
families with children in remote rural areas.
Continue to be involved with sustaining Realignment
funding for the residual indigent population.
¨ Continue to attend and participate in the CMSP
Planning & Benefits Committee and governing board.
¨ Continue to collect and disburse the Maddy Funds to
local emergency physicians and hospitals.
¨ Continue to monitor impacts of health care reform
and section 17000 obligations.
¨ Continue the implementation of Behavioral Health
and Care Coordination mobile support team.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approving the submitted budget, which came in at Net County Cost. But add
$1,065,668 of special program realignment funding to reserves, hereby adjusting Net County Cost for a total of -$818,096.
Provide focused provider outreach and education to
ensure that CCS providers are able to independently access
critical information and resources.
¨ Provide continued support and resources to community
partners related to Managed Care Medi-Cal and the CCS
carve-out.
¨ Expand and maintain the Children’s Medical Services
References Manuals, including the CCS Procedure Manuals
and the Child Health & Disability Prevention (CHDP)
Program Manual.
¨ Continue to provide opportunities to cross-train and
enable Children’s Medical Services staff to provide a high
level of service.
Continue to provide services and consultation to
primary care providers who serve Mendocino County’s
CHDP Program’s eligible children.
¨ Continue to work with Partnership Healthplan of
California (PHC) to coordinate care for CHDP Program
eligible children.
ADULT AND AGING SERVICES
¨ Developing and will be training all Adult Protective
Services staff on specific challenges and issues they face
when working with the community to address situations of
abuse and neglect.
¨ Working with local City Law Enforcement entities to
engage in collaborative investigative work to expedite
investigations and meet the immediate community needs
in a more effective manner, as has been accomplished with
the Mendocino County Sheriff’s Office.
¨ Veterans Services office is continuing to provide
outreach and engagement efforts to ensure community
members having have served in the armed forces receive
the support and access to benefits they are entitled.
¨ General Assistance Unit will focus on increasing the
engagement and training of clients to promote selfsufficiency
for community members.
¨ Working to ensure that services for conserved
individuals meet their specific needs and focus on assisting
these individuals when appropriate in regaining their
independence.
¨ Continue addressing caseload growth, based on
population demographics and in response to the aging
“boomer” population.
¨ Working with Area Agency on Aging to provide
increased supports to the community and care facilities
through more local access sites.
FAMILY AND CHILDREN’S SERVICES
¨ Recruit and retain qualified staff and coordinate with
Staff Resources to hire staff to fill vacancies as quickly as
possible.
¨ Develop a comprehensive internal training program for
new staff.
¨ Have on-going Medi-Cal, clinical and practice related
training for Katie A. staff to better serve clients.
¨ Continue to support Redwood Community Services in
the opening of an in-county Residentially Based Services
group home model to serve the highest level needs
children and youth locally.
¨ Continue to ensure Structured Decision Making (SDM)
tools are fully and consistently utilized throughout life of
referrals and cases in conjunction with Safety Organized
Practices (SOP) tools.
¨ Enhance Social Workers’ comfort with using Safety
Organized Practices (SOP) tools in the field with clients to
help develop a broader understanding of the family’s
capacity to provide safety for the child, help the family
clearly understand Family and Children’s Services’ concerns
and develop a mutually agreed upon safety plan or needed
behavior changes.
¨ Invigorate Family Finding efforts with community
providers and internal staff to help children/youth and
their families identify and connect with lifelong support
networks to help ensure child/youth safety, successful
reunification with parents when possible and reduce reentry
into the system.
¨ Develop and implement a Continuous Quality
Improvement Process to improve and enhance child
welfare practices.
¨ Complete a new County Self-Assessment and Peer
Case Review process to inform the next 5-year System
Improvement Plan.
¨ Complete an analysis of the foster care emergency
shelter system to determine how to better serve the
children/youth and community including keeping siblings
together.
¨ Collaborate with local foster family agencies and
community partners to recruit and retain foster families,
including foster families that can meet the needs of
children/youth with specialized needs and/or provide
emergency foster care.
EMPLOYMENT AND FAMILY ASSISTANCE SERVICES (EFAS)
¨ Conduct a minimum of 3 new eligibility worker classes
to increase staffing to better serve the community and
increase application processing for all programs.
¨ Expand the Welfare-to-Work to include subsidized
employment, enhanced Family Stabilization and increase
participation among the Welfare-to-Work participants to
help community members achieve self-sufficiency.
¨ Increase staff training and strengthen succession
planning to continue to improve services, and service
delivery to the community.
¨ Continue to support community partners in their effort
to help each member of the community achieve affordable
health care coverage and CalFresh. Support will be offered
through targeted and efficient technical assistance and
facilitation of collaborative efforts to better serve clients.
¨ Implement and train staff on the new assessment tool
designed to assist in identifying barriers to self-sufficiency
when working with Welfare-to-Work participants. Through
this new identification process staff will be able to assist
with specific targeted supports designed to meet the needs
of each individual.
¨ Implement a strong work participation strategy to
increase Mendocino County work participation rates
through increased participants engaged in employment.
DISASTER RESPONSE TEAM (DRT)
¨ Conduct annual membership drive to recruit team
members to build and strengthen the team and to replace
members who retire or otherwise leave the team to assure
coverage for disasters that require shelters for displaced
citizens.
¨ Provide continued training for new recruits and
refresher courses for current DRT members to assure that
the team is trained and ready for response in times of
disasters. This includes training for the Special Needs
Population Response Staff to adequately cover such needs
in a shelter situation
¨ Participate in county-wide drills in conjunction with the
Mendocino County Office of Emergency Services (OES).
¨ Respond to hazardous weather situations, disasters,
shelter needs and work cooperatively with the OES and
American Red Cross.
¨ Work with County OES to secure further funding for
additional disaster shelter trailers to be stationed in
additional areas of the county.
¨ Work with the American Red Cross to ensure
Memorandums of Agreement are signed by all preapproved
shelter sites for clarity of use and responsibilities
of using a site as a disaster shelter.
¨ Work with the American Red Cross to connect
community groups in outlying areas of the county for
Shelter Management training to strengthen communities
to care for their citizens during disasters when outside help
cannot immediately reach them.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends the approval of submitted budget, which utilizes reserves of $1,193,440 for
funding programs through the fiscal year and the Net County Cost of $399,479. Adjustment does not impact service
delivery, but realizes anticipated cost savings in the budget.
The governing board of the MCHS-CoC will be
reviewing and updating procedures to ensure compliance
with all new HUD regulation changes.
• Updates to the Homeless Management Information
System (HMIS) will be expanded to meet the increased
requirements by HUD to include all partner agencies
providing services to those who are homeless in
Mendocino County.
• All users of the HMIS will be receiving updated
training on new procedures.
Create a coordinated entry into services following the
“no wrong door” model to ensure ease of access for
community members.
 All users of the Homeless Management Information
System will be receiving updated training on new
procedures for new required fields to ensure eligibility to
funding through HUD.
Leadership will continue active participation and
involvement in the Partnership Health Plan of California.
¨ HHSA Executive Team will continue to hold All Staff
Check-in meetings throughout its offices in the County.
¨ Continue to train both its management and employees
for disaster response.
¨ Staff Resources plans to continue assessment of its
services and structure, making adjustments where needed
to provide better customer service both internally and
externally. Update trainings such as the Supervisor’s Core
Competency series for its supervisory staff and also
updating of the new employee orientation meetings for all
new HHSA staff. Staff Resources will also produce HHSA
procedures that encompass the entire Agency bringing
consistency for all employees.
¨ Staff Resources will work to create an Agency wide
staff evaluation format that will include a 360 degree
process.
¨ Special Investigations Unit will continue to work on the
established early fraud prevention and detection program
to identify public assistance fraud as soon as possible. The
unit will also work to assist in the Fair Hearing process and
Cal Fresh administrative disqualification hearings.
¨ The Contract Unit will hold an annual contract writing
training and quarterly trainings on special topics. The unit
will also work to establish a grant oversight process for the
Agency.
¨ Communication Coordination will continue to work on
maintaining media contacts. Consistent and frequent
promotion of HHSA programs for public education will
continue. HHSA will also work to improve internal
communications with employees and promote education
of all programs among HHSA staff.
¨ HHSA will assess its outreach materials, web site, and
other public information offerings to ensure consistent and
continuously updated information is available to the public.
Further, HHSA will develop the capacity and resolve to
regularly and consistently provide both internal and
external news on issues of HHSA program relevance.
¨ HHSA staff will develop a training curriculum and/or
process to increase employees working knowledge of both
internal and community resources to help meet the needs
of clients.
¨ HHSA shall actively participate in community efforts to
address transportation or other concerns effecting low
income persons.
¨ The HHSA shall hire and train sufficient staff to
appropriately serve HHSA program and community needs.
FAMILY AND CHILDREN’S SERVICES
¨ Successfully implement the “Approved Relative
Caregiver Funding Option” Program to provide foster care
payments to eligible relative foster parents.
¨ Continue to maximize use of Federal and State funds in
all programs.
¨ Continue to utilize all available funding sources to
support these programs.
¨ Continue to successfully interview clients to determine
appropriate eligibility for funding.
¨ Continue to reduce the number of overpayments by
ensuring timely communication with the Placement Unit
regarding changes in placements and children returning
home to a parent.
¨ Continue to improve collaboration and communication
between the Foster Care Eligibility Unit and Family and
Children’s Services Social Workers to ensure accuracy of
on-going eligibility determinations and to streamline
processes that involve various units.
Continue quality assurance efforts to ensure Foster Care
support cases are in compliance with State and Federal
regulations.
¨ Ensure Foster Care eligibility workers receive on-going
training.
¨ Successfully pass foster care eligibility audits.
EMPLOYMENT AND FAMILY ASSISTANCE SERVICES
¨ Will support staff retention through ongoing training,
professional growth development and ongoing staff support.
We will continue to identify the equipment needs of staff as
job duties change and evolve.
¨ Will provide an expansion of employment related
workshops to support job seekers in Willits and Ft Bragg.
¨ We plan to provide addition of portable video access
between Ukiah, Willits and Ft Bragg. Portable video
connectivity between the 3 offices will serve Agency staff to
attend distant meetings and conferences as well as job
seeking community members having access to resources
such as live workshops.
¨ Will implement the Expanded Subsidized Employment
Program, to allow special funding to pay to place welfare to
work recipients into paid work experience sites. We plan to
utilize a portion of the funds to place work experience
participants into work experience positions within the
agency, which will assist in the low staffing levels of some
areas as well as offer participants hanks on experience in the
field of Health and Human Services.
¨ We will incorporate Behavioral Health and Substance
Use and Disorders Treatment programs into the
Employment program to reduce and work to eliminate
barriers leading to employment and employment success.
¨ We plan to continue the growth of the work
participation rate though in depth training on capturing
work participation hours, collecting detailed information
from the employment bureau and continued execution of
the WINS program. We will also outreach long term
sanctioned families, to encourage and support their return
to participation.
¨ Will apply for Rapid Re-housing funds to assist in the
housing of homeless families and the reduction of
homeless residents in Mendocino County.
Implement fraud prevention through completion of 2-
week follow-up assessments with clients in their homes
after initial approval of benefits.
¨ Provide quality assurance of services by IHSS staff
completing 6 month home visits with IHSS recipients.
¨ Restore 7% reduction in IHSS client hours using the
CMIPS II system as per instructions through the State.
¨ Support the IHSS Advisory Committee.
¨ Provide support and guidance for IHSS in home care
providers through the Public Authority.
¨ Provide information and referral services to ensure
that the public is aware of services available to assist
elderly and disabled persons to remain living independently
in their homes. This will be done through communication
efforts such as Public Service Announcements, and other
media outreach.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of budget as submitted, which included an increase of $157,500 in Net
County Cost due to a recent labor agreement.
Focus on increasing the engagement and training of
consumers to provide and promote self-sufficiency for our
community members.
¨ Continue to work with community partners to develop
additional job sites for employable General Assistance
recipients.
¨ Systemic review and update of program policies and
update desk manuals.
¨ Collaborate with community partners, public, and
private, to provide excellent services to recipients
throughout the county.
¨ Collaborate with members of the Continuum of Care
for the Homeless to develop housing opportunities
throughout the county.
¨ Complete the Point in Time count engaging more
community members in collaborative efforts and ensure
and accurate count of homeless individuals in the
community.
Complete the system conversion from Interagency
Merit System (IMS) to Approved Local Merit System
(ALMS) for grant-in-aid departments.
¨ Preparation of a County-wide workforce analysis, and
development of a succession planning program.
¨ Continuation of activities in conjunction with the
Mendocino County Leadership Initiative including
development of a Management Academy.
¨ Improve and expand training programs for all County
employees with the implementation of a basic skills
training series. This program will include training on
subjects such as business writing skills, meeting
facilitation, report writing, and communication skills.
Other planned topics include employee performance
evaluation preparation and documentation, Excel, MUNIS.
¨ Continue to improve and implement various aspects
of the electronic recruitment, examination and
certification processes through the NEOGOV system.
¨ Participate in labor negotiations with various
bargaining units for expiring labor contracts.
¨ Conduct classification studies as requested by various
departments.
¨ Update and implement improved and streamlined
processes to create efficiencies in Human Resources and
throughout County departments.
¨ Work with Civil Service Commission to review and
update Civil Service Rules as needed.
¨ Review and update various Human Resources related
County policies as needed.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which includes an increase in the Training
line item for additional county-wide staff trainings. The addition of two positions, and Human Resource Technician I and a
Human Resource Analyst II, is the result of a transfer of some Merit System recruiting responsibilities and is fully funded by
Child Support Services and the Health and Human Services Agency.
Continue Employee Trainings for Health Benefits in
order to build an understanding of how our health plan
works.
¨ Continue to increase Open Enrollment participation.
¨ Continue researching ways to reduce Health Plan costs
without impacting benefits.
Increase Biometric Screening/Incentive Program
participation to 64%.
¨ Increase Personal Health Assessment completion to
55%.
¨ Utilize the online registration form to automate the
registration process for all MCWOW classes and events.
¨ Continue to offer onsite trainings in locations
accessible to all employees.
¨ Continue to add additional challenges to keep wellness
activities going year round.
Use E-Rate funding to increase public internet speed at
Ukiah, Willits, Round Valley and Fort Bragg branches.
¨ Continue to send staff to conferences and workshops in
order to have the best trained and responsive library team
possible.
¨ Continue working with Information Services to provide
the best computer and technology services possible to the
patrons and staff.
¨ Purchase and replace remaining public computers for
Ukiah and Round Valley branches.
¨ Continue working towards having a more attractive
and user-friendly web page.
¨ Complete facility upgrades at Ukiah, Willits, and Fort
Bragg branches to include:
o Refurbishment of the existing teen room in Ukiah
in order to expand the already vibrant teen
services in the community;
o Upgrade of outdoor lighting in Willits to improve
visibility and safety;
o Relocation of book drop in Fort Bragg to prevent
overflow;
o Installation of noise-reducing ceiling baffles in
Fort Bragg; and
o Replacement of leaking windows in Fort Bragg
¨ Establish a new library station in Laytonville.
¨ Expand outreach services to preschools and in-home
daycare providers.
¨ Establish Horizon catalog access on the Bookmobile to
provide up-to-date borrower information.
¨ Implement a county-wide technology “petting zoo.”
To hire Collections Curator and initiate/re-invigorate
efforts to inventory, conserve, store, and share the
Museum’s amazing collections of large and small artifacts,
photos, archives, and historical books.
¨ To sustain and grow major Museum events: Museum
Road Show, Mini Maker Faire, Kinetic Carnivale,
Mushroom Train.
¨ To build upon and expand Museum educational
programming on site and in the field.
¨ To address remaining long-term infrastructure issues.
¨ To research, develop, design and create major new
exhibit on the 1850 Frolic Shipwreck and its impacts.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which includes an increase of $49,342 to Net
County Cost to cover the Curator position as well as associated changes in other accounts.
Continue to maintain support for budgeted economic
development activities.
¨ Commence the update of the Comprehensive
Economic Development Strategy (CEDS).
¨ Continue efforts to finalize the Sonoma Mendocino
Economic Development District (SMEDD) and obtain
Economic Development Administration approval for the
district.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which includes utilizing one-time money of
$59,000 for special contract costs and addition funding for growth in Transient Occupancy Tax revenue anticipated in FY
2015-16.
Continue to support public education and research
through the Commission website and public lecture series.
¨ Continue to support community-based activities to
improve fish and wildlife habitat and propagation
¨ Continue efforts to increase public participation in
Commission meetings and initiatives.
¨ Continue to represent the County, within and outside
the County, at meetings, conferences and public hearings,
and with regulatory agencies, relating to fish and wildlife.
¨ Continue the allocation of collected fines and
forfeitures in the form of grants to local community based
organizations to benefit fish and/or game.
Continue efforts to identify and implement improved
processes that result in efficiencies and enhanced customer
service.
¨ Continue implementation of online permitting system
to allow remote access by the public of simple permit and
property related information.
¨ Continue focused effort to close backlogged code
enforcement cases while addressing new issues.
¨ Continue Housing Element Update review process with
State HCD.
¨ Continue digital archiving of accumulated building
permits, blueprints, planning application files, project
plans, and administrative records. Establish comprehensive
indexing system to facilitate access to, and retrieval of
digitized archives.
¨ Continue Mendocino Town Plan review process with
the Coastal Commission.
¨ Continue supporting the Broadband Alliance of
Mendocino County (BAMC) and the North Bay North Coast
Broadband Consortium (NBNCBC) efforts for expanded
county and regional broadband capacity.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which includes an additional Net County
Cost to cover increased staffing costs and add funding for mandated storm water compliance programs previously funded
by the Water Agency.
Begin implementation/transition from WIA to WIOA,
to be completed by 07/01/2016.
¨ Continue technical assistance to the WIA program
service provider in attaining the newly mandated
requirement of utilizing 30% of the Adult and Dislocated
Worker formula funds for specific training expenses.
¨ Conduct Fiscal and Program monitoring of the
contractors, per the State directive.
¨ Issue RFP to procure contractor necessary to update
the Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy
(CEDS).
¨ Issue RFP to procure One-Stop Administrator
¨ Award contracts for WIOA program service delivery
¨ Conduct Business/Industry Survey to identify
prospective business/Industry partners and collect
information regarding workforce needs.
¨ Sponsor, yearly, Regional Education & Economic
Development Summit.
Remain responsive in adapting to changes in mental
health services to ensure that adequate levels of service are
being provided.
¨ Continuation of curriculum for garden project for
detained youth as future vocational training and to qualify
as elective high school credits in gardening and/or
landscaping.
¨ Upgrade, where necessary, security cameras and video
equipment.
¨ Restructuring the staffing schedules to reflect lower
average daily populations while remaining compliance
with State and Federal mandates.
Continue to look for opportunities to improve upon
availability of mental health services offered.
¨ Continue the productive relationship with the
Community Corrections Partnership.
¨ Continue to recruit and train highly qualified Deputy
Probation Officers to allocated staffing levels.
¨ Certify additional in-house training programs through
STC to maximize utilization of training funds, reduce outof-
county training costs, and provide flexibility in
scheduling of trainings.
¨ Two supervising Deputy Probation Officers will
complete the CPOC Supervisory Leadership Academy.
¨ Complete web-based Lexipol Policy and Procedure
Manual.
¨ Evaluate available Case Management systems
designed to meet the expanding and complex needs of the
Probation Department, at a low- or no-cost basis.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget, which incorporated increased Community Corrections
Partnership (CCP) revenue and other adjustments.
Maintain the continuity and stability in staffing and
caseloads.
¨ Assure that all measures are taken to fully investigate
and prepare cases for trial and/or disposition; including
retaining any experts and consultants necessary for the
complete and full representation of all of the clients.
¨ Assure that all attorneys are able to maintain their CLE
credits and attend important and critical educational
seminars which will benefit both the attorney and the
clients.
¨ Ensure that there continues to be good communication
between the Chief Executive Officer and the Public
Defender.
¨ Continue to provide the best criminal defense services
that are possible in Mendocino County.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted: utilize one-time money to fund the extra
help costs of $17,000 for the digitization project; recognize unbudgeted revenue; and provide Net County Cost to cover
increased retirement costs.
To continue the practice of efficient, dedicated and
thorough legal defense.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which includes an increase of Net County
Cost of $30,680 due to an increase in professional service as a result of the increase in complex cases and extra help needed
to cover for staffing shortage due to a planned leave. One-time money is utilized to fund the increase in extra help costs.
Complete the integration of the Pension
Administration System.
¨ Develop a capital project improvement plan.
¨ Continue modernization of Charters and Policies.
¨ Complete Cycle E Filing for a new determination letter
from the Internal Revenue Service.
¨ Investigate the costs and benefits of implementing an
Electronic Document Management System (EDMS), and
implement same, if warranted.
¨ Investigate the costs and benefits of outsourcing the
administrative process of Disability applications, and
contract for said services, if warranted.
¨ Investigate the costs and the benefits of contracting
with a custodial bank, and contract for said services, if
warranted.
¨ Continue to provide members with excellent customer
service and retirement benefit education.
¨ Increase the effectiveness of internal operations
through assessing technology needs, pursuing staff
development, cross-training, and succession planning.
¨ Work with vendors and plan sponsors to facilitate the
implementation of GASB 68 accounting guidelines.
CONTINUE WITH FOLLOWING INITIATIVES:
¨ Promote effective, professional, community-oriented
public safety service through cooperative effort.
¨ Identify and address public safety issues throughout
the County.
¨ Engage in individual and organizational accountability.
¨ Timely response to calls for service and to needs of the
community.
¨ Continue with efforts relocate the Mendocino Sub-
Station.
NEW INITIATIVES TO COMPLETE:
¨ Focus on recruitment and hiring to increase staffing
levels to provide better safety and service to citizens and
visitors of Mendocino County.
¨ Replace 10 patrol vehicles.
¨ Replace outdated in-car camera recording systems in
existing patrol vehicles.
¨ Acquire Backup Generators for Ukiah Station and
Willits Sub-Station.
¨ Remodel existing portion of Ukiah Station for purpose
of creating additional needed office space.
¨ Acquire 8 MDT (Mobile Data Terminal) computers to
complete fleet installation.
¨ Acquire 10 MDT (Mobile Data Terminal) computers to
upgrade outdated computer versions.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which includes an additional Net County
Cost to cover increases in staffing costs related to recent labor agreements, provide funding for overtime, provide funding
for two mission critical positions (one additional Deputy Sheriff-Coroner position and one additional Animal Control Officer
for the coast), and one fixed asset – generator for emergency use (one-time money of $75,000 is utilized). These costs are
partially offset by revenue adjustments and decreases in requested Services and Supplies and Fixed Assets.
Continue to employ Sheriff's Technology Specialist
¨ Continue to fund unfunded communications
mandates.
Continue to train K-9s in all aspects of search and
seizure.
¨ Continue to promote the K-9 Program within the
community.
Apply for SB 863 funds to add beds and
programming space to the facility.
¨ Add more I.P. security cameras throughout the
facility.
¨ Purchase body cameras for staff.
¨ Increase the number of corrections deputies
assigned to Inmate Transportation.
¨ Establish a farm at the Brush Street Triangle.
¨ Expand video arraignment.
¨ Transition to video visiting for inmates.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which includes additional Net County Cost to
cover increases in staffing costs related to recent labor agreements, provide an increase in funding for overtime, provide
funding for two Corrections Deputy positions, and utilization of one-time funding for a freezer for the jail kitchen.
The goal of Jail & Rehabilitation Center - COPS is to
have funding available for unanticipated equipment
maintenance and replacement, or to enhance overall Jail
Operations.
Provide additional training that would include Public
Information Officer, Emergency Operations Center and
Incident command training.
¨ Educate the public on how to sign up for the new
reverse 9-1-1 system
¨ Identify two locations for the possibility of installation
of two more tsunami warning sirens for the coastal area.
¨ Increase public disaster awareness by providing
disaster preparedness trainings to community members,
nonprofit organizations, service clubs and businesses.
¨ Complete a data resource for the Emergency
Operation Center.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which included an increase in Net County
Cost of $18,147 in grant match for equipment and training funds.
Hire a new Deputy Director to lead the Land
Improvement Division.
¨ Continue to coordinate Department efforts to
minimize County Maintained Road impacts to the natural
environment by reducing sediment production and
improving and removing barriers to fish migration.
¨ Continue to improve timeliness of review for initial
processing of land development referrals.
¨ Continue seeking grant opportunities for funding of
improvements to County Airports through the Airport
Improvement Program.
¨ Continue seeking grant opportunities for funding
drainage and habitat improvements within the County
Maintained Road System.
¨ Strive to enhance public safety and facilitate
commerce through the Permit Program.
¨ Strive to facilitate orderly development through the
land development process and permitting functions.
¨ Strive to improve the development review and
application process for the public through better
communication and coordination with other County
departments.
¨ Continue training staff in permit processing,
construction inspection, plan checking and development
review skills to develop a versatile staff which is crosstrained
to perform a variety of division functions.
¨ Continue the maintenance of all three (3) Mill Creek
Dams.
¨ Install a backup valve on the secondary line for the
Upper Mill Creek Dam.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which includes an increase in Net County
Cost of $11,772 due to increased retirement and staffing cost related to the vacant Deputy Director position.
Maintain a substantial preventive maintenance
program that includes: aggressive “crack sealing” program,
drainage and culvert improvements, chip seal program, base repairs with asphalt overlays, and vegetation
management.
¨ Continue to replace old, non-compliant, on- and offroad
equipment, while maintaining the goal of reducing
total fleet size.
¨ Increase safety training to further reduce injuries.
¨ Continue to maintain bridge and drainage structures
throughout the County.
¨ Deliver prompt, efficient, professional customer
service to the public.
Construct 2011 storm damage Permanent Restoration
projects at the following locations:
• Mountain View Road (CR 510) M.P. 15.36 & 15.40
¨ Complete design, environmental, and rights-of-way
acquisition work on the remaining three 2011 storm
damage Permanent Restoration sites with construction
expected to begin in summer/fall 2016. These include:
• Comptche Ukiah Road (CR 223) M.P. 20.80
• Mountain View Road (CR 510) M.P. 14.04 & 14.51
¨ Seek funding for repairs to three 2015 storm damage
sites.
¨ Continue to restore the existing road system to predisaster
conditions to ensure that the roads stay open and
safe for the traveling public.
¨ Continue to perform storm damage repairs that are
vital to the well-being of the traveling public in the most
efficient manner possible.
¨ Support, through training and collaborative input, our
high-potential employees who constitute the next
generation of Department staff personnel and managers.
East Side Potter Valley Road Widening and
Reconstruction (CR 240, M.P. 2.40 to M.P. 6.42): complete
right-of-way phase and mobilize for utility pole relocation.
¨ Safe Routes to School (Calpella, CR 104, M.P. 4.76 to
4.90 and CR 229B, M.P. 0.20 to 0.37): complete
construction before the start of school in the fall of 2015.
¨ Perform Corrective Maintenance by either contract or
County crews.
¨ BRIDGE PROJECTS
• Seismic Retrofit Program: Three bridges remain for
completion under the program:
• School Way Bridge Replacement over West Fork,
Russian River (CR 236, M.P. 0.87): the Department expects
to complete construction fall 2015.
• Moore Street Bridge Seismic Retrofit over West
Fork, Russian River (CR 229B, M.P. 0.45): complete right-ofway
acquisitions from property owners and begin
construction summer 2016.
• Eureka Hill Road Bridge Seismic Retrofit over
Garcia River (CR 505, M.P. 4.92): complete engineering
design and environmental permitting, and acquire rights-ofway
from property owners.
• North State Street Bridge over Ackerman Creek (CR
104, M.P. 0.75): complete engineering design and
environmental permitting, and begin acquiring rights-ofway
from property owners.
• Branscomb Road Pedestrian Bridge over Ten Mile
Creek (CR 429, M.P. 25.41): complete engineering design
and acquiring rights-of-way from property owners.
• Bridge Preventive Maintenance: This Federallyfunded
county-wide project
provides funding for major
maintenance in lieu of bridge
replacement. The Eel River Road
Bridge over the main stem Eel
River (CR 240B, M.P. 6.20) will
have a major joint seal replaced
and two bridges on Branscomb
Road over South Fork of Eel
River (CR 429, M.P. 9.95 and
10.50) east of Wilderness Lodge
Road will receive surface
treatment. Complete
construction in the fall of 2015.
¨ TOLL CREDIT PROGRAM – BRIDGE REPLACEMENT
• Complete right-of-way acquisitions from property
owners for Muir Mill Road Bridge over Baechtel Creek (CR
301C, M.P. 2.07) and Reeves Canyon Road Bridge over
Forsythe Creek (CR 219, M.P. 0.46). Both projects are
anticipated to begin construction in the summer of 2016,
pending construction authorization from the Federal
Highway Administration (FHWA).
• Complete all pre-construction activities, including
engineering design, environmental permitting, and rightof-
way acquisitions for the replacement of Sherwood Road
Bridge over Rowes Creek (CR 311, M.P. 5.52) and East Hill
Road Bridge over Davis Creek (CR 301, M.P. 2.05).
• Continue preliminary engineering activities,
including preliminary design and environmental clearances
for the replacement of the following bridges: Briceland
Road Bridge over Mattole River (CR 435, M.P. 0.63),
Wilderness Lodge Road Bridge over Dutch Charlie Creek
(CR 320, M.P. 0.72), Hill Road Bridge over Mill Creek (CR
327B, M.P. 2.05), Philo-Greenwood Road Bridge over
Navarro River (CR 132, M.P. 17.33), Usal Road Bridge over
Usal Creek (CR 431, M.P. 5.94) and Powerhouse Road
Bridge over Williams Creek (CR 248A, M.P. 0.90).
• Begin preliminary engineering activities, including
preliminary design and environmental clearances for the
replacement of Lambert Lane Bridge over Robinson Creek
(CR 123A, M.P. 0.10).
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which includes a transfer of $1,000,000 in
one-time money to be used for corrective road maintenance.
Secure Airport Improvement Program (AIP) funding
for South Airport Road Realignment Project construction
from FAA and DOA.
¨ Secure Airport Improvement Program (AIP) funding
for design and construction of the Airport Pavement
Rehabilitation project from FAA and DOA.
¨ Continue to work productively with the aviation
community and Covelo Flying Club to identify and resolve
airport issues, maintain facilities and enhance safety.
¨ Continue to provide support facilities for local fire,
emergency and rescue services.
¨ Continue to retain existing funding sources and seek
new funding sources for capital improvements and
facilities maintenance.
¨ Continue to support the part-time efforts of
Administration Division and Land Improvement Division
staff who administer airport programs
Secure Airport Improvement Program grant funding
from FAA for capital improvement projects including
rehabilitation of the taxiway, the taxiway connector and
the south apron pavement.
¨ Implement the Airport Pavement Management
System Plan by designing Taxiway Rehabilitation Project.
¨ Maintain current operations and provide a safe
modern transportation facility for the public in the County
and North State region.
¨ Work productively with the Little River Airport
Advisory Committee to identify and resolve airport issues,
maintain facilities and enhance safety.
¨ Continue to provide support facilities for local fire,
emergency and rescue services.
¨ Continue to retain existing funding sources and seek
new funding sources for capital improvements and
facilities maintenance.
¨ Continue to provide support to the contracted Airport
Supervisor and the part-time efforts of Land Improvement
staff who apply their efforts to airport matters to the
extent limited airport resources permit.
¨ Continue to explore conservation options for land on
the southwesterly side of the airport including possible
exchange for land at the southeasterly end of the runway
and obtain FAA policy guidance.
Complete South Coast closure design acceptance by
the NCRWQCB and CalRecycle and possibly go to
construction in 2015. Mendocino County Environmental
Health Division, serving as Local Enforcement Agency
(LEA), organized a meeting between MCDoT, the
California Integrated Waste Management Board
(CIWMB), and the NCRWQCB. The hope is that these
state agencies will provide recommendations and/or
direction on the criterion needed for a submittal of a
final closure and post closure plan and design. MCDoT’s
Land Improvement Division Civil Engineer/Project
Manager is preparing a Request for Proposals (RFP)
which will lead to the hiring of a landfill consultant to
provide professional services to prepare Amended
Closure And Post Closure Plans (Updated Plans) and
Updated Non-Water Corrective Action Plans (CA Plans)
for Caspar and Laytonville Landfills and Updated Non-
Water Corrective Action Plans (CA Plans) for South Coast
Landfill.
¨ SHN, the consultant for landfill monitoring, will
update the plan to conform to new stormwater
Industrial General Permit (IGP, Order No. 2014-0057-
DWQ), which was approved by the State Water
Resources Control Board (SWRQB).
Locate unreported short-term residential rentals and
require property owners to comply with the transient
occupancy tax regulations, thereby generating additional
revenues for the County.
¨ Enhance collection activities for delinquent unsecured
property taxes by utilizing collection options not currently
in use.
¨ Continue to explore options on ways to utilize staff in
the most efficient and revenue-enhancing manner
Install and transition from an AS400 accounts
receivable software to new collection software including
data conversion, training, and go-live implementation.
Improve the collection of revenue by automating manual
monitoring and processes for staff while increasing account
information available for debtors and justice partners.
¨ Improve communication with victims using early
notification regarding the debtor failing to pay and provide
information about how the victim can enforce their
judgment when the debt is no longer collected by the
County.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted, which includes a decrease in contribution of
Net County Cost by $107,800 due to software replacement as required by the courts, and increased software maintenance
contract costs. One-time money is utilized to fund the software replacement costs in the amount of $99,800.
