For Public Health & Safety, we will continue to do door to door canvassing in order to detect unvaccinated/unlicensed dogs as well as to
continue to offer “preventative patrol” and timely and professional public assistance.
? To continue our highly successful program requiring that new adoptees complete an adoption questionnaire, wait a 24 hour “think it over
period”, complete a yard inspection when applicable, and understand that their landlord must approve of a new animal on the property.
Property owners are very grateful for this service.
? Continued Animal Control presentations throughout the County. Continued pre-entry animal vaccinations, continued volunteer training
program.
? Ongoing distribution of educational brochures, complimentary leashes and doggy waste bags.
To maintain the volunteer “dog walking and kitty cuddling” program provided by volunteer attendees.
? To provide volunteer training once a month for those interested in walking, grooming and socializing dogs and grooming and
providing attention to our feline friends.
? Continue to offer school teachers and students time to interact with shelter animals as a class project.
? Continued education and distribution of material regarding animal care, new ownership of a shelter animal, and the importance
of vaccinations and licensing.
? Provide professional and quality service to community members and visitors.
Fill the vacant Assessor position
? Fill the vacant Appraiser position
? Hire a new FTS to assist with data processing necessary to promote consistency and accuracy
within the Megabyte system and to provide office support.
? Eliminate backlog of transfers and maps – Additional staffing will enable us to reduce or
eliminate this backlog.
? Improve appraisal practices and procedures in the Assessor’s office by increasing training for all
staff (both in house training and BOE training).
? Resolve outstanding Applications for Changes Assessment filed prior to current year.
Continue work on integration and implementation of all services regarding Health Care
Reform (HCR). This includes adding and reallocating staff and having systems in place
for the projected client load increase expected once the Affordable Care Act is
implemented in January 2014. Some projections show that we will have a potential
100% increase in clientele due to the number of new MediCal eligilebles in Mono
County.
? Continue to address the State findings that MCBH does not meet our obligations
regarding “Hispanic penetration” in terms of services provided. We plan to maintain our
current level of service provision and to add hours for services, outreach and engagement
to the Hispanic Community by moving our contracted MFT employee to a .80 FTE
benefitted position; this will require a new allocation.
Upgrade our electronic clinical software and billing program (EHR) to meet the State and
Federal requirements for meaningful use. This will allow us to share information with
Primary Health Care providers and vice versa.
? Continue to address State findings that MCBH does not meet all of the requirements
regarding Quality Improvement and Assurance. This will require us to allocate a full
time position to oversee the various State funded programs: stigma and discrimination
reduction, suicide prevention, and mental health in the schools, as well as our Quality
Improvement and Assurance compliance. This new allocation will be divided as .50
Quality Improvement and Assurance and .50 Psych Specialist I, providing therapeutic
assessment, treatment and crisis services.
? To address the upcoming retirement of our psychiatrist by working with Inyo County
Behavioral Health on an MOU to share services of a new psychiatrist. We will consult
with County C
Expand service to meet the anticipated increase of clients though Health Care
Reform.
? Continue to work with the Courts, DA, Public Defenders and Probation to create
programs that fulfill the needs and obligations of offenders and those incarcerated
? Implement the Batterers Intervention 52 week program for males and females
who are mandated by our Court system.
Move forward with our Club Live Youth program and implement the Friday
Night Live program
? Continue with the Community Corrections Project plan of implementation for
transitional housing where we will provide AOD individual and group treatment
for residents
? Work with Mammoth Hospital Emergency Department to create a system of
response to their “frequent flyers” who are accessing emergency care related to
alcohol and/or drug use and withdrawal
Continue to fund the Peapod Program though First Five
? Address stigma and discrimination reduction in collaboration with Inyo County
Behavioral Health.
? Continue our efforts in the Benton Community to provide gatherings for the
purpose of community connections.
? Create a County collaborative to address community health from the perspective
of county government, the town, hospital, school, small businesses, churches,
community members, non-profit agencies, etc.

? Pool resources with Cerro Coso Community College by providing our expertise at
speaking engagements as well as potentially taking on an intern from the Human
Services Degree Program.
? Team up with Mono County Social Services Department to provide support for
the implementation of the Healthy IDEA’s Pilot Project serving the Seniors in the
Walker, Coleville and Benton communities.
? Increase residents ability to adjust to change or stress, and build confidence, social
skills and positive family relationships through community events, our WRAP
Program, the implementation of Katie A. and our Community Gardens.
? Continue to find ways to develop and fund positions within Mono County
Behavioral Health for our consumer population.
? Continue to pursue a program for the purpose of providing much needed housing
to vulnerable Mono County residents through AB-109 program, County probation
and some severely mentally ill residents. This is in conjunction with the
Community Corrections Program and will be funded in part with AB-109 money
in addition to MHSA dollars.
Replace outdated and costly film reader/printer with new digital equipment using
Modernization Funds.
? Using Modernization Funds, contract for conversion of digital-only official documents to
film for permanent retention.
? Continue working on internal efficiencies.
Continue managing agendas, minutes, and paperwork efficiently to meet all the
various deadlines among boards.
? Create information packet for new Supervisors.
? Continue working on internal efficiencies, working collaboratively with
departments on creation of agenda items, assisting individual Supervisors in a
timely manner, and acting as liaison for citizens as needed.
Prepare for and execute the June 3, 2014, Statewide Primary Election, which includes,
but is not limited to, the following:
o Updating the voter registration database by mailing out address update cards.
o Preparing required filing forms and candidates’ guide.
o Reviewing pertinent sections of the Elections Code.
o Ballot and Sample Ballot preparations.
o Equipment programming and testing.
o Securing polling places and poll workers.
o Conducting pollworker training.
o Providing required reports to the Secretary of State.
o Organizing the elections team consisting of staff members from the Elections, IT,
Community Development, and Public Works Departments.
o Processing new voter registration cards.
o Processing vote-by-mail ballots.
o Publishing required and courtesy notices.
o Providing, receiving, and reviewing candidacy papers.
o Processing the Town’s request to consolidate their election.
o Setting up/tearing down polling places.
o Conducting the official canvass that includes the 1% manual tally.
o Bringing the Certified Statement of Vote before the Board for approval.
? Throughout the process, be mindful of finding ways to become more efficient.
? Begin working on Phase II of the Polling Place Accessibility Surveys (using HAVA grant
funds, attend required training, purchase mitigation supplies, conduct additional site
surveys as necessary, and refund Public Works for ADA upgrades to Memorial Hall
restrooms).
Department goals for FY 2013-2014 include:
- Complete an already initiated prescriptive design specific to roof top solar projects for use by the
public.
- Continue public outreach and education. Examples of such outreach and training include a class from
the State of California’s Office of Emergency Services for Safety Evaluators/Coordinators, financial
incentives through the Energy Upgrade California program, geothermal source water and space heating
systems, and fire-resistive exterior construction requirements and practices.
- Continue to monitor and learn upcoming Building Code changes due to take place for the 2013 code
cycle, effective January 1, 2014. Presentations to both the public and the Board of Supervisors are
planned.
- Update and expand informational hand-outs available to the public at both the Bridgeport and
Mammoth permit offices.
- Complete an already initiated process of enhanced web site improvements that will allow for greater
on-line capabilities for the public and permit applicants.

- Work with the Board of Supervisors and county staff to consider policy on reduced permit fees for
renewable energy and similar 'green' projects.
- Continue to provide good inspection services, plan review services, and customer service to the public.
? Continue to execute all the functions and duties listed above
? Obtain Code Enforcement Officer 2 Certification through CACEO
? Assist in the update of the General Plan update, including review of policy and regulation
changes to ensure that they are consistent with county regulations and are enforceable.
? Process Reclamation Plans and environmental documents for two new county aggregate pits.
? Implement new SMARA inspection requirements during annual inspections on local mining
operations.
Anticipated activities related to the Housing Authority this fiscal year include :
? Participation in potential revisions to the Housing Mitigation Ordinance
? Participation in the update to the Mono County Housing Element.
? Pursuit of grant funds such as the recently authorized HOME grant application for first time
homebuyers and administration of such grants by Mammoth Lakes Housing
? Consideration of Mammoth Lakes Housing Role in management of Mono County’s Rental Housing
Program
? Assistance from Mammoth Lakes Housing in the update of the June Lake Area Plan Housing Element
and potential assistance with the General Plan Housing Element Update
Concluding review and update of Sphere of Influence/Municipal Service Reviews, including supporting
CEQA documentation;
? Responding to application activity, including application processing
? Reflecting LAFCO policies in the Mono County General Plan update;
? Concluding the mutual water company inventory, providing support in the transition of the mosquito
abatement service structure;
? Concluding the update of the LAFCO Handbook and updating membership via a special district selection
committee election process.
It is expected that the Commission will be very active this year in the update of the Mono County General Plan. In
addition to considering routine planning permit applications, the Commission will be conducting a number of
workshops on matters related to the General Plan Update. Ultimately the Commission will conduct one or more
hearings to consider recommendations to the Board of Supervisors on the adoption of an update environmental
impact report and General Plan.
Implement Bridgeport Main Street Revitalization Project, including companion Main Street Design
Handbook, assessment of effectiveness of new parking configuration in concert with Caltrans, and pursuit
of Multi-agency Visitor Center
? Integrate outcomes of Bridgeport Facilities Plan into General Plan, and into capital improvement and
transportation improvement programming
? Conclude Hwy 395 Scenic Byway Corridor Enhancement Plan, including main street parking regulation
modifications, community themes and scenic corridor marketing plan
? Process planning applications/EIRs in a timely manner.
? Using Sustainable Communities Grant and LTC funding, draft update to Mono County General Plan (GP),
including Housing Element, Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), other mandated elements and policy
priorities (energy, telecommunications, solid waste, capital facilities, sage grouse and resource efficiency);

developing supporting comprehensive Environmental Impact Report (EIR), with a focus on Planning
Commission and RPAC review, streamlined processing, innovative easy-to-use electronic format, and
action plans.
? Provide Staff support to the Local Transportation Commission, including related committees such as
Yosemite Area Regional Transit System (YARTS), implement the Overall Work Program, update of the
RTP, submit the Regional Transportation Improvement Program and conclude performance audit.
? Staff Airport Land Use Commission and pursue Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan funding for
Mammoth-Yosemite Airport.
? Staff the Planning Commission, Regional Planning Advisory Committees, LDTAC, and Collaborative
Planning Team (including Land Tenure Subcommittee).
? Conduct Biomass Feasibility Study and integrate with General Plan Update
? Staff the Local Agency Formation Commission and integrate update of spheres of influence with general
plan update (see also LAFCO budget).
? Conduct monthly coordination meetings with applicable departments, including Economic Development,
Public Works and Environmental Health
? In concert with Public Works and County Counsel, conclude grading & subdivision ordinance updates.
? Continue to provide broad range of customer services at South County counter and daily planning
assistance in Bridgeport.
? Continue trails planning for communities, including Paradise/Rock Creek, Yosemite/Lee Vining, June Lake
and Bridgeport, integrating bike plan with RTP. Pursue agreements with the Inyo National Forest and
Friends of the Inyo for construction and maintenance of new trails.
Address Long Term Liabilities/Unmet Needs
? Continue Board initiated community and intergovernmental process to address long term solid waste
issues supported by appropriate county departments;
? Working with appropriate county departments, propose long-term California Air Resources Board (CARB)
funding plan;
? Continue energy efficiency efforts for county buildings;
Strategic Planning and Communications
? Launch E-Board Update;
? Re-vamp employee newsletter – enhance content to include Board information;
? Bring proposed Mono County Legislative Platform for consideration;
? Support Board of Supervisors led Countywide Strategic Planning Process;
Strengthen County Organization
? Maintain a balanced budget
? Develop comprehensive compensation review of At-Will employees for Board review;
? Fill key county leadership positions including: Information Technology Department Manager; Director of
Human Resources/Risk Management; Emergency Medical Services(EMS) Manager; Public Works
Director;
? Bring Assessor appointee candidates to Board for review and potential filling of vacancy;
? Finalize all remaining labor agreements;
? Continue to provide Human Resources leadership and assistance for recruitment of high performing
employees for vacancies;
? Continue development of internal improvements to HR processes;
? Ensure the continued use of best practices and provide professional development of staff;
Provide professional development opportunities for staff;
? Pass annual Trindel Evaluation;
? Ensure a safe and healthy environment for county employees while reducing injuries and injury related
time away from work;
? Continue to ensure the success of the County Safety program and utilize benefits of our Trindel
membership;
? Update the Hazardous Communications and Emergency Action Plan Policies;
As mentioned above under “major accomplishments,” the County Counsel’s Office primarily supports and assists
other departments in accomplishing their projects. Thus, our “goals and objectives” are not exclusively our own
department’s projects, but rather are other department’s projects with respect to which we expect to play a
significant role. Here are some of those projects:
? Effectuation of the Caltrans settlement (including drafting a conservation easement)
? More MOU negotiations with bargaining units including DSA and Paramedics
? Recruitment of a new deputy/assistant county counsel
? Continued assistance with South County lease negotiations
? Continued assistance to and support of new CAO
? Walker River representation
? *Routine activities (as described above under “major accomplishments”)
As for measuring when a goal is accomplished, we generally view “accomplishment” as reaching a point where
there is no apparent need for further legal services with respect to a matter.
*Finish restructuring the Investigative Unit to add an additional Contract-Investigator and
expand the Mammoth Office space to house the Investigation Unit with the goal of also bringing
the MONET unit over to Sierra Center Mall from the Minaret Mall. This will lead to better
efficiency, better investigation management and an overall cost savings because crimes are being
investigated better, faster and less costly. Tremendous savings are also realized by the County in
the cost of prosecution, expert fees, witness fees, public defender expenses and jury trials.
*Securing a contract investigator position to assist in the increased case load.
*Securing a much needed finance officer position.
*To complete the implementation of our Case Management System.
*To continue to DO THE RIGHT THING FOR THE RIGHT REASON ALL THE TIME.
Grant Sourcing: Under the auspices of the Economic Development Block Grant (EDBG) program,
establish a revolving loan/enterprise fund to provide low-interest loans to start-up and existing businesses
for job creation and job retention. Hire full-time Economic Development Assistant to pursue economic
development projects that will help create increased revenue growth for local businesses, create jobs, and
increase opportunity through leverage of new capabilities. This can be accomplished by pursuing the
CDBG & EDBG grants to assist local businesses with hiring and training new employees. The position can
also pursue the leveraging of new technology capabilities resulting from the completion of Digital 395
including broadband training to underserved communities and residents to spurn growth and opportunity.
? Economic Development Strategy: Complete the Economic Development Strategy and National Scenic
Byway Marketing Plan with Strategic Marketing Group (SMG) and phase into implementation.
? Geothermal Monitoring: Direct the participation of the Long Valley Hydrologic Advisory Committee
(LVHAC) in the future establishment of an expanded hydrologic monitoring program which would address
the potential hydrologic effects of the proposed CD-4 Geothermal Power Plant Project.
Identify and implement a solution to onsite impacts to private property at Conway Summit as a result of
adjudicated water flow diversion from Virginia Creek. A possible re-routing of the existing diversion
ditch is being investigated.
? Proceed with the development of a Conservation Easement for the 75-acre portion of the Conway Ranch
which has been designated as the area for a hatchery and interpretive facility.
? Develop agreements with National Fish & Wildlife Foundation and California Department of Parks &
Recreation to acknowledge the Conservation Easement and allow the construction of the hatchery facility
on Conway Ranch.
Continue to provide outreach and support to local fish enhancement projects such as the Bridgeport Fish
Enhancement Foundation.
? Pursue potential rearing of Lahontan Cutthroat Trout with US Fish & Wildlife Service to be carried out on
the Conway Ranch.
To ensure the availability of a minimum of $3,500 for payment to ESWC until March 2016.
? Strive to ensure that future expenditures from this fund focus on high priority projects for non-profit or
governmental entities.
Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) is climbing towards pre-recession levels and the primary goal for
Tourism in this next fiscal year is to increase overnight visitation to the region in an effort to maintain this
upward trend.
GOAL: To continue to drive overnight and day visits to Mono County to increase TOT and visitor
spending in Mono County.
STRATEGY #1: Improve and increase communication and marketing of the brand message which
brings awareness to name/location “Mono County - California’s Eastern Sierra” and to the top
three reasons people visit – outdoor recreation opportunities, scenic beauty, and to see the region’s
natural wonders and historic attractions.
? Visitor Guide - Improve Mono County Visitor Guide by increasing content around the two main
recreational opportunities – hiking and fishing – and revitalizing photography
Eastern Sierra Fall Color Guide - Collaborate with Inyo County, Bishop Chamber, and
Mammoth Lakes Tourism to redesign and distribute new Fall Color Guide
? Website - Increase visitor traffic to MonoCounty.org website by 30% by adding interior pages
with key word rich content; installing language translator for international visitors; uploading
Booking.com to provide online booking capability for lodging partners. Continue to increase
traffic to website by focusing on Organic search results in addition to Paid Search campaigns.
? Social Media - Expand social media reach by 100% through increased exposure to Mono
County’s Facebook page with targeted promotion and advertising to capture and engage key
influencers; continue monthly E-Newsletters to database of over 15,800.
? Trade shows – Continue to meet potential visitors face-to-face in key markets, increasing and
replenishing visitor database with qualified leads, and distributing Visitor Guides, Scenic Event
Calendars, and other primary marketing materials, and raising awareness of Mono County as a
premiere outdoor recreation destination. Maximize co-operative presence with Yosemite Gateway
Partners, High Sierra Visitors Council, Mammoth Lakes Tourism, and other US 395 corridor
businesses and agencies.
? Advertising; Continue to promote Mono County on both a national and regional level in key
publications (Visit California’s Official Visitor Guide and niche pubs like Western Outdoor
Page 142
News). Participate in co-op ads when possible with regional and tourism partners. Sponsor
CaliforniaFallColor.com.
? Public Relations – Secure editorial in major travel-based and lifestyle publications, both print and
online, as well as in niche publications by issuing targeted press releases and story ideas that push
shoulder season travel to Mono County. Position US Highway 395 resort corridor as the
premiere road trip in America. Generate lifestyle stories including family-friendly and dogfriendly
vacation options, June Mountain re-opening, Seasonal themes (Fall Colors, Spring
Fishing, Winter Festivals), Hiking, High Altitude Training, Film-friendly destination for
locations, Special events, etc. Also attend Visit California’s annual LA Media Event.
? Fulfillment – Optimize interaction with visitors and potential visitors through in-house fulfillment
from 800-line and website requests for information, plus reader response from print advertising.
? Film Commission (Policy Item: $10,000) – Leveraging the current momentum, actively promote
Mono County as a film-friendly, accessible destination. This will include the development of an
online locations photo library as well as expanded information regarding permitting on county,
public and private lands.
? Event Marketing and Local Program Funding (Policy Item: $40,000) – Increase ability to assist
communities directly, and thus the county overall, in their efforts to grow existing tourism-related
events and/or to launch new events through county-wide marketing, and the reinstatement of
Local Program Funding. Local Program Funding is a grant reimbursement program developed by
the Tourism Commission that has a proven track record of successfully supporting non-profit
organizations to increase participation in established tourism-related events and/or to launch new
events or programs that drive overnight visitation to communities.
STRATEGY #2: Expand reach to additional regional and international markets.
? Focus on 100% optimization of all programs, tools, and marketing channels available through
Visit California by increasing communication and building relationships with marketing/
PR/International sales staff
? Work closely and strategically with Mammoth Lakes Tourism, Mammoth Mountain Ski Area,
High Sierra Visitors Council, and Visit California on media/travel trade familiarization trips and
cooperative advertising promotions in Northern California, SoCal, Las Vegas, Denver, etc.
? Add Google translator tool to website to provide language options to non-English speaking
demographics
? Work closely with High Sierra Visitors Council to ensure optimal representation at international
travel shows and with contracted French travel broker, MN Organisation.
STRATEGY #3: Improve and develop co-operative and collaborative regional partnerships.
? Increase access to, and improve outdoor recreation product by continuing to develop positive
working relationships with US Forest Service, IAVC, regional visitor centers, community
chambers of commerce, Friends of the Inyo, Caltrans, etc.
Complete financial audit and have FY 2012/13 audited financial statements available prior to Dec 31, 2013
? Continue to provide meaningful professional training for department personnel
? Continue emphasis on reducing Finance Department’s error rates
? Continue to meet all State, Federal, and other reporting and financial deadlines
? Continue to refine collections effort to improve revenues.
? Continue implementation of payroll interface with Public Works cost accounting system (CAMS)
? Continue to improve fiscal services provided to LTC, Community Development, and Public Works
Departments
? Maintain quality results in the Treasury Pool in a difficult economic market

? Implementation of Employee Self-Service Portal and E-Forms
? Implement initial billing process of EMS services and eliminate outsourcing of billing
? Implement a county wide credit card processing program for all departments to utilize
? Continue to maintain and build our relationship with Oak Valley Community Bank
? Continue to research and expand our revenue collections process for higher collections of revenue
Renegotiate new service contracts on all machines.
? Purchase one new machine for the new Social Services Office.
? Replace 2 older copy machines
? Continue to insure each department’s copier needs are met.
? Continue to look for additional ways to reduce costs.
Our goal is continued quality television reception which is the only program
our District is managing at this time.
Research and develop recommended practices for raising horticultural crops in the Eastern Sierra.
? Provide workshops and one-on-one consultations to educate local residents and growers of best
management practices in agriculture, gardening, and landscapes.
? Support current and potential small-scale growers to improve local access to affordable, fresh food and to
develop resiliency in our local food supply.
? Promote 4-H activities that focus on science, engineering and technology; healthy living; and citizenship.
? Recruit new volunteers into 4-H and expand offerings of non-traditional projects to increase membership.
? Promote Cooperative Extension’s programs through local collaborations, advocacy, and public workshops.
? Provide instruction on safe food preservation practices to be conducted by UC-trained Master Food
Preservers.
? Update and expand online information available at Master Gardeners’ website and through social media.
? Continue outreach efforts and continue to provide services listed under accomplishments.
We continue to strive to:
? Service the citizens of Inyo/Mono Counties
? Respond quickly to issues and complaints;

? Maintain our 100% rate of inspection for all weighing and measuring devices within Inyo and Mono Counties to ensure equity for all
transactions; and,
? To enforce the laws to the best of our ability.
Funding priority goals:
? We continue lobbying through the California Agricultural Commissioners’ Association to gain state and federal dollars through legislation and
regulations,
? We continue to investigate contracting with other agencies to maintain a viable noxious weed control program.
IT Department Goals:
? Develop IT Strategic Plan for Mono County & Town of Mammoth Lakes
? Implement new phone system for selected sites
? Implement Digital 395 in all County sites
? Sign and fulfill obligations of contract with Town of Mammoth Lakes for IT Support & Services
? Increase staff and user Training

GIS Division Goals:
? Leverage Digital 395 infrastructure to unify and streamline GIS across County/Town network
? Perform utility infrastructure inventory and develop associated data
? Update MLTS trails signs and convert entire process to GIS
? Develop and manage data, website, and apps for Mammoth-Yosemite trail project
? Complete Centerline data update & continue work on addressing issues
? Complete geometry input for Highway 395 Right of Way for control (cadastral management)
? ParcelViewer redesign effort
? Database updates & replication
Hire a DPOI/II created by realignment funds as well as send to CORE training as funded by Standards and
Training Corrections (STC) program ($6030).
? Enroll three (3) DPOI/II in PC 832 training locally with Mono County Sheriff’s Office.
? Enroll one (1) DPOI/II in CORE as funded through STC reimbursement.
? Implement evidence based practice (EBP) treatment program Aggression Replacement Therapy (ART) as
funded by Youth Accountability Block Grant (YOBG) ($10,000).
? Implement the last phase of EBP Juvenile Risk/Needs by training two DPO’s on PACT Treatment Plans
funded through YOBG ($15,000).
? Ensure and enact the Youth Drug and Alcohol and pro-social skills cognitive behavioral program through
interactive journaling, risk assessment, treatment plan as funded by YOBG ($2,150).
? Ensure and schedule pro-social work groups for youth funded through YOBG ($5,000).
? Implement as Ordered by the Court, electronic monitoring for Court involved youth funded through YOBG
($5,000).
? Implement a Youth Work Crew with the U.S. Forest Service volunteer Trail Management program through
YOBG ($4,500).
? Detain youth as Ordered by the Court as funded by YOBG ($75, 350).
? Conduct EBP of interactive journaling measuring arrest rate, rate of successful completion of probation,
incarceration rate, probation violation rate, rate in completion and court-ordered community services as
funded through the Juvenile Justice Crime Prevention Act ($37,855).
? Train and certify two employees on California Law Enforcement Telecommunication System (CLETS) as a
response to retirement of a user.
? Through the Community Corrections Partnership (CCP), prepare a comprehensive multiagency juvenile
justice plan to be approved by the Board of Supervisors.
? Implement Field Contacts Matrix (moderate to high risk of percent of caseload) measuring for frequency of
probation violations and new offenses.
? CCP will ensure all regulations and codes are adhered to for the purpose of opening a transition house for
AB109 offenders released from jail.
? Train a second DPO on SARATSO and the Containment Model.
? Partner with neighboring counties to bring STC Training and Staff Development courses to minimize
travel.
? Plan and execute leadership and professional development for the DPO III’s.
? Provide service and support to citizens and probationers as indicated by 30% file audits conducted by COP
and the DPO III’s.
? Increase collections on outstanding Court Ordered fees and fines by 20%.
? Evaluate current Case Management System (Justware) in its effectiveness.
? Community Corrections Partnership will plan and initiate an educational, programmatic and treatment
programs for detainees under AB109.

? Apply for the BPAI grant to fund the “EBP Trusting Data” Project will utilize JABG funding to add
Information Technology infrastructure (hardware and software) to support and enhance the Probation
Department's ability to collect and analyze data for informing evidence based practices.
Maintain the core Public Health services in the continued face of decreases in realignment,
program funding decreases, sequestration, and minimal staffing.
? Enhance knowledge on the changes to Public Health infrastructure as related to the
implementation of the Affordable Care Act.
? Implement changes related to the Affordable Care Act into Public health infrastructure.
? Support Social Services during the transitions related to the implementation of the Affordable
Care Act.
? Utilize new functions within CalREDIE, the State of California Communicable Reporting System
to include providers reporting electronically through CalREDIE and electronic lab reporting.
? Complete the data input into California Immunization Registry (CAIR), the online immunization
registry.
? Finish transition to Envision Connect, automated record keeping for CUPA, in compliance with
state requirements.
? Increase the flu vaccination rates within the county.
? Support programs within MCAH that focus on nutrition and physical activity to therefore reduce
childhood obesity.
? Support programs within MCAH that focus on early prenatal care.
? Maintain the Mono County Health Taskforce leadership in the arenas of: Breastfeeding, Chronic
Disease Prevention, Nutrition and Physical Activity, and Oral Health.
? Investigate the Public Health Accreditation process.
Maintain local relationships with first responders, community agencies and coalitions to
continue to support and promote emergency preparedness awareness in our community by
providing trainings/workshops and exercises.
? In November 2013, conduct the 2013 Statewide Medical and Health Training and Exercise with
the scenario being foodborne illness. Complete with AAR/IP within 90 days.
? Develop an Operational Area Healthcare Coalition and coordinate with the MHOAC Program.
? Health Officer to receive the EOM Train-the-Trainer training as provided by CDPH and EMSA.
? Develop five year training and exercise plan integrated with PHEP and OES.

? The HPP Entity (MCHD) and the MHOAC Program will maintain updated contact lists and
disseminate to all HCC members quarterly or as necessary.
? Provide CAHAN Training for all mandatory and supplemental roles with Mammoth Hospital
personnel. CAHAN Training will be provided to the Antelope Valley and Town of Mammoth
Lakes CERT volunteers.
? Continue attending and actively participating in the multi-agency group meetings.
? Health Officer will provide trainings to the primary and additional members of the Hospital
Command Center at quarterly Unified Command meetings, bi-monthly EMCC meetings, and
monthly Mammoth Hospital Disaster Committee meetings, and all other opportunities as they
arise.
Provide signage and replacement signage to support Mammoth Lakes comprehensive
smoke free ordinance and Mono County voluntary smoke free policy.
? Assess community readiness for smoke free parks policy in Mono County and smoke free
college campus for Cerro Coso, Mammoth Campus.
? Provide technical assistance to Mammoth Lakes Affordable Housing Authority for policy
development to bring them into line with many of their colleague agency smoke free policy.
? Assess the healthiness of retail environments of 30 markets in regards to nutrition, alcohol
and tobacco as mandated by the CA Public Health Department.
? Assess the remainder of the 35 multiunit housing complexes in Mammoth for smoke free
policy.
? Support all schools in delivering health curriculum.
Complete implementation of Image Trend Software.
? Finalize recruitment for EMS Manager.
? Finalize recruitment to fill two positions with EMT’s, and add additional EMT’s to the reserve corps.
? Expanding inventory of PPE to identify manufacture date (and corresponding OSHA standard) and
develop replacement plan.
? Develop master training calendar, identifying source of mandate for training, for training not related to
continuing education.
? Implement provisions of MOU once it has been negotiated.
Engineering and Project Management for the following projects:
? Close out School Street Plaza
? Complete and close out Bridgeport Streets
? Complete and close out Lee Vining Streets
? Construct Aspen Road Paving
? Design and construct Mountain Gate
? Design and construct Chalfant Streets
? Environmental and design phases of June Lake Streets
? Review Federal Highway Administration design of Rock Creek Road
Finalize Bryant Field construction
? Receive FAA grants for updated Airport Layout Plans for both Bryant Field and Lee Vining Airport
? Assist Community Development grant application for a County-wide Airport Land Use Compatibility
Plan (Mammoth-Yosemite, Lee Vining Airport, and Bryant Field)
? Begin working with Los Angeles Department of Water and Power on long term lease for Lee Vining
Airport (current lease expires 08/31/15)
? Continue monitoring Lee Vining Airport re-vegetation project
The Department’s FY 2013-2014 Requested Budget represents an overall decrease of $2,694,671 in
expenditures, and a decrease of $2,447,531 in operating revenues, when compared to the FY 2012-2013 Board
Approved Budget. As a result, the requested net cost is decreased by $247,140. In addition, significant project
expenditures occurred in 2012/13, with only small amounts to finalize the project expected in 2013/14, utilizing
FAA grant funding.
There are no personnel costs in this budget.
Revenues –Decrease in fuel revenue and tie-down revenue projected based on 2012/13 actual revenue.
Staff notes that 2012/13 could be lower than projected due to Bryant Field being closed for construction for two
months during 2012/13.
Personnel – N/A
Services & Supplies – Decrease in cost to purchase fuel for sale, based on 2012/13 actuals. Increase in
A-87 costs.
Fixed Assets – Completion of Bryant Field project.
Continue ongoing overall maintenance of the campground as well as focus on adding more bear boxes to
existing campgrounds.
Ongoing Projects
? Antelope Valley Community Center addition
? Clean Air Project Program (CAPP) funded solar projects-solar arrays for Lee Vining and Crowley
Lake Community Centers
? Sierra Center Mall Child Welfare space remodel
? Bridgeport Memorial Hall ADA project-CSA #5 funding
? Annex I ADA access
? Lower Rock Creek Guardrail
? Mountain Gate Fishing Access-pending additional grant funding
Set-aside funds
? Paramedic garage-Walker-$23,000
? June Lake Visitor’s Center-$24,467.97
? Chalfant Park Development-$20,000
? Crowley Lake mailboxes-$10,500
Goals include finalizing the site plan, installing development staking, setting grave markers for the
unmarked/unknown gravesites and creating the roads for the Bridgeport and Mono Lake Cemeteries. Once the
site plans are completed, the cemetery ordinance can be finalized.
Lakeridge Ranch #1
June Lake Highlands #1
Rimrock Ranch-Zone B
Rimrock Ranch-Zone C
Rimrock Ranch-T37-49A
Sierra Meadows
Premier Properties
Osage Circle
Silver Lake Pines
The facilities division is focusing on refining the existing systems which include weekly inspections of playgrounds,
quarterly inspections of Community Centers and existing facilities, bi-annual maintenance and inspection of heating
and cooling systems county wide. In addition, the facilities division has also developed an overall facilities
maintenance schedule which includes facility inspections, back-up generators, appliances, and painting. The plan is
to improve the documentation of the aforementioned inspections and maintenance to achieve a more seamless
transition from season to season. In addition, we would like to continue to focus on ADA accessibility as well as
improving building systems to increase energy efficiency. We will possibly establish an Energy Task Force to
accomplish this.
? Split accounts to delineate replacement vs. maintenance costs. This may result in a rate reduction at
mid-year budget.
? Automate billing process in CAMS system.
Follow up with Digital 395 and Praxis to ensure county roads are not compromised
? Continue county-wide bridge analysis and associated maintenance
? Complete construction of Bridgeport Streets-$1,000,000-carried forward from 2012/13-expenditure and revenue
budgeted
? Complete construction of Lee Vining Streets-$1,000,000-carried forward from 2012/13-expenditure and
revenue budgeted
? Complete construction of Aspen Street-$164,017-carried forward from 2012/13-expenditures budgeted, revenue
already on deposit from Prop 1B
? Design phase of Chalfant Streets-$65,000 expenditure and revenue budgeted
? Environmental June Lake Streets-$37,000 expenditure and revenue budgeted
Continue to work with regional jurisdictions including the Town of Mammoth Lakes on long-term solid
waste plans and strategies
? Work with LADWP to obtain Revised Solid Waste Facility Permit for Pumice Valley Landfill
? Obtain Revised Solid Waste Facility Permit for Walker Landfill
? Complete update to County Integrated Waste Management Plan
? Initiate environmental mitigation (landfill gas) project at Bridgeport Landfill
? Work with LADWP to obtain extended lease at Benton Crossing Landfill
? Expand diversion programs to include mixed paper, and event recycling within the county.
Become fully staffed in Patrol Operations
? Provide quality and responsive law enforcement services
? Improve communications between various county agencies for the purposes of mutual aid
? Meet or exceed all POST training mandates
? Replace the aging Orbacom System (security and radio) to create incentives for staff to reside
within the county so they can better assist in managing Patrol Operations
Continue to operate our boating program using only grant revenue
Work with the Superior Court to keep court security costs within awarded state revenue figures
Continue to improve communications with various County departments and emergency service
stakeholders to coordinate mutual aid agreements and EOC management
? Coordinate with Mammoth Lakes Fire Department in a joint effort to provide OES training and
emergency management techniques
? Host a State OES Winter Training
Maintain orderly operation of the jail
? Enhance jail operations based on the increased inmate population and AB 109 implementation
? Support patrol functions by striving to provide professional dispatch services
? Continue to support county maintenance projects by utilizing inmate labor by assigning inmates to
specific daily county operations on a full time basis
? Continue to support the community, non-profits and allied governmental agencies by providing
supervised inmate labor as needed
? Meet or exceed the STC training requirements
Continue to conduct SAR missions in a professional manner
? Work with the SAR team to write grants to support the SAR program
? Replace Rescue One with a new and updated vehicle
Implement all changes relevant to Medi-Cal and publically subsidized health insurance as described in
the Patient Protection Affordable Care Act.
? Implement policy and business process changes to allow successful implementation of Health Care
Reform. Identify best practices for eligibility case load management and provide training to staff.
? Continue foster family home recruitment – a critical need in Mono County. Partner with the Mono
County Child Abuse Prevention Council and other partners to increase the number of licensed family
foster homes.
? Expand our partnership with Probation to respond to the public assistance service needs of exoffenders.
? Continue outreach to hard-to-reach communities with services and education on the variety and level
of economic assistance available to them, with a concentration on vulnerable populations, including
the elderly and disabled.
? Extend foster care services for youth after 18 years old to enable an improved transition to adulthood.
? Implement Safety Organized Practice, a framework for assessing safety in partnership with families
from referral to post-permanency, to achieve the best possible child welfare outcomes.
? Implement the Mono County WRAP Program in partnership with the Depts of Behavioral Health,
Probation, and Public Health, to reduce the risk of out-of-home placement and recidivism of children
and youth.
? Develop an effective team process for implementing a trauma-informed system of supports and
services for Katie A. subclass members and their families being served jointly by Child Welfare and
Behavioral Health.
? Complete the Mono County System Improvement Plan (SIP), and present the five- year SIP to the
Board of Supervisors regarding how child welfare and probation services will be provided through
2018.
? Continue regular quality assurance monitoring, and weekly inter-departmental case staffing meetings,
to ensure continued coordination and improvement in the services provided to the community.
? Increase accessibility to C4Yourself, CalFresh, and other eligibility programs on the Mono County
Social Services website page.

? Successfully transition all IHSS providers to the new Case Management Information Payrolling
System (CMIPS II) to achieve system and staffing efficiencies.
? Develop stronger program evaluations and other reporting protocols to better understand client
outcomes and inform decisions.
Continue successful operation of emergency shelters and short-term assistance to indigent adults.
Through collaboration with the Mono County Departments of Behavioral and Public Health, expand
the reach and depth of services to the senior community, while creating greater connection to existing
services and supports. This includes planned implementation of the Healthy Ideas Program for
seniors in northern and eastern Mono County.
? Increase outreach efforts to enroll seniors in the CalFresh nutrition program to reduce food insecurity.
Increase participation by 50% or more, by June 2014.
? Work collaboratively with Inyo County through the Eastern Sierra Area Agency on Aging partnership
to benefit senior programs and outreach, and achieve program delivery efficiencies where possible.
Develop an On-the-Job (OJT) Training Program with Mono County employers and job seekers. OJT
provides clients with an opportunity to build skills while earning money. It also helps businesses by
providing a subsidy up to 90%. Training periods can range from weeks to months for every OJT
employee.
? Provide a Subsidized Employment Program (SEP) for Mono County employers and Welfare to Work
Participants. Employment in a private or public sector for which the employer receives a subsidy
from CalWORKS to offset some or all of the wages and costs of employing a client for up to 6
months.
? Increase accessibility for jobseekers and employers to CalJOBS, job search resources and other
services on the Mono County Social Services website page.
? Expand our partnership with Probation to respond to the employment service needs of ex-offenders.
The Mono County CAPC has not yet set specific goals for FY 2013-14.
