The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for the County
Administrative Office (CAO) is $68,812,111 a net increase of
$15,427,914, or 29%. Increases were realized as follows: $735,455
in salaries and benefits, $2,980,329 in capital assets, and
$25,421,941 in other charges. Decreases were realized in services
and supplies in the amount of $8,079,683 and other financing uses
in the amount of $7,476,188. Cost increases in salaries and benefits
were due to the addition of two positions in Fleet and approved
salary increases combined with increased benefits costs. The
increase in capital assets is due to the Vehicle Asset Management
Program (VAMP). The primary cost drivers in other charges are
$3.2 million appropriated for the Jail Addition project and $5.8
million for the Juvenile Hall project.
Recommended General Fund revenues are $202,338,038, an
increase of $18,634,200, or 10%. The increase is due to the
following increases: $10,267,752 in tax revenue, $182,391 in
licenses, permits, and franchises, $60,269 in revenue from use of
money and property, and $42,272 in charges for services. The
increases were offset by decreases of $8,000 in miscellaneous
revenue and $8,835 in other financing sources.The CAO's FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes the
elimination of 1.0 vacant Full-Time Equivalent (FTE)
Administrative Analyst position and the addition of 1.0 FTE
County Budget Director in the Budget and Analysis Division. The
Administration and Finance Division added 1.0 FTE Accounting
Technician. Fleet Administration added 1.0 FTE Management
Analyst II. These changes resulted in no net increase to General
Fund Contribution (GFC).
The position count for the Contracts/Purchasing Division
increased in FY 2014-15 by the addition of 1.0 FTE Buyer II. The
position was added to replace an existing Buyer II being reassigned
offsite to work on the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) project
and is being funded through the ERP project through the term of
the project.
Two augmentations have been incorporated into the FY 2015-16
Recommended Budget. The first augmentation is $16,000 for
Intergovernmental & Legislative Affairs to restore professional
services contracts for legislative lobbyist. The second is in the
Office of Emergency Services in the amount of $33,938 to prevent a
loss of critical services due to increases in non-discretionary cost.CAO DEPARTMENTAL: The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget
for the CAO's Departmental Division is $9,127,630, an increase of
$2,898,481 or 47%. The increase is primarily driven by an increase
in the capital asset expenditure for the Fleet Vehicle Asset
Management Program (VAMP).
ADMINISTRATION & FINANCE: The FY 2015-16
Recommended Budget for the Administration & Finance Division
is $1,176,601, an increase of $25,000. The increase is due to better
alignment of resources within the Department and resulted in no
net increase to General Fund Contribution (GFC). The FY 2015-16
Recommended Budget includes the addition of a 1.0 Full Time
Equivalent (FTE) Accounting Technician funded through
reimbursement from the Fleet Division with no additional GFC.
BUDGET & ANALYSIS: The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget
for the Budget & Analysis Division is $1,060,952. Increases in
salary and benefit costs of $14,118 were offset by reductions to
services and supplies for no net change from prior year.
Organtizational changes in the Division include the reduction of
1.0 FTE Associate Administrative Analyst and the addition of 1.0
FTE County Budget Director.
CONTRACTS/PURCHASING: The FY 2015-16 Recommended
Budget for the Contracts/Purchasing Unit is $979,947, a decrease
of $8,000. The decrease is the result of a reduction in revenue.
Salary and benefit cost increases of $121,269 were offset by
reductions to services and supplies for no net increase in County
cost.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL & LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS: The FY
2015-16 Recommended Budget for the Intergovernmental &
Legislative Affairs (IGLA) Division is $1,079,183. This represents
an increase of $16,000 in GFC to restore essential legislative
lobbyist professional services that were originally reduced to
partially offset salary and benefit increases.
OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES (OES): The Recommended
Budget for the Office of Emergency Services is $898,755. This
represents an increase of $35,938 in GFC to restore reductions to
critical services due to increased costs of non-discretionary items.
The increased funding allows for maintenance of existing service
levels.
OFFICE OF COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT & STRATEGIC
ADVOCACY: The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for the
Office of Community Engagement & Strategic Advocacy (OCESA)
remained static at $516,132. Increases in salary and benefit costs of
$20,465 are offset by reductions in services and supplies.
FLEET ADMINISTRATION: The FY 2015-16 Recommended
Budget for Fleet Management is $5,427,576. Due to inter/intrafund
reimbursements and the fuel sales revenues realized through
the Monterey County Office of Education, the net budget is
$329,397. Included in this amount is the addition of 1.0 FTE
Management Analyst II. Fleet Administration provides services to
entities within the government and as such, the budget is totally
derived from the services rendered. It operates on a full cost
recovery basis and does not receive any General Fund Contribution
(GFC).
SHUTTLE SERVICES: FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for
Shuttle Services is $163,351. The recognition of revenue from
outside agencies resulted in the General Fund Contribution
decreasing $25,000 from $138,351 to $113,351.
VEHICLE ASSET MANAGEMENT PROGRAM: The
Recommended Budget for the Vehicle Asset Management Program
is where vehicle purchases are based on the estimated monthly
vehicle lease payments made by respective County departments to
replace their vehicles once they have reached their useful life. The
monthly payment is calculated based on the useful life of the
vehicle. The amount budgeted for vehicle purchases in FY 2015-16
will exceed monthly lease payments by $2,878,783 to allow for
vehicle purchases to better align with the age of the fleet. The
amount budgeted for vehicle purchases in FY 2015-16 is
$4,620,000. The revenue of $44,528 is estimated proceeds from
vehicles sold at auction. The staff associated with this Unit are
budgeted in Fleet Administration (Unit 8451).
Budget Impacts
The CAO's Recommended Budget FY 2015-16 includes the
elimination of 1.0 vacant Full-Time Equivalent (FTE)
Administrative Analyst position and the addition of 1.0 FTE
County Budget Director in the Budget & Analysis Division. The
Administration and Finance Division added 1.0 FTE Accounting
Technician. Fleet Administration added 1.0 FTE Management
Analyst II. These changes resulted in no net increase to General
Fund Contribution.
The position count for the Contracts/Purchasing Division was
impacted in FY 2014-15 by the addition of 1.0 FTE Buyer II. The
position was added to replace an existing Buyer II being reassigned
offsite to work on the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) project.
The funding for the position will come from the ERP funding
through the term of the project.
Two augmentations have been incorporated into the FY 2015-16
Recommended Budget. The first augmentation is $16,000 for
Intergovernmental & Legislative Affairs to restore professional
services contracts for legislative lobbyist. The second is in the
Office of Emergency Services in the amount of $33,938 to prevent a
loss of critical services due to increases in non-discretionary cost.

ADMINISTRATION & FINANCE/BUDGET & ANALYSIS:
Update, develop, and recommend fiscal policies to assure the
financial stability of the County.
Collaborate with departments to produce periodic financial reports
and annual Three-Year Financial Forecasts for the Board of
Supervisors.
Develop and recommend for Board of Supervisors' consideration,
principles and strategies for development of the FY 2016-17
Recommended Budget.
Provide continuous improvement in the Fiscal Year Recommended
Budget Book to provide greater transparency and user-friendliness.
CONTRACTS/PURCHASING: Continue to provide additional
cohorts for the Contracts/ Purchasing Academy while maintaining
effective and pertinent material to assist in the growth and
development of the participants enrolled within the Academy.
Continue outreach efforts for the County's surplus property
program, resulting in timely disposal of surplus property and
increased revenue to the County.
Continue to improve outreach efforts to the local vendor
community by participating in various small business expositions;
continually looking for ways to improve the Vendor Self- Service
(VSS) user experience; continuous collaboration with the Auditor-
Controller's Office to optimize efficiency and accuracy in Vendor
Data reporting.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL & LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS: Provide
legislative analysis, coordination, and advocacy services in support
of the County's legislative priorities and critical County initiatives
including efforts to secure funding for priority County projects and
programs. Develop and administer the County's State and Federal
legislative advocacy contracts. Coordinate County participation in
State and Federal lobbying efforts through the California State
Association of Counties (CSAC) and National Association of
Counties (NACo).
Coordinate State and Federal legislative advocacy efforts related to
the California drought emergency, including coordinating the
County's response.
Direct and manage the continued development of the Managing for
Results (MFR), County performance measurement program and
annual reports.
OFFICE OF COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT & STRATEGIC
ADVOCACY: Finalize and implement the Monterey County Gang
Violence Prevention Strategic Action Plan, its strategies, short and
long term goals, objectives and outcomes and provide sustainable
implementation recommendations to the Board of Supervisors.
Implement the Board of Supervisors approved Monterey County
Gang Violence Prevention Strategic Action Plan recommendation.
FLEET ADMINISTRATION: Evaluate and implement industry
best procedures within operations.Serve as liaison and coordinator among the County Administrative
Office, the Resource Management Agency, Agricultural
Commissioner and Cooperative Extension. Provide direct
management oversight to the Parks, Emergency Communications,
Economic Development departments and Resource Management
Agency.
Coordinate and manage work supporting a solution to the San
Lucas water quality issue.
Complete assessment and recommendations regarding Laguna
Seca management and operation alternatives.
Prepare and implement the County's FY 2015-16 Legislative
Program update.
Coordinate the County response to the California drought
emergency.
Provide legislative analysis, coordination, and advocacy services in
support of the County's legislative priorities and critical County
initiatives including efforts to secure funding for priority County
projects and programs. Develop and administer the County's State
and Federal legislative advocacy contracts. Coordinate County
participation in State and Federal lobbying efforts through the
California State Association of Counties (CSAC) and National
Association of Counties (NACo).
Continue to direct, manage and develop the Strategic Grants
Program to identify funding opportunities for countywide project
and program needs, especially the highest priority needs as
identified by the Board of Supervisor's Strategic Initiatives and
Legislative Program.
Continue to coordinate legislative and funding strategy
development and advocacy related to high priority water issues and
funding needs affecting the County in collaboration with the Water
Resources Agency (WRA).
Continue to assist the CAO in matters related to the Board of
Supervisors' and Water Resources Board of Directors' Joint Ad Hoc
Committee on Water.
Direct and manage the continued development of the Managing for
Results (MFR), County performance measurement program;
continue to review, analyze and prepare Strategic Initiatives/Key
Objective Success Indicator outcomes and presentations to the
Board.
Plan and coordinate the FY 2015-16 Board of Supervisor's and
department heads annual retreat.
Continue to work with departments to identify, refine and/or
review Department Key Performance Measures for FY 2015-16.
Subject to resource availability, continue to develop the Go Green!
Monterey County Program related to energy sustainability.
Develop and implement an online Board of Supervisors Policy
Manual.
Continue to provide programming and vendor contract oversight
for the County Government Channel.
Continue development of Government Channel website, which will
include live streaming of County programming. Direct research
into the possible expansion of public meetings available to
broadcast to the public.
Develop guidelines for County department public outreach efforts
and provide the CAO Weekly Report and public information/
media relations services. Provide positive communications in a
disaster or emergency event.
Continue coordination efforts related to 9-1-1 governance issues.
Preparedness/Mitigation:
OES will conduct 25 community outreach programs to increase
community preparedness awareness.
Three Year Training and Exercise Plan will be updated. OES will
conduct three EOC Field Exercises and two EOC trainings of staff
to ensure the State of local readiness for the occurrence of any
natural, technological or human conflict related emergency or
disaster that may impact any segment of Monterey County
including relocation of EOC. Monterey County will participate in
Urban Shied Functional exercise in September 2015.
Complete of Urban Areass Security Intitiative (UASI) hazard
identification process, risk management and core competencies
assessment.
Reach 90% of National Incident Management System (NIMS)
compliance in Operational Area and 95% in OES.
Ensure that all grants are awarded, tracked, and closed out within
12 months.
Finalize Emergency Services County Ordinance and OACC
adoption by Board of Supervisors. Build Affinity groups with
members representing the whole community.
Adopt Hazard Mitigation Plan by cities and the Board of
Supervisors. Receive final approval by FEMA.
Response:
Complete EOC Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) reflecting
new organizational changes.
Increase OES staff capability of mutual aid deployment per
Emergency Management Mutual Aide (EMMA) standards.
Ensure all Special Teams are credentialed per Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) guidelines.
Review all Hazard Annexes and update as needed.
Conduct TTX involving Elkhorn Slough and hazardous materials
spill. Finalize Oil Spill Plan for Elkhorn Slough.
Recovery:
Obtain approval and adoption by the Board of Supervisors of the
Continuity of Operations Government Operations Plan for the
County.
Develop Disaster Recovery Framework including Logistics,
Resource Management, and Lifeline restoration.
Conduct donations management exercise with stakeholders.
Continue to build a resiliency collation with the Board of
Supervisors and non-government organizations and private
business throughout County.
CONTRIBUTIONS - PROPOSITION 172: The County
contributes a portion of its Public Safety Sales Tax (Proposition
172) revenue to fire protection service providers in unincorporated
areas of the County. The disbursement model for Proposition 172
as of FY 2011-12, is the sharing of the full 9.13% of Proposition 172
revenues for the most recently audited fiscal year with the
Association of Fire Fighters and Volunteer Fire Companies. Under
this formula, the Association's share of Proposition 172 revenues
will increase by $106,375 to $2,714,110 in FY 2015-16.
CONTRIBUTIONS - OTHER AGENCIES: The FY 2015-16
Recommended Budget is $486,881 and reflects payment of fees and
dues to other government agencies, such as the Monterey Bay
Unified Air Pollution Control District and the Association of

Monterey Bay Area Governments (please see the unit narrative for
a complete list of agencies funded by this program).
TRIAL COURTS: The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for
expenditures is $8,925,615 a decrease of $100,000.
CONTINGENCIES: The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for
General Fund Contingencies totals $5,702,525. This funding level
complies with the Board of Supervisors' policy (adopted in January
2005), establishing the General Fund Contingencies appropriation
at 1% of estimated General Fund revenues.
COUNTY MEMBERSHIPS: The FY 2015-16 Recommended
Budget totals $69,329, a $153,000 decrease from the prior year.
The budgeted total is sufficient for the County's current
membership costs for the California State Association of Counties
and the National Association of Counties.
MEDICAL CARE SERVICES: The Recommended Budget for FY
2015-16 is $12,032,255 in appropriations for Medical Care Services
reflecting an increase of $3,697,928 from the previous fiscal year
due to maturing Assembly Bill 85 (AB85) transactions with the
State. As of FY 2012-13, this unit appropriates Vehicle License Fee
Realignment revenue to the Health and Social Services
departments, and the County's portion of the Sales Tax Revenue
match for Health and Mental Health Services. Effective July 1,
2012, the Mental Health match is administered in Fund 023-
Behavioral Health; and the Health and Social Services department
monies will be administered in Fund 025-Realignment/Vehicle
License Fees. As of January 1, 2014, AB 85 as modified by Senate
Bill 98 (AB85) reduces California counties' health realignment
funds (Please see detail at the Unit level).
OTHER FINANCING USES: This unit provides operating
transfers to various County programs including the County's Public
Improvement Corporation (PIC) Debt Service Fund (Fund 251) to
finance public facility improvements and the Monterey County
Next Generation (NGEN) Operational Area Emergency
Communications System. It also provides contributions for the
Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA) program, the Fort Ord
Reuse Authority (FORA) annual membership fees, Redevelopment
& Housing's pollution and liability insurance costs for the East
Garrison Redevelopment project, operation of the Prunedale
Senior Center, Audit expenses, contracted publishing services for
the annual Recommended Budget book, and transfers in support of
the following County departments and programs: County Library,
Parks, Law Library, and the Public Works/Road Fund chip seal
paving program, Carmel Lagoon sandbar emergency response
work and capital transfers for the Jail and Juvenile Hall Projects.
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget increases appropriations in
this unit by $7,132,070 to $28,712,587.
OTHER GENERAL EXPENDITURES: Recommended
expenditures in this unit for FY 2015-16 are $67,500 remaining at
the same level as FY 2014-15.
NON-PROGRAM REVENUE: This unit includes all non-program
revenues that are not directly associated with operating
departments. Non-program revenues are discretionary funds.
Primary sources of non-program revenues includes property taxes,
sales taxes, transient occupancy taxes (TOT) also referred to as
hotel taxes, interest earnings, property transfer taxes, utility
franchises, interest on short-term investments for cash flow
purposes, open space subventions, discretionary State and Federal
aid, property tax administrative cost recoveries, and the sale of
fixed assets. A portion of Vehicle License Fee (VLF) revenue for
programs that were realigned under State/local program
realignment, and tobacco settlement funds, are also budgeted in
this unit. The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for Non-
Program Revenue totals $192,750,709. This total represents an
increase of $18,560,066 over the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget,
primarily related to estimated growth in revenue from property
taxes.
HOMELAND SECURITY GRANT PROGRAM: The FY 2015-16
Recommended Budget for the Homeland Security Grant, Fund 024
is $973,679 in appropriations and $973,679 in revenue. There is no
budgeted General Fund Contribution for this unit.
Budget Impacts
NON-PROGRAM REVENUE: The FY 2015-16 Recommended
Budget for Non-Program Revenue may be potentially impacted by
the State's AB 85 which was effective January 1, 2014. As a result of
this legislation, the State may retain 51% of the County's previous
levels of revenue from Vehicle License Fees (VLF), related to Public
Health Realignment. The State will notify the County annually
regarding the amount of County VLF revenue to be withheld, up to
51%. As of this writing, the State's determination for FY 2014-15
and FY 2015-16 has not been received (Please see detail at Unit
Level).The Recommended Budget provides the resources necessary to
maintain FY 2014-15 service levels in most departmental
functional areas. One vacant position (Office Assistant III) was
deleted from the FY 2015-16 budget in the Learning &
Organizational Development Division.
Employment and Information Systems reallocated 1.0 Full-Time
Equivalent (FTE) Management Analyst III to 1.0 FTE Senior
Personnel Analyst. The reallocation resulted in no net budget
increase. There was a .5 FTE reduction to a Management Analyst
III in Learning & Organizational Development. The reduction was
a corrective action to align the position with the funding and filled
status and does not reflect an actual loss of an FTE.
The position count for the Division was impacted in FY 2014-15 by
the addition of 1.0 FTE Associate Personnel Analyst and 1.0 FTE
Personnel Technician-Confidential to replace existing personnel
being located offsite to work on the Enterprise Resource Planning
(ERP) upgrade. The cost of the positions will be funded by ERP
project funds through the term of the project.
The position count for the Employee Benefits Division was
impacted in FY 2014-15 by the addition of 1.0 FTE Risk & Benefits
Analyst. The position was added to replace an existing Risk &
Benefits Analyst being located offsite to work on the Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP) upgrade. The cost of the position will be
funded by ERP project funds through the term of the project.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 Recommended Budget for Economic
Development Department (EDD) is $22,005,176. Anticipated
Revenue is $17,561,356, a reduction of $186,420 from the FY 2014-
15 Adopted Budget.
The General Fund Contribution increased by $421,919, which
includes $172,865 for the Development Set-Aside program,
$227,139 for the Economic Development Administration and a
$21,915 change in the Cluster Loan program.
Of the total $22,005,176 budgeted funds, $20,954,331 are restricted
funds to be untilized for specific grants or programs.
Budget Impacts
Business Retention and Expansion and Business Attraction efforts,
along with the Strategic Plan implementation, are hampered with a
reduced baseline budget for Economic Development and the
assigned staff and resources to implement the Strategic Plan as
envision by the Economic Opportunity Committee.
EDD's now completed Stanford Research Institute (SRI) Strategic
Plan for economic development is based on input from more than
150 key stakeholders and the Economic Development Committee,
who identified four economic base 'Pillars' and thus have added
Military Base Retention as a fifth economic 'Pillar' Agriculture and
Agri-technology, Education, Research including the "Blue
Economy-marine research" and Tourism. The other pillars, Small
Business and entrepreneurship remain cornerstones of the
program and cut across all Pillars. Without additional funding we
will not be able to implement the plan as outline in the report.
In order to meet our baseline budget we had to reduce certain
expenditures. One example of these reductions is the lack of
funding available to successfully fund annual memberships that
foster business relationships with certain key non-profit
organizations such as the Society of Office and Industrial Realtors,
Site Selection Network, CoreNet Global and our area's local
Chambers of Commerce and government organizations such as the
Small Business Development Centers. Limiting the level of
organizational collaboration diminishes EDD's ability to affect
Business Retention and Expansion.
There are several activities that were not included in the Agency's
budget requiring submittal of augmentation requests, like the
requested $81,528 Augmentation for an Account Technician.
Without this the Department will have to continue to rely on
outside support to review our accounts payable. The Department
will also have a need to bring in and external agency temporary
employee which will require lots of training. This is an issue as the
temporary help, will not have the expertise of the Monterey County
process and also the Department knowledge to ensure accurate and
complete data is being entered into the system, adding to that there
is a limitation on hours and salary severely limiting the number of
qualified candidates for the position. The Department will not
have the time necessary to review all grant programs which could
result in a liability to the county if Grant requirements are not
managed properly.
Another Augmentation of $40,000 for Professional Services is
required, as the Economic Development Website is outdated. If
EDD is not able to update its website, the lack of current and most
up-to-date information will not be available online which could
result in a poor perception of the County. An outdated website also
causes an increased volume of phone calls and emails from people
seeking information that they cannot find online which could have
a negative impact on staff productivity. This also will allow EDD to
create a website to mirror and match the new County Website.
The Revolving Loan Fund (RLF) Augmentation in the amount of
$204,875, was submitted, as this fund will need to be reimbursed at
some point in time. Last year it was discovered some of the
Administration costs were paid for with grant funds in several of
the past years. The RLF augmentation request was to reimburse
the program for the dollars spent on administration fees which
were not allowable per the grant program.Participate in the City of Salinas/Civic Center Downtown
Revitalization Plan.
Start the implementation phase of the SRI Strategic Plan and the
Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy. Establish five
new working groups under the Economic Opportunity Committee
with a focus on the following economic base industries or "Pillar"
industry groups: 1) Agriculture, 2) Education, 3) Military Support,
4) Research (primarily Marine and Water Technology), 5) Tourism
and continue existing Small Business assistance, expansion and
funding services.
Support the workforce strategy that creates pathways of economic
opportunity and prosperity for residents.
Align with strategic partners, public and private, in order to
strengthen economic development efforts and provide support and
resources that County currently lacks.
Evaluate Return On Investment (ROI) of County funds and private
sector projects to expend on economic development efforts.
Create a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the
County and cities to lead business retention, expansion and
attraction.
Develop an implementation plan for a multi-department
countywide economic development strategy.
Develop and promote Monterey County as a destination for ecorecreation
and wellness expanding both medical services and
recreational opportunities.
Support a diversified collective impact model to work toward
"cradle to career" model that is integrated into the countywide
development strategy.
Support the Central Coast Broadband Consortium for broadband
service throughout Monterey County in order to support business
expansion and attraction.
Develop, in collaboration with the County Information Technology
Dept. (ITD) and Resource Management Agency Public Works

Division, a Broadband Policy and trenching procedure to expand
conduit and fiber resources in the County.
Encourage and increase revenue generating events at County Parks.
Continue affordable housing efforts: Complete the Camphora
project in Soledad and the Geil Street Apartment project in
Castroville.
Other: Fund 6 new projects and 9 service projects through the
Urban County Grant Program and review and provide assistance to
new Inclusionary Housing projects when required.
Pending Issues
Since the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency, the Economic
Development Department (EDD) has lost $3 million in annual tax
increment revenue from redevelopment funding which contributed
to covering operating costs in the Department. It is now necessary
for the Board to revisit the purpose and successes of both the
Housing Program and the Economic Development Program. Funds
only exist for one or the other, but not both, without a new
augmentation. This decision will provide overall direction to the
Department to best serve and allow EDD to continue its mission to
ensure that residents are being served as described in the Board's
Strategic Initiatives.Work in partnership with RMA on special handling of key projects
for permitting and assist companies through the permitting process
in order to create jobs and new revenue. Continue the partnership
with RMA staff on performing post project reviews and quality
improvement.
Implement efforts to secure financial resources for community and
Economic Development e f for t s t o replace the l o ss of
Redevelopment tax increment revenue.
Create a workforce development strategy to connect the local labor
force and training resources to meet the needs of industries with
the best growth potential.
Work with five new subcommittees for five primary economic
development pillars: agriculture, education, military, research and
tourism. A critical area is continuing to support small business
start-ups and existing business owners.
Promote both affordable and market rate housing projects in both
the unincorporated areas of the County as well as the cities in order
to attract new businesses.
Oversee Inclusionary housing, including new projects, refinancing,
resale and monitoring of existing units.
Undertake all other housing activities, including oversight of the
Housing Successor Agency Kents Court project and monitoring of
past projects.Maintain effective Rapid Response early warning systems.
Create a workforce development strategy to connect the local labor
force and training resources to meet the needs of industries with
the best growth potential.
Work with industry representatives to identify and develop a
workforce development strategy that meets the needs of business
within the four primary pillars of economic opportunity: tourism,
education/research technology, agriculture, and small business.
Work with training providers to create career paths of economic
opportunity for the people who live and work within Monterey
County, focusing on apprenticeship, career certificate and
vocational training opportunities.
Ensure the presence of a workforce development system that is not
only cognizant of the needs of employers and jobseekers, but also
works with the educational system to effectively prepare
unemployed and/or underemployed jobseekers for entry into key
industry sectors.
Increase the number of adults who obtain a marketable and
industry-recognized credential or degree, with a special emphasis

on unemployed, underemployed, low-skilled, veterans, individuals
with disabilities, and other at-risk populations.
Increase the number of high school students, with emphasis on atrisk
youth and those from low-income communities, who graduate
prepared for postsecondary vocational training, further education,
and/or a career.
Develop entrepreneurial and small business training that turns
ideas into successful businesses in a short period of time, in
partnership with Small Business Development Centers and local
colleges.
Design an effective outreach strategy and consistent message to
effectively communicate what the Workforce Investment Board can
do to help business.Continue Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) and
integrate the new Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act
(WIOA) which replaces the WIA.
WIOA Programs are subject to detailed regulations by State and
Federal agencies. The members will consider adjusting the EDD/
WIB's four strategic plan goals to meet the demands of the new
WIOA legislation.
GOAL #1: BUSINESS & INDUSTRY: Meet the workforce needs of
high demand sectors of the state and regional economies.
GOAL #2: SYSTEM ALIGNMENT AND ACCOUNTABILITY:
Support system alignment, service integration & continuous
improvement using data to support evidence-based policymaking
GOAL #3: ADULTS: Increase the number of Californians who
obtain a marketable and industry-recognized credential or degree,
with special emphasis on unemployed, underemployed, low skilled,
low-income, veterans, individuals with disabilities & other at-risk
populations.
GOAL #4: YOUTH: Increase the number of High school students,
with emphasis on at-risk and low-income youth, who graduate
prepared for postsecondary vocational training, further education,
and/or a career.
Monterey County EDD/WIB plans to continue partnering with a
consortium of six local workforce investment areas and their
respective WIBs comprised of Ventura, Santa Barbara, San Luis
Obispo, San Benito and Santa Cruz Counties for the purpose of
establishing a cooperative and mutually beneficial relationship to
improve workforce development on the Central Coast.
Partner with the Santa Cruz and San Benito County WIBs to
develop a program to fill critical workforce skills gaps by creating
opportunities for job seekers to earn industry-valued credentials
and enter into the apprenticeship or direct employment in the
energy efficiency or construction sector in accordance with
Proposition 39 Pre-Apprenticeship support program.
Workforce Accelerator & Design, develop, and implement projects
that accelerate employment and re-employment strategies for job
seekers, in collaboration with the San Benito and Santa Cruz
County WIBs to create and prototype innovative strategies that
bridge education and workforce gaps for targeted populations, and
initial implementation of promising models and practices in
workforce system service delivery infrastructure. The intent is to
accelerate skill development, employment, and reemployment for
one or more of the target populations (long-term unemployed,
returning veterans, individuals with disabilities, low-income
workers, disconnected youth, and ex-offenders
Collaborate with the Monterey County Probation Department, the
lead agency for the implementation of the AB 109 Public Safety
Realignment Act special project, in partnership with the
Department of Social Services and the Office for Employment
Training to provide ongoing personal, educational and career
counseling, assessment of workforce skills and abilities and to
develop service strategies that encompass appropriate training, and
placement in subsidized employment opportunities to exoffenders.
Continue to collaborate with the Monterey County
Probation Department and other community-based organizations
to support the Silver Star Program with a primary purpose to
provide prevention services for youth and their families. The
program's mission is to utilize a multi-agency collaborative of
prevention and early intervention services to prevent and reduce
gang association, membership and activities among youth ages 16
to 21 in Monterey County.
Workforce Innovation Fund (WIF) and, The Monterey County
EDD/WIB's along with Youth Ambassadors for Peace: WIF funded
project are intended to support innovative approaches to the
design and delivery of employment and training services that
generate long term improvements in the performance of the public
workforce system, outcomes for job seekers and employers, and
cost effectiveness.Collaborate with the Department of Social Services to support the
Youth Employment & Leadership Development program to provide
employment services to CalWORKs participating youth.
Continue to provide assistance to those faced with lay-off from
large entities in our jurisdiction. Support employers through
recruitment events with the Business Services Team.
Seek additional funding sources through State and Federal WIOA
funding, with a focus on serving veterans and at-risk out-of-school
youth ages 16 to 24.
Create a workforce development strategy to connect the local labor
force and training resources to meet the needs of priority industry
sectors with the best growth potential.
Work with industry to identify and develop a workforce
development strategy that meets the needs of business within
Monterey County's top four targeted industries sectors that hold
the most promise of job creation: Agriculture; Tourism &
Hospitality; Education & Research; and Health & Social Assistance.
Work with training providers to create career paths of economic
opportunity for the people who live and work within Monterey
County, focusing on apprenticeship, career certificate and
vocational training opportunities.
Ensure the presence of a workforce development system that is not
only cognizant of the needs of employers and jobseekers, but also
works with the educational system to effectively prepare
unemployed and or underemployed jobseekers for entry into key
industry sectors.
Develop entrepreneurial and small business training that turns
ideas into successful businesses in a short period of time, in
partnership with Small Business Development Centers and local
colleges.
Design an effective outreach strategy and consistent message to
effectively communicate what the EDD/WIB can do to help
business.The Recommended Budget for the Equal Opportunity Office totals
$747,050 in appropriations and General Fund Contributions (GFC).
The Equal Opportunity Office budget remained status quo from
Fiscal Year 2014-15.
Budget Impacts
The Equal Opportunity Office is faced with rising costs associated
with salary and benefits and internal charges. The Equal
Opportunity Office has requested two augmentations totaling
$66,504 to restore .5 FTE of an Administrative Secretary-
Confidential position and costs related to training and consulting
services. In order to balance the recommended budget the Equal
Opportunity Office reduced .5 of a full-time Administrative
Secretary-Confidential position. The Equal Opportunity Office
will be unable to absorb any unexpected expenditures associated
with investigations and trainings.The Equal Opportunity Office is responsible for providing sexual
harassment training to all employees of Monterey County to fulfill
the requirement of Government Code 12950.1 and County policy.
In addition, the Equal Opportunity Office will implement a new
mandatory Equal Opportunity and Non-Discrimination training.
The training is designed to educate all employees on the prevention
of unlawful discrimination, harassment and retaliation.
The Equal Opportunity Office will continue to work with
Department Heads on the their department's Equal Opportunity
Plan to ensure compliance with the County's Equal Opportunity
Plan and assist with their good faith efforts to achieve a diverse
workforce.
The Equal Opportunity Office will continue to collaborate with the
Human Resources Department and departments to recruit, hire
and retain qualified women and minorities in accordance with the
County's Equal Opportunity Plan.
The Equal Opportunity Office will work with departments to
resolve discrimination complaints at the earliest level possible to
decrease the number of formal complaints. The Department will
continue to receive, address and investigate complaints of
discrimination, harassment and retaliation as mandated by State
and Federal laws and County Policy.The Auditor-Controller requested an augmentation of 1.0 FTE
Payroll Technician which would allow the Payroll Section to have a
second person devoted to working on Advantage Human
Rescources Mangement System (HRM) configuration, and 3.0 FTE
Internal Auditors to re-staff the Internal Audit section. Addition of
the second staff member to configure Advantage HRM would
provide staffing depth and more rapid configuration of the
approved negotiated employee Memoranda of Understanding
(MOU) and other required changes to HRM-Payroll. The lack of
Internal Auditor positions, which would be re-instated positions
that were reduced in prior fiscal years due to budget reductions,
increases the risk of inefficient operations and fraud in Department
operations.The Office of the Auditor-Controller had three budgeted Internal
Auditors. However, due to reductions in the past two fiscal years,
the Office gave up the Chief Deputy - Internal Audit and two of the
Internal Auditor positions. In an effort to cover Board requested
internal audits and audits directed by the Auditor-Controller, the
Office contracted for internal audit work with private firms, but
this has not proven totally cost effective or efficient. According to
State Government Code, the Office of the Auditor-Controller
should have a fully staffed Internal Audit staff.The Treasurer-Tax Collector's Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 budget
request meets the County Administrative Office (CAO)
requirement for not exceeding the Department's FY 2014-15
approved budget General Fund Contribution (GFC). Total
appropriations of $7,144,357 reflect an increase of $192,687, or
2.8%. Estimated revenues total $5,753,669, growing by $192,686, or
3.5%. The resulting GFC request of $1,390,688 reflects a one-dollar
increase over FY 2014-15.
The Treasurer-Tax Collector reallocated a vacant Investment
Officer position to a Treasury Manager and eliminated one Finance
Manager I position in FY 2014-15. These actions were taken to
increase departmental efficiencies while containing growing salary
and benefits expenses. The reduction in position count also helps
the Department deflect growing internal service department and
capital project/technology upgrade charges assessed to
departments based on total FTE (full-time equivalent) positions.
Expenditures for salaries and benefits total $4,839,966, an increase
of $117,260 or 2.5%. This additional expense includes the Board
approved three percent salary increase effective July 1, 2015, costs
for qualified F and J unit staff vacation buy-back, earned step
increases, and increased charges for PERS Retirement and
employee healthcare benefits. Requested appropriations for
services and supplies total $2,826,114, increasing by $47,494 or
1.7%. Though the Treasurer-Tax Collector is reducing prior year
expenditures in a number of services and supplies accounts where
it has the discretion to do so, the cost savings is significantly
negated by increases in non-discretionary charges for general
liability insurance, Information Technology and Enterprise
Resource Project (ERP) capital project/infrastructure upgrades,
and internal cost increases as service departments pass along
charges to offset similar non-discretionary cost drivers in their own
budgets. Estimated revenue is projected to increase by $192,686
primarily driven by cost recovery charges for collections services.
The recommended departmental budget meets the County
Administrative Office's identified status quo GFC through a
combination of increased offsetting revenue and a staffing
reduction of one management position.The Treasurer Tax Collector (TTC) Department expects to
maintain current service levels and deliver exceptional services
despite continuing increases in non-discretionary costs and
internal service charges. The Department continues to meet this
challenge through an ongoing review and realignment of the use of
internal and external service providers, streamlining processes, and
capitalizing on the use of technological innovations. These efforts
include ongoing analysis of the activities of personnel, crosstraining
and as-needed realignment of staff duties for maximum
effectiveness.Meet and exceed recommended budget guidelines.
Continue to increase efficiencies as opportunities arise, by
improving automated processes both intra-departmentally and
with external stakeholders.
Continue the implementation of a succession plan that identifies
critical functions, improves process documentation and
encourages staff to seek educational and professional development
training.
Continue managing the implementation of new banking and
merchant card service contracts.
Develop a countywide banking and merchant card use policy.
Coordinate the movement and centralization of all banking and
merchant card services within the Office of the Treasurer-Tax
Collector.
Install additional TracNet licenses to Revenue Officer's work
stations to replace information access previously available through
CJIS.The Property Tax Division continues to focus on its process
analysis, increased efficiencies through technology/system
enhancements, cross-training, and succession planning to
minimize the impact of increasing labor and support services costs.
The FY 2015-16 General Fund Contribution (GFC) to the
Treasurer-Tax Collector Property Tax Division reflects an increase
of $102,367 over the prior year. Where there is departmental
discretion to do so, expenditures have been reduced in many of the
services and supplies line items in this unit. However, these costsaving
efforts are more than negated by increased expenses that
departments have little or no control over. Salaries have increased
by 2.92%. Health insurance expenses in this unit show an increase
of 14.24%, and PERS Retirement expenditures reflect an increase of
11.78%. Overall, salary and benefits appropriations in the Property
Tax Division, including the Board-approved three percent salary
increase effective July 1, 2015, are $77,206, or 4.4% higher than the
previous year. Services and supplies expenditures are $28,371, or
4.52% higher than the FY 2014-15 budget, driven by increased
general liability insurance expenditures, charges for Information
Technology and Enterprise Resource Project (ERP) capital project/
infrastructure upgrades, and increases in charges from internal
service providers to offset these same non-discretionary cost
increases in their own budgets.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 Recommended Budget for the
Assessor-County Clerk-Recorder's Office includes total
appropriations of $7,787,385 representing a 6.1% increase from the
FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget.
Appropriations for Salaries and Benefits are increased by $414,853
(7.1%). Services and Supplies have increased by $68,615 (5.2%).
Revenues are estimated at $3,894,994, an increase of $169,102
(4.6%) from FY 2014-15.
The FY 2015-16 General Fund Contribution of $3,892,391
represents an increase of $278,383 from the FY 2014-15 Adopted
Budget.
Budget Impacts
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for the Assessor-County
Clerk-Recorder's Office provides resources to maintain comparable
service levels as to those in FY 2014-15.
The combined efforts of the staff in the County of Monterey
Assessor's Office for FY 2014-15 produced an assessment roll of
approximately $52 billion, generating over $520 million for local
governmental agencies and schools. A total of 160,000 secured,
unsecured, and supplemental tax bills were generated in FY 2014-
15. The County's share of property tax revenues for FY 2013-14
was $128 million accounting for approximately 70% of the overall
discretionary revenue.
In FY 2014-15, the Assessor's Office had over 20,000 residential
and commercial properties with reduced values under the
provisions of Proposition 8 due to declines in market value. Sales
activity and new construction continued to improve (albeit slowly)
and assessment appeals are also still at higher than normal levels.
Workload in the office of the Assessor continues to increase as
appeals and Prop 8 reviews require greater analysis.
The remainder of the Assessor's workload and the basis for the
majority of increases of assessed valuations are the reassessment of
properties changing ownership either as a result of a sale or interfamily
transfer; the reassessment of new construction; and the
analysis of annual Business Property Statements.From FY 1999-00 to FY 2007-08 assessed valuations in Monterey
County increased by an average of 8% per year. Property values,
however, leveled off in FY 2008-09 and in FY 2009-10, the local Tax
Roll declined for the first time in the history of the County of
Monterey. The Assessor's Office will again review the value of all
residential properties in the County of Monterey and will also
conduct an extensive review of commercial properties with current
base year values. It is estimated that 15,000 properties will receive
Prop 8 reductions this year, a decline of over 5,000. Assessment
Appeals although still at a higher than normal level declined
significantly in FY 2014-15. The Assessor's Office will review all
Prop 8 reductions on an annual basis until base year values have
been restored.The Department is currently participating in the State-County
Assessors' Partnership Program, a three year pilot program to
support cCunty property assessment efforts. The success of the
program shall be determined by the Department's ability to capture
property tax revenues for local K-14 schools and offices of
education that might otherwise escape recognition and collection.
The Department seeks continued support in the required dollar-todollar
match of the annual $200,000 grant awarded.The Assessor's primary goal for FY 2015-16 will be to continue to
provide the highest level of public service. The Assessor is an
elected position sworn to abide by the laws of the California State
Constitution. The Assessor will ensure that all taxpayers and
property owners are treated fairly, equally and with respect. The
Assessor's Office is also the repository for a wealth of propertyrelated
information including, but not limited to, assessor's parcel
maps and property characteristics. Through technological
advances the Assessor's Office continues to make this information
more readily available to the public while also respecting property
owner's privacy rights.
Additional FY 2015-16 Goals for the Assessor's Office include the
following:
Review the assessed valuation of all residential and a large portion
of commercial and industrial properties in the County of Monterey.
In conjunction with the Information Technology Department,
other County of Monterey departments and local governmental
agencies, continue to develop a GIS collaborative effort resulting in
a product that will be beneficial to government agencies and the
public at large.
Implement a discovery program looking for unpermitted
construction through the use of GIS aerial imagery.
Increase discovery efforts of unpermitted construction and new
construction with the additional appraisers hired thru the State-
County Assessors' Partnership Program and therefore, increasing
the tax roll and County contributions to local schools.
Complete a reorganization study of all office/clerical positions in
the Assessor and County Clerk-Recorder's offices and implement
cross training between all three departments with the goal of
establishing efficiencies, career opportunities and to assist in
succession planning.The Recorder's Office will continue to promote electronic
recording on the local and national level. Until recently, traditional
technology required that the recording process involve the delivery
and recordation of only original paper documents. Electronic
recording facilitates the transmission, acceptance, recordation, and
return of real property documents reducing the time it takes to
record and return a document while also saving paper and
streamlining internal operation systems.
The Recorder's Office will continue to work toward becoming
compliant with Government Code section 27301. This requires the
redaction of all social security numbers located on real property
documents recorded from January 1, 1980 through and including
December 31, 2008 by December 31, 2017.
The Recorder's Office will continue with its internal conversion of
paper vital record certificates into electronic images.
The Recorder's Office will continue its preservation project of all
real property, vital record, and map books.
The County Clerk/Recorder's Office will research upgrading its
current recording, filing, cashiering system to a web-based system
to assist in its efforts of providing modern and efficient services to
taxpayers.
The County Clerk/Recorder's Off ice will continue it s
reorganization efforts in conjunction with the Assessor's Office
with the goal of establishing cross trained staff that will be able to
take advantage of an established career ladder that will also assist in
succession planning.
The Office will continue to provide quality customer service to all
taxpayers taking into consideration comments noted on our survey
cards.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 Recommended Budget for the Office
of the County Counsel is $33,137,714. Department Revenues total
$28,233,807 and General Fund Contributions (GFC) total
$4,903,907, reflecting an increase of $400,000 or 8.9% to fund the
County's responsibility for payment of a ten year liability insurance
premium for Fort Ord. The Recommended Budget also includes
the addition of a Finance Manager I position funded by Internal
Service Funds (ISF).
Budget Impacts
The Office of the County Counsel's FY 2015-16 Recommended
Budget is intended to provide funding to maintain prior year
service levels. FY 2015-16 inter-fund reimbursements and
revenues were formulated with consideration for filled attorney
positions and billable hour trends, and included rate increases for
attorney's time using FY 2014-15 salaries, benefits and overhead
and do not consider the FY 2015-16 increases to salaries and
benefits. In FY 2014-15, previously budgeted departmental
reimbursements from General Fund billable departments were
converted to General Fund Contribution in the amount of
$1,317,000 to off-set reimbursements. The department is still
adjusting to the reimbursement process of the Countywide Cost
Allocation Plan (COWCAP) and its ability to cover rising cost
trends for salaries, benefits and overhead.
The Department faced challenges due to increased cost in nondiscretionary
items such as salaries, benefits, Information
Technology infrastructure replacement, and the Enterprise System
upgrade. To offset costs, the Department lowered services and
supplies by 12% as well as temporary help by 47%. In addition, a
vacant Management Analyst I I posi tion and a vacant
Administrative Secretary Confidential position were budgeted at a
Step 3 rather than a Step 7. Vacation Buy Back was also not funded.
Augmentations were submitted for Step 7 funding of the two
vacant positions ($46,328) and Vacation Buy Back ($70,000). The
Department also submitted an augmentation for a new allocation
of one permanent full time Deputy County Counsel II position to
provide higher level attorneys with assistance in increasing
workload in the amount of $139,772.
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes funding for two
augmentations; one full-time (1.0 FTE) Finance Manager I (FM I)
allocated to the Risk Management Division (Unit 8407) ($143,000)

funded by Internal Service Funds (ISF) and $400,000 for the Fort
Ord Insurance Premiums which was funded with additional
General Fund Contributions.The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for County Counsel's
Departmental is $4,086,386 funded by $393,665 in revenue and
$3,692,721 in General Fund Contribution.
Budget Impacts
The Office of the County Counsel's FY 2015-16 Recommended
Budget is intended to provide funding to maintain prior year
service levels. FY 2015-16 inter-fund reimbursements and
revenues were formulated with consideration of filled attorney
positions and billable hour trends, and included rate increases for
attorney's time using FY 2014-15 salaries, benefits and overhead
and do not consider the FY 2015-16 increases to salaries and
benefits. In FY 2014-15, previously budgeted departmental
reimbursements from General Fund billable departments were
converted to General Fund Contribution in the amount of
$1,317,000 to off-set reimbursements. The Department is still
adjusting to the reimbursement process of the Countywide Cost
Allocation Plan (COWCAP) and its ability to cover rising cost
trends for salaries, benefits and overhead.
The Department faced challenges due to increased cost in nondiscretionary
items such as salaries, benefits, Information
Technology infrastructure replacement, and the Enterprise System

upgrade. To offset increased costs, the department lowered
services and supplies by12% as well as temporary help by 47%. In
addition, a vacant Management Analyst II position and a vacant
Administrative Secretary Confidential position were budgeted at a
Step 3 rather than a Step 7. Vacation Buy Back was also not funded.
Augmentations were submitted for Step 7 funding of the two
vacant positions ($46,328) and Vacation Buy Back ($70,000). The
Department also submitted an augmentation for a new allocation
of one permanent full time Deputy County Counsel II position to
provide higher level attorneys with assistance in increasing
workload in the amount of $139,772.
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes the addition of
one full-time (1.0 FTE) Finance Manager I (FM I) which is funded
by Internal Service Funds (ISF).

Policy Considerations
During the FY 2015-16 budget development process, the
Department requested a new allocation of one permanent full time
Deputy County Counsel II position to provide higher level
attorneys with assistance in increasing workload in the amount of
$139,772. Assigning lower level legal tasks to a lower position at a
lower cost would free attorneys to concentrate their efforts on
higher level matters of the Board and County and reinforce the
Department's goal of timely responses to such matters. The
Department intends to create a fellowship program for young
lawyers, using this position to offer limited terms to the employee,
which would create opportunities for young lawyers and may be
parlayed into a higher position here or somewhere else. Such a
position has proven to be successful in other counties.
Additionally, the Office requested funding to restore Vacation Buy
Back in the amount of $70,000 and $46,328 to restore funding to
step 7 for the currently vacant Administrative Secretary
Confidential and MAII positions, for which the Department is
seeking recruitment to meet its increasing analytical and
administrative support demands.
Not funding the requested allocations may significantly reduce the
ability of County Counsel to meet its goal of providing timely,
quality legal services to outside agencies and departments of the
County, as well as its obligation to service the Board of Supervisors
goals.The GFC allocation allows the Department to maintain FY 2014-15
service levels and to continue to meet the service needs of the
public, County departments, special districts, as well as public
agencies, while providing the highest level of customer service
possible. Augmentation requests totaled $26,032 to fund the
reallocation of a Management Analyst I to a Management Analyst
III position.Allocation of funds for the cost of repairs and replacement of the
equipment in the Board Chambers (e.g. projectors, monitors and
recording equipment), will reduce the impact of unanticipated
charges to the COB's budget.Continue to receive and process Assessment Appeal applications.
The filing period for 2015 will run from July 2 to November 30,
2015. The number of application filings is anticipated to be in the
range of 500 to 650.
Review and evaluate Assessment Appeals electronic management
systems for possible implementation.
Update the Local Rules of Procedures to reflect minor revisions to
Monterey County Assessment Appeals Board procedures.Recommended appropriations for the Elections Department total
$5,458,012, an increase of $1,317,000 from the Fiscal Year (FY)
2014-15 Adopted Budget, based upon two scheduled elections
occurring in November 2015 and June 2016. Services and supplies
increased $1,325,994 due to the large scale of the scheduled second
election, which is a Presidential Primary. The proposed budget
reflects the additional costs of mandated ballots and voter guide
printing and mailing services, publication of notices, and poll
workers.
Estimated revenues from services increased by $151,000 for a total
revenue of $1,033,500 in FY 2015-2016. General Fund Contribution
(GFC) is $4,424,512, an increase of $1,166,000 from the previous
year to fund the June 2016 Presidential Primary election. Since the
Department administers all Federal, State, county, and local
elections, expenditures and revenues vary based on the number
and type of scheduled and unscheduled elections in a given year.
Budget Impacts
State law mandates local agencies reimburse the County for
election services relating to the local November 2015 election.
However, there is no mandate for the State to reimburse counties
for conducting a State or Federal election; therefore, the funds
necessary to conduct the Presidential Primary Election scheduled
in June 2016 must be provided by the General Fund. Though
revenues will offset a portion of this, due to the timing of the June
election and the close of the fiscal year, these will not post until FY
2016-17.
The Department must still comply with all mandates and
regulations related to election administration, regardless of the
suspension of State reimbursements. Any reduction will create
difficulties in providing sufficient and timely customer service both
at the Department and at the polling places and results in a longer
wait time for election night results.The Department seeks to implement 34 new pieces of legislation
while minimizing impact to local jurisdictions. In addition,
Elections will conduct the November 2015 cities, schools and
special districts election and the June 2016 Presidential Primary
Election.
The Department will continue to redesign the bilingual services
program area and associated materials; improve the content of and
access to Department procedures; and employ the Department's
website as a means for the public to easily access information.
The Department has applied for public and private grant funding to
further support the Department's accessibility and outreach
programs, including funding to support the required survey of all
current and potential polling places in the County using the newly
redefined survey tool provided by the Secretary of State.
Monitor State legislation that is in line with the Board's Legislative
Priorities such as those that permit jurisdictions in California,
including counties, to conduct all-mail ballot elections.
Reestablish the public observer panel and establish the Voting
Accessibility Advisory Committee in an effort to improve
transparency, access, and public education activities.
Pending Issues
SPECIAL ELECTIONS: The potential for the Governor to call a
statewide special election to occur within the remaining budget
year or the following year remains unknown. Under existing law,
elections conducted on behalf of the State are not reimbursable.
VOTECAL PROJECT: The VoteCal project is a Help America Vote
Act (HAVA) mandated and funded project. Upon completion in
June of 2016, it will provide a single, official database of voter
registration information, connecting to State agencies and all 58
county Elections Offices to improve the voter registration process.
Initial connectivity upgrades necessary for the implementation are
complete, and staff is participating in informational and feedback
sessions with the Secretary of State and the project vendors as
required. This project will have significant impact for all program
areas of the Elections Department.
HELP AMERICA VOTE ACT FUNDS - DEADLINE EXTENDED:
The Department has a deadline of December 31, 2015 to spend
Federal funding granted to Monterey County under HAVA.
Currently, the remaining funds are in two categories and can be
spent on voting technology and items related to VoteCal, the State's
current version of the statewide registration database. Remaining
funds are estimated at approximately $409,533. The Department
continues to review new voting systems to replace our current
aging system. Due to limited grant funding available, several
possible options have been suggested, including lease arrangements
or additional equipment that would complement the County's
existing accessible voting technology required under HAVA.
DEPARTMENT FACILITY: The Elections Department's five-year
lease agreement for the current facility ended in December 2014. In
coordination with Public Works and other applicable departments,
Elections will relocate to Schilling Place in 2017 upon completion
of necessary upgrades to the site. The current building of 12,000
square feet is leased at an annual cost of $380,000, with additional
overflow space rented at an annual cost of $10,000. This reflects a
$100,000 increase due to the annual lease extension. Confidential
and valuable materials are moved between locations as needed
during an election cycle, reducing the Department's ability to
improve operations. Consolidating the Department's locations to
one secure building will reduce costs and improve efficiencies while
decreasing the vulnerability of the County's election records and
equipment.appropriations for the Emergency Communications Department,
including $12,990,726 for emergency communications operations
and $5,295,331 for the Next Generation (NGEN) Radio Project.
Financing includes $16,794,135 in program revenue and $1,491,922
in General Fund Contributions (GFC). Recommended
appropriations represent an increase of $2,283,373 compared to the
FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget. The increase reflects additional
operations and maintenance spending related to the ongoing
implementation of the NGEN Project and anticipation of the
purchase and implementation of the new Computer Aided
Dispatch system.
The Recommended Budget includes the addition of seven
Communications Dispatcher 1 (CD1) positions and one Senior
Information Systems Manager. The cost of these positions is
$310,059, offset by $217,961 in program revenue (from
participating user agencies) and a general fund augmentation
totaling $92,098. The intent of these additional positions is to
improve response times and reduce employee overtime.The ITD Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes
appropriations of $22,163,336, and reimbursements of $21,479,216,
resulting in net expenditures of $684,120. Estimated revenues are
$684,120, providing a balanced budget without a General Fund
Contribution.
Beginning in FY 2014-15, the Recommended Budget for the
Information Technology Department (ITD) was comprised of two
areas, Operations and Capital Improvement Program (CIP). Along
with requests associated with ITD's basic standard operational
requirements, a multi-year implementation of ITD infrastructure
replacements began.
With regard to ITD standard operations, FY 2015-16 Salaries and
Benefits saw an increase of $391,798, while Services and Supply
requests reflect a decrease of $494,829. The Salary and Benefit
increase was mainly due to Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) salary increases.
Overall appropriations reflect a decrease of $329,025. All ITD
operational costs are directly related to ITD fees, which are
allocated to both internal (County) and external agency customers
alike. The Salary and Benefit increases impact fee structures
affecting all customers. However, the Service and Supply
expenditure reductions mainly affect fees associated only with
internal County customers. Because of this distribution of cost
decrease, overall appropriations, (which includes an offset of
internal County customer reimbursement) shows a reduction from
FY 2014-15 in the amount of $329,025. For the same reasons just
listed, there is an increase in the Revenue amount of $329,025.
With regard to the ITD infrastructure replacement portion of the
budget, the Capital Improvement Projects (CIP) slated for FY 2015-
16 reflect an amount of $3,955,630. This is an increase of
$2,734,785 over the FY 2014-15 (initially) requested CIP amount of
$1,220,845. CIP figures included in both requested budgets reflect
offsetting reimbursement figures from internal County customer
departments.
The initial FY 2014-15 CIP request was based upon purchase and
lease options, after careful analysis this option was later amended
to reflect the amount of $3,054,491 based on a purchase only
pricing. The variance between the initial requested budget of
$1,220,845 and amended figures, $3,054,491, was Board approved
to be financed from the Workers' Compensation Fund as the
decision was made post budget structure for all County

departments. FY 2015-16 CIP requested budget figures,
$3,955,630, reflect full cost recovery from customers benefitting
from each of the respective projects.
Budget Impacts
The MOU salary increases created an increase in most ITD
operational fee structures. Enterprise and certain operations
charges reflect decreases associated with the removal of training
costs and the decommissioning of the mainframe respectively.
FY 2015-16 reflects $3,955,630 in ITD infrastructure replacement
expenditures that will be funded through charges to County ITD
customers for complete cost recovery. There are additional ITD
facility projects submitted to Capital Improvement Committee
(CIC) which are not included in the ITD budget.
ITD continues to work with the Auditor Controllers' Office to
increase reporting capabilities within the County Advantage
system. This collaboration coupled with continued enhancements
to ITD's internal systems, will continue to provide a greater level of
support documentation in relation to operations and project
tracking for current as well as future fiscal impacts. These
enhancements will provide reconciliation by cost center as well as
internal organizational structure.
Prior Year Accomplishments
Accomplishments are included at the unit level.
Budget Year Goals
ITD will be working in collaboration with Economic Development
and Resource Management Agency (RMA) Public Works to
develop a Broadband Policy to expand fiber throughout the County
to help business retention, expansion and attraction.
Pending Issues
ITD, will continue working with Emergency Communications
Department, on addressing their needs to secure new radio
frequencies to be able to complete the implementation of the
NGEN (next generation radio system).
ITD is continuing to negotiate with Comcast on County franchise
agreement fees and on continued use of Institutional Network (Inet)
at no cost to County.
Policy Considerations
A Records Management Policy was approved by the Board of
Supervisors in FY 2014-15. Therefore now each department is to
return to the Board with their department implementation plan for
individual retention needs. ITD is awaiting direction on staffing
needs to help implement the new Records Management Policy.

The Recommended Budget provides appropriations of $23,946,096,
an increase of $1,412,531 compared to the FY 2014-15 Adopted
Budget. Recommended appropriations are supported by
$13,753,676 in program revenue and $10,192,420 in general fund
contributions (GFC). The increase in recommended appropriations
supports the retention of eight filled positions that were at risk due
to countywide cost pressures (discussed later).
Budget Impacts
The District Attorney's Office has experienced a number of
countywide cost pressures that have caused reductions in staffing
and discretionary spending, negatively impacting the Department's
ability to provide services to the community. Examples of these cost
pressures include employee pay raises, rising PERS retirement
contributions, and increased charges for information technology
infrastructure and the enterprise resource planning (ERP) upgrade.
In addition to these countywide cost drivers, new and expanding
technological challenges, such as body camera videos, will require
additional resources that the Department does not currently have
available.
Although the Recommended Budget provides augmentations to
retain eight filled positions, it was still necessary to eliminate one
vacant position and cut $306,460 in discretionary funding due to
the various cost pressures described above. Additionally, the
Department requested four new positions, including a Digital
Forensic Investigator, an Assistant Chief Investigator, a Deputy
District Attorney and a Legal Secretary. To fund these proposed
positions, the Department requested $479,079 in additional GFC.
However, due to budget constraints, the additional positions were
not included as part of the Recommended Budget.
.Collaborate with other State and local agencies to devise new
approaches to disrupting gang violence. The damage that gang
violence inf licts on the County's residents requires law
enforcement and the community to keep searching for a
coordinated approach to this most pressing problem.
Implementation of a new computer software interface between our
Case Management System, Prosecutor by Karpel, with the new
Case Management System being utilized by several police agencies
in the County of Monterey, known as TrackNET. When
implemented, criminal case files will be digitally uploaded to our
system, eliminating the requirement to bring paper files into our
offices.
Work with the Superior Court in the implementation of their new
Case Management System, known as Odyssey, which begins
implementation in FY 2015-16. While the Courts are phasing in
the implementation over many months, this first phase will be an
important step in creating a paperless criminal justice process.
Pending Issues
CJIS/SUSTAIN & TRACKNET: The CJIS system is about to be
removed from service and the Sheriff's Office is utilizing a new
case management system, known as TrackNET. Our office is
training our staff members on the use of the new system and this
new technology holds a great deal of promise. Additionally, it has
the capability to interface directly with our own case management
system, Prosecutor by Karpel, which has the potential to greatly
improve productivity of our office.
RELOCATION: The Office continues to be housed in modular
units in both Salinas & Marina, and in office facilities at the
Monterey Courthouse. The Office has been housed in modular
units for approximately 11 years and expected to be there for only
two years. The issue of appropriate office space for the District
Attorney's Office continues to remain one of our most pressing
issues. The recent purchase of the Capitol One building in Salinas
appears to provide a long-term office space solution for the District
Attorney's Office.
REALIGNMENT: The implementation of AB 109 in October 2011,
shifting State prisoners to local authorities, has led to a profound
change in how the criminal justice system and the public safety
agencies protect the community. The elimination of parole and
return of State prison inmates to local authorities for management
continues to challenge the entire County. The recent
implementation of Proposition 47, where significant reductions in
the severity of many offenses was approved, has many in Law
Enforcement concerned for the safety of our citizens. The longterm
impact on the District Attorney's office and the entire
community remain uncertain. The unknowns for realignment and
Proposition 47 are a significant challenge, making it difficult to plan
for the future.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 Recommended Budget for the
Department of Child Support Services budget includes
appropriations of $10,958,855, representing an increase of $49,819
compared to the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget. As required by
legislation effective January 1, 2000, this budget has been submitted
to the State for approval.
Budget Impacts
The Department of Child Support Services is funded with 34%
State funds and 66% Federal funds based on a reimbursement
process of claimed expenditures. However, since FY 2003-04 the
State has funded local child support agencies on a "status quo"
basis. As such, annual funding levels do not address ongoing cost
pressures related to salaries and benefits, general liability insurance,
and various departmental charges. In addition, a recently
completed classification study with the State of California's
Department of Human Resources resulted in reclassification of
four positions, further increasing salary and benefit costs.
To help fund these cost pressures and prevent the loss of two filled
positions, the Recommended Budget includes a $24,222
augmentation in general fund contributions. Nevertheless, in the
absence of increased Federal and State funding to help cover cost
increases, the Recommended Budget does not provide the means
to fill two vacant Child Support Officer positions and two vacant
Child Support Assistant positions. The Department asserts that
mandated services will be negatively impacted, including loss of
collections for families.Continue to have a proactive outreach program with emphasis on
collaboration and sharing of services so that we optimize our
mandated services in the most efficient manner and continue to be
a leader within the State of California Child Support Program.
Develop and retain employees by providing ongoing professional
development courses including utilizing the County's "Learning
and Development Network."
Review opportunities for cost savings and sharing of services with
other county child support agencies.
Increase the frequency and reliability of payments for families, so
they can depend on this very important source of income.
Obtain an additional funding stream that will offset possible staff
reductions.
Pending Issues
There are no pending issues.
Policy Considerations
The Recommended Budget does not include funding to restore two
vacant Child Support Officer II positions that the Department
deleted to submit a balanced budget. The Department has
requested that the Board of Supervisors consider restoring these
two positions. Currently, each Child Support Officer collects an
estimated average of $800,000 annually. The Department projects
that the loss of these two positions could negatively impact support
collections by $1.6 million annually. The Department further states
that the loss of these two positions could place at risk $321,000 in
revenue stabilization funding from the State due to maintenance of
effort requirements. Restoration of these two positions would
require an additional $58,253 in general fund contributions.

The Recommended Budget for the Public Defender is $11,075,768
and includes $642,866 in revenues and $10,432,902 in General
Fund Contributions (GFC). Compared to the FY 2014-15 Adopted
Budget, recommended appropriations increase $1,406,066,
financed by $155,294 in additional revenues and $1,250,772 in
additional GFCs.
The Recommended Budget includes augmentations totaling
$1,250,772, including $511,170 to retain four Deputy Public
Defender positions (three filled and one vacant) that were at-risk
due to cost pressures (discussed later) and $739,602 in additional
support for the Alternate Defender's Office (ADO). The additional
funding for the ADO includes $130,290 for trial-related expenses
and $609,312 for panel attorney costs and two contract attorneys to
reduce the need for more expensive panel attorneys in future fiscal
years.
Budget Impacts
The Department will experience a number of countywide cost
pressures in FY 2015-16 that will further strain its ability to
maintain current service levels. These cost pressures include wage
and related benefits increases authorized by employee bargaining
agreements, earned annual step advancements and promotions,
higher general liability insurance program costs, and increased
information technology charges for infrastructure upgrades. In
addition, the Department has financing needs related to trial
expenses, legal research reference tools, replacement of aging
computers and office furniture, infrastructure, and miscellaneous
service costs.
The Department recently completed a staffing study in which it
proposes various position-related augmentations in three phases
over a five year period. The study proposes additional staffing to
help meet the Public Defender's mandated responsibilities and
proposes to reallocate a number of existing positions to ensure
appropriate levels of supervision and realign classifications to job
duties. While the Recommended Budget provides funding to retain
existing staffing and augments funding for the ADO, it does not
include $815,025 in requested augmentations to support phase one
recommendations of the staffing study.

The Public Defender's physical office is densely compacted into a
singular modular trailer, Modular Unit #4. Finding appropriate
space to house the Public Defender function remains a pressing
issue.
Policy Considerations
The Public Defender recently completed a Benchmark County
Caseload/Workload Study indicating that its caseloads exceed
those of similar counties and applicable State, Federal and
Professional Organization standards. The previously mentioned
staffing study proposes position augmentations over a five year
period to address the Public Defender's benchmark study findings.
The Recommended Budget provides $1,250,772 in GFC
augmentations to retain existing staffing and increase funding for
the ADO. However, due to budget constraints, the Recommended
Budget does not include funding to meet phase one staffing
augmentations identified in the staffing study.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 Recommended Budget for the
Sheriff 's Office includes $95,020,965 in appropriations. This
represents an increase of $5,229,388 over the FY 2014-15 Adopted
Budget and primarily reflects negotiated pay raises, higher PERS
retirement contributions, and additional expenditures related to
inmate medical services. Revenue is estimated at $42,067,794, an
$856,479 increase. The revenue increase reflects higher
Proposition 172 sales tax revenue, partially offset by reductions in
Federal grants. The recommended General Fund Contribution
(GFC) totals $52,953,171, for an increase of $4,372,909.
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes $4,372,909 in
augmentations to retain 33 existing positions at-risk due to cost
pressures and to provide seed money in the amount of $510,000 for
the Sheriff 's Office to participate in the vehicle replacement
program to replace aged patrol vehicles.
The Recommended Budget supports 435.0 positions, representing
a net decrease of 7.5 positions over the FY 2014-15 Adopted
Budget. A total of 14 positions were added during the current year,
including a Deputy Sheriff supported by a grant targeting
agricultural-related crime, seven Deputy Sheriffs funded by AB 109
Public Safety Realignment funds, four Deputy Sheriffs established
to escort inmates for medical treatment, one Deputy Sheriff per the
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Monterey
County Superior Court, and an at-will Administrative Secretary-
Confidential. In addition, the Recommended Budget includes two
additional positions that are fully funded with program revenues,
including a Commander for the Court Security Division and a
Correctional Sergeant to supervise inmate medical transportation.
Offsetting the addition of 16 positions compared to the FY 2014-15
Adopted Budget, the recommended budget includes a reduction of
23.5 positions, including 11 vacant Deputy Sheriffs, one vacant
Commander in Patrol, six vacant Deputy Sheriffs in Investigations,
two vacant Records Specialists, one vacant Management Analyst
III, a part-time vacant Forensic Autopsy Technician, one Legal
Secretary, and a filled Criminal Intelligence Analyst who can be
transferred to a grant funded position.Increases in costs in the areas of inmate medical services, general
liability insurance, employee salaries and benefits, and facility
maintenance continue to put budgetary pressure on the Sheriff's
Office and restrict the Department's flexibility in assigning
resources to rapidly changing service requirements. The FY 2015-
16 Recommended Budget does not include sufficient funding to
fully cover vacation payouts, employee leave benefit payouts, and
expected overtime spending. The Sheriff 's Office's ability to
address staffing shortages in the jail and much needed programs
and facilities upgrades will be significantly impacted by these
unbudgeted/under-budgeted costs.
One positive item included in the FY 2015-16 Recommended
Budget is $510,000, seed money for the Sheriff 's Office to
participate in the Vehicle Replacement Program through County
Fleet Management to replace high mileage patrol vehicles.
During FY 2015-16 the Sheriff 's Office will continue to explore
increased funding from other sources such as the Affordable Care
Act, Capital Improvement Program and grants to address some of
the inmate medical costs as well as long-deferred equipment and
facility needs that are critical to the continued provision of public
safety services. Additional actions may be needed in FY 2015-16 to
adequately budget for staffing shortages, higher overtime costs,
facility repairs and improvements, and expanded inmate programs.Major goals for FY 2015-16 include:
Continue to utilize and enhance the new Kronos timekeeping/
scheduling system.
Review the organizational structure and propose a reorganization
to provide the most efficient and cost effective organizational
structure of management and administrative staff.
Continue to develop improved processes and strategies for more
efficient and effective maintenance and repair of Department
facilities.
Fully implement a new records management system which will
allow the Department, County and other agencies to retire the
aging and costly mainframe.
Review large contracts for the inmate phone system in the jail and
inmate food services.
Create a more tactical, collaborative and intelligence driven
approach to reducing gang violence, drug trafficking and property
crimes within the LEOC structure and its partnerships, and in the
patrol and investigative units.
Ensure that the number and types of inmates in the County Jail as a
result of AB 109 is effectively managed for both inmate and
employee safety through contracting with other facilities to house
some of our inmates.
Finalize the environmental impact report (EIR) for the AB 900 jail
expansion project, and begin construction of a new facility.
Continue to seek funding alternatives for a medical and mental
health housing unit for inmates.
Expand educational, life skills and vocational programs and revise
the inmate grievance practices.
Send out Requests for Proposals and have valid contracts for
inmate telephone system, commissary and food operations services
in the jail, and inmate medical services.be added to the Enforcement Operations Bureau. The current
available funding and staffing is not sufficient to provide the
minimal level of service to the unincorporated area. The
Department has not been able to restore all of the positions lost
between 2004 and 2011. Further, it is being recommended to delete
18 vacant safety positions, including 17 Deputy Sheriffs and one
Commander. This situation threatens the public welfare as well as
officer safety due to the large areas covered by each deputy. This
lengthens response times and limits the timeliness of backup. In
addition, there are insufficient deputies to provide the type of
concentrated and specialized enforcement or investigative activities
to respond to crime trends within the communities we serve.
Although the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes seed
money for the Sheriff 's Office to participate in the Vehicle
Replacement Program to replace long overdue patrol vehicles, this
proposal does not address the following years' loan repayments and
reserve funding sources of approximately $2.3 million in FY 2016-
17 and $2.8 million each for FYs 2017-18 and 2018-19.
Although the Monterey County Jail is already operating
significantly over capacity, two issues are creating additional
pressures on this facility. Both the Federal Court ruling and State
Realignment legislation have resulted in increased numbers of
inmates to be housed in the Jail. Given the current overcrowded
condition, any increase in inmates requires the release of other
inmates until the construction of new facilities is completed. The
County has begun to address these issues through award of the AB
900 funds, application to the SB 1022 program, and the contract
with Alameda County. Additionally, the Department will continue
to implement strategies to address understaffing, provision of
medical services, and facility improvements that will result in
additional expenditures for County Jail operations.
Custody Operations has a fleet of three buses used to transport
inmates to court and to other penal institutions. The oldest bus
was built in 1984, and the others in 1988 and 1991. In FY 2012-13,
one of those buses was replaced with a new bus. The two remaining
buses do not comply with State diesel particulate admission
standards. The Sheriff's Office submitted a request to replace one
of these buses at a cost of $210,000. However, due to budget
constraints , this request is not included as part of the
Recommended Budget.The Recommended Budget for the Department totals $64,518,515,
financed by $45,029,570 in program revenue and $19,488,945 in
General Fund Contributions (GFC). The Recommended Budget
includes an augmentation of $1,642,055 in GFC to support the
retention of 20 filled positions that could no longer be funded
within existing resources due to cost pressures (discussed later).
The Recommended Budget of $64,518,515 continues to reflect two
fund sources: the Local Realignment (Fund 022) budget of
$21,774,553 and a General Fund budget of $42,743,962. Per State
legislation, Fund 022 Recommended Budget is a passthrough fund
for receipt of AB 109 Public Safety Realignment monies.
Probation's positions and operations are paid from the General
Fund and reimbursed from Fund 022 as expenses are incurred.
The Recommended Budget includes an increase in revenue totaling
$4,306,615. Most of this increase ($4,071,942) is in AB 109 Public
Safety Realignment monies. AB 109 realigned responsibility for
supervising lower level adult offenders to local jurisdictions. The
funding associated with these realigned responsibilities is shared
with other community corrections partners, including the Sheriff's
Office, District Attorney, Public Defender, Health, and Social
Services in the form of operating transfers from Probation to the
recipient departments.
The Recommended Budget includes a total of 295 positions, with a
loss of one position, currently vacant, offset by the addition of a
new position to directly support the State's Public Safety
Realignment (AB 109) program's administrative activities and
Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) functions.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget deletes 1.0 vacant position in response
to various cost pressures, including higher salary and benefits costs
under current bargaining agreements and higher County
infrastructure costs. This reduction of an authorized position will
adversely impact staffing and service levels in programs which
provide either mandated services or services that have been
identified as essential to the community.
The reduction of 1.0 Probation Officer II in the Adult Field unit will
overburden the remaining field services officers, reduce the ability
to identify rehabilitative needs, and further delay implementation

of case plans for use by the moderate supervision officers as the
next step in evidence-based supervision.
The addition of 1.0 Senior Secretary position, fully funded by the
State's AB 109 realignment allocation, will be responsible for the
administrative support of the Community Corrections Partnership
and Public Safety Realignment activities.
Revenue from Federal claiming for reimbursement of Title IV-E
pre-placement juvenile case management and services to Probation
Departments has significantly decreased after a Federal review of
the State Cost Allocation Plan, with a substantial impact statewide.
For Monterey County Probation, initial reduction of Federal Title
IV-E revenue is estimated at $1.5 million annually for FY 2015-16.
This reduction will be offset by a projected increase in State
revenue (per the State's Department of Finance) for FY 2015-16.
The Department experienced various expenditure increases, as
well as new costs compared to the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget.
Cost increases included $1,297,226 for salaries and benefits related
to negotiated bargaining agreements, employee step advances, and
higher employee health care cost. General liability insurance costs
increased an additional $62,933, while medical services for wards
and State custody housing increased by $86,244. New costs for FY
2015-16 include: $154,249 for the Enterprise Financial System
upgrade and $391,667 for the Information Technology capital
infrastructure upgrade. The net result of these costs is a $1,992,319
increase in baseline funding requirements for FY 2015-16.The Probation Department is dedicated to achieving and
maintaining the following goals:
Continue to participate in the process of constructing a new, more
functional juvenile detention facility.
Improve the quality of life for youth, seniors and families by
preventing and reducing the frequency, severity, and impact of
criminal and delinquent behavior among adults and juveniles who
come within the jurisdiction of the Probation Department
(ongoing).
Enhance public safety programs throughout Monterey County
through collaboration and cooperation with other departments and
agencies and by the development of new and innovative methods to
address the issues of public safety (ongoing).
Expand services to the young adult population and address specific
needs, e.g. mental health, substance abuse and vocational training
(ongoing).
Continue to enhance the collection of probation fees in
collaboration with the Treasurer's Revenue Division.
Continue to serve as the lead agency to maintain core functions
and expand the Silver Star Resource Center as a "one-stop"
program for gang prevention and intervention (ongoing).
Continue to serve as the lead agency for the Juvenile Justice Crime
Prevention Act programs (ongoing).
Continue to serve as the lead agency for the Community
Correction Partnership, and for the implementation of the
Community Correction Plan focusing on evidence-based probation
supervision strategies and programs (ongoing).
Continue to enhance data collection capabilities in the Case
Management System to track, monitor and report data on its
juvenile and adult populations, and to analyze and evaluate the
success of programs and program participation. Develop new data
requirements for realigned adult and juvenile populations.
Participate in data sharing efforts as required by law, such as the
State's Supervised Release File (SRF) and Smart Justice initiatives.
Expand the Medi-Cal Administrative Activities (MAA) Program.
Pending Issues
In December 2013, the United States Health and Human Services
Department completed a Federal review and found California
Department of Social Services out of compliance regarding the
State Cost Allocation Plan for the Federal Title IV-E Program. The
statewide impact affected Federal claiming for the reimbursement
of pre-placement juvenile case management and services to
Probation Departments. In FY 2015-16, the Federal Title IV-E
revenue reduction is estimated at $1.5 million and will be offset by
increases in Supervised Home Confinement revenue and Medi-Cal
Administrative Activities (MAA) revenue.
The State's AB 109 Public Safety Realignment, implemented on
October 1, 2011, continues to impact the Adult Division's
operations. The realignment significantly increases Probation's

nonsex
offenses, and without any prior conviction) adult offenders, as
well as offenders released to local authority under Post Release
Community Supervision (PRCS) status. Probation departments
continue to plan and adjust for this significant change.
The operational and financial impact of the State-mandated Static-
99R assessment for adult sex offenders continues to be evaluated.
Further, the cost of Global Positioning System monitoring for highrisk
sex offenders while on probation continues to be absorbed by
the Department.
The FY 2015-16 Juvenile Accountability Block Grant (JABG)
continues to be funded with no change from the FY 2014-15 grant
allocation. New data collection requirements continue to be
initiated. This appears to be a trend in data requirements
presented by both State and Federal entities.
The Department is incurring additional costs for mandated core
training required by Title 15 for part-time and temporary Juvenile
Institutions Officers. Increasing mandated Standards and Training
for Corrections (STC) costs challenge the Department's ability to
cover all training expenses.
Due to the implementation of Proposition 21, juveniles facing adult
court proceedings continue to generate additional costs associated
with extended detention in Juvenile Hall. Depending on the
number of arrests and the court processes, the Department's
budget is constrained to absorb these increased costs in FY 2015-
16.
The annual Department of Juvenile Justice (DJJ) placement rate was
established in July 2012 at $24,000 per juvenile, a significant
increase over prior years. This placement cost will continue to
impact costs next fiscal year, based on the amount of youth in State
custody and their commitment time.
The Department continues its commitment to public safety and
protection of the community in spite of the fiscal challenges that
have accumulated in recent years. Constrained resources challenge
the Department's ability to maintain the necessary level of services,
particularly in consideration of the increase in its span of control
for adult and juvenile offenders. The Department will carefully and
responsibly monitor expenses, and, if necessary, request additional
appropriations.Continue to serve as the lead agency for the Juvenile Justice Crime
Prevention Act and Silver Star Resource Center, as permissible by
availability of funding and increase the use of validated evidencebased
programs and curricula.
Continue to collaborate with South County's "Four Cities for Peace"
law enforcement initiative.
Collaborate with the City of Seaside CalGRIP Program to develop
the Seaside Youth Resource Center.Collaborate with California Forensic Medical Group (CFMG) and
Natividad Medical Center (NMC) to implement a tattoo removal
program for the Youth Center.
Continue to develop enhancements to Probation's Case
Management System (CMS) to collect Youth Center commitment
and reentry data.
Continue enhancements of evidence-based practices with
programming dosage based on assessed risk to reoffend; detention
alternatives for technical violations; developing a sanctions and
incentives matrix; and additional training to staff on evidencebased
strategies and programs.
Continue to train staff and providers and refine infrastructure to
ensure compliance with the Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA).
Develop a program in conjunction with Monterey County Office of
Education (MCOE) for residents eligible to attend online college
courses.appropriations, financed by $6,399,117 in program revenue and
$3,397,179 in General Fund Contribution (GFC). An augmentation
of $332,494 for FY 2015-16 is included in the Recommended
Budget. The Department requested additional funding to fund five
positions that otherwise would be deleted.
Budget Impacts
Decreased resources and increased costs for agricultural programs
will impact the Department's service delivery; however, the
Department will redirect, through reprioritization, existing
resources to increase efficiencies and, to the extent possible,
minimize these impacts.Promote and protect agriculture, the environment, and public
welfare, and assure consumer and business confidence in the
marketplace through uniform enforcement of laws and regulations.
Pending Issues
The expected reductions in Federal funding may present budgetary
challenges in FY 2015-16. The Department continues to support
State and Federal activities, especially as related to facilitation of
commerce. The Department currently issues approximately 7,000
Phytosantary Certificates annually for shipments related to Light
Brown Apple Moth (LBAM) quarantines and over 20,000 total
Phytosantary Certificates.
The Department will work with the California Department of Food
& Agriculture (CDFA) to continue detection efforts for the
European Grape Vine Moth and a citrus pest, the Asian Citrus
Psyllid. Quarantines for the LBAM are impacting trade with
Canada and Mexico and will require dedication of resources to
maintain these markets. The status of funding to cover the costs
associated with these programs is uncertain. Reduction in funding

resources to protect the County's agriculture from these and other
pests.
There is a continuing focus on local use of fumigants, and
implementation of significant new use requirements. This will
result in a continuing dedication of staff resources to fumigation
issues.
Implementation of the 2010 General Plan will require a dedication
of staff resources. The Department will also be taking on an
expanded role in the administration of the County's Agricultural
Preserve (Williamson Act) program.

Implement phytosanitary certification activities facilitating trade
with other states and countries especially related to Light Brown
Apple Moth.
Monitor issues related to food safety and water quality and
collaborate with stakeholders, other departments and agencies as
appropriate.
Emphasis on training and retention efforts for all positions to
maintain core service levels and succession planning.
Direct pesticide enforcement resources to fumigants, and related
issues.
Respond to emerging and ongoing pest exclusion and quarantine
activities, particularly those related to the Light Brown Apple
Moth, Glassy-Winged Sharp Shooter, European Grapevine Moth,
Asian Citrus Psyllid and preventing introduction of other exotic
insects, pests and diseases. Continue to work with Parks
Department and Water Resources Agency on the detection and
exclusion of the Quagga Mussel from the waters of the County.
As resources allow, continue collaboration with other departments
and agencies on education and outreach related to resource
conservation issues (such as erosion) and water quality in concert
with our pesticide use enforcement efforts.
Contine to direct limited, available resources through the Monterey
County Weed Management Area to work cooperatively on the
control of noxious weeds in the County and coordinate efforts of,
and obtain funding for, weed management efforts. Collaborate
specifically with Parks, Resource Management Agency (RMA) and
Water Resources on weeds and other pests of mutual interest, as
resources allow.
Increase protection of the County's residents, businesses and
visitors through fair and equitable enforcement of weights and
measures laws, and the adoption of a price verification scanner
ordinance.
Support of the Board's Agricultural Advisory Committee; and
collaborate with the Resource Management Agency on land use
issues.
Suport the implementation of the County's General Plan on
matters pertaining to agriculture.
Develop uniform guidelines for the County's Williamson Act
program, including revisions to the compatible uses allowed in
agricultural preserves.
Support agricultural education efforts, including Monterey County
Ag Education (Farm Days) and AgKnowledge (executive
agricultural training).The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for the Resource
Management Agency (RMA) totals $81,536,422 in appropriations
financed by $57,792,580 in program revenue, $14,881,226 in
General Fund Contribution (GFC) and $8,862,616 in other fund
balances.
The Recommended Budget increases the prior year level of GFC by
$482,349 to restore funding for professional services related to
General Plan Implementation, Local Coastal Program updates,
expanded State mandated programs for water quality monitoring,
storm water management and closed landfill monitoring.
Additional funds for rising janitorial costs at County facilities are
also included in this total.
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes organizational
changes to more clearly reflect activities associated with
centralizing the front counter operations, call center, records
requests, and document scanning.
Specific details regarding individual functional area budgets for the
Agency are provided within division level narratives.
Budget Impacts
The Agency continues to experience significant increases in nondiscretionary
costs, including: negotiated pay and earned annual
step increases, flexible benefit costs, general liability insurance,
property insurance, new annual charges for Information
Technology Department (ITD) Capital Improvements, Enterprise
Resource Project (ERP) Upgrades, and Building Use Allowance
charges. With limited growth in GFC targets in recent years, the

Agency has had to divert funds from service delivery to cover these
internal cost increases.
The County's General Liability Insurance charges distributed to
departments by Risk Management (Risk) continue to increase for
the RMA. Due to a revised methodology by Risk that designates
RMA-Planning as the responsible party for costs related to land use
litigation versus allocating these costs across all departments
responsible for land use litigation, RMA-Planning charges reflect a
423% increase over FY 2012-13, or $744,381. As a nondiscretionary
expense outside of the control of RMA, this cost
represents a significant reduction to its capacity to maintain service
levels.
FY 2015-16 will be the first year that the County will no longer be
receiving funds from the State Criminal Alien Assistance Program
(SCAAP) as this program was eliminated by the Department of
Justice. This loss of funds impact the Facility Maintenance Project
Fund, Fund 401, as these funds were used to fund facility related
projects associated with the County's public safety departments.
Over the course of the past three years, the average annual amount
the County received from SCAAP was $480,000.
To cover increased costs within the limits of the County
Administrative Office (CAO) preliminary baseline GFC level, RMA
has and continues to maintain reduced resources, and in FY 2015-
16 is relying on the use of one-time revenues of $746,727, as well as
the use of the Accrued Leave Assignment (3115) in the amount of
$372,448 to meet the flat GFC target. While the use of one-time
funds will fill the funding gap for FY 2015-16, the RMA will need to
identify recurring revenues or an increase in GFC in the following
year in order to fill the funding gap created by these uncontrollable
increased costs plus any additional increases that arise in FY 2016-
17. There are several activities that were not included in the
Agency's budget requiring submittal of augmentation requests
totaling $6.46 million and include the following by request type:
Unfunded augmentation requests for new and/or expanded
mandates total $2.5 million and include funding requests for:
$375,00 to cover new and increased costs for storm drain clean out,
and increased road sweeping requirements; $232,183 for new
responsibilities related to land management and maintenance of
former Fort Ord properties; $220,000 for the repair of the San Ardo
Landfill Cap; $190,754 related to General Plan Implementation,
Local Coastal Plan Updates and Board referrals; and $1,486,000 for
the Schilling Properties facility maintenance and operations,
excluding utilities.
Augmentation requests to fund mission critical activities total
$46,850 to fund support activities not reimbursable under the Safe
Drinking Water State Revolving Fund (SDWSRF) grant for the San
Lucas Water District. Non-funding may jeopardize a grant award
of $440,000.
Augmentation requests to fund base level maintenance activities
total $2.29 million and include requests for: $120,000 towards
Homeless encampment clean up; $568,962 in General Liability
costs for the Road Fund; $60,000 for small safety projects on
County roadways; $250,000 for pruning Historic Eucalyptus Trees;
$66,000 to establish a file management system; $36,000 to update
the Land Map Records (LMR) database; $230,000 for increased
utility costs in County shared facilities; $900,000 for utility costs at
the Schilling Place facilities; and $62,000 for the property insurance
for the Schilling Place facilities.
Augmentation requests from outside funds requesting general
funds total $32,000 to install four solar-powered driver feedback
signs at the entrances of the communities of Aromas, Carmel
Village, Chualar, and on Inter-Garrison Road.
Augmentation requests that are not mandated total $108,418 to
fund a dedicated Code Compliance Inspector II for short term
rentals and special events.
Workload and types of services are expected to grow due to
increased regulations and more permit demands as the economy
strengthens. It is anticipated that increased demand will compound
the already existing heavy workload on staff, potentially impacting
expected timelines and increasing the demand for plan check and
inspections in the upcoming year.
Data on County roads and bridge project requirements reflect the
need to focus efforts on obtaining revenue for maintenance
funding. Limited funding reduces the ability of existing staff to
keep up with preventive maintenance needs. As requests for
service increase (corrective maintenance), the ability of staff to be
responsive and meet targets will decrease.

The State of California projection for Gas Tax revenues are
anticipated to decrease 25% or $3.1 million in FY 2015-16 and
projected to continue to decline in FY 2016-17. Gas Tax is
predominately the main funding source for road and bridge
maintenance for the County. As a result, Public Works has already
frozen hiring in maintenance and capital projects. After
accounting for one time project expenditures, this represents a
structural deficit of $3 million per year in the Road Fund. For
successive fiscal years, either expenditures and services will have to
be reduced, and/or new revenue sources will have to be identified.
The volatility of Gas Tax revenues is attributable in large part to the
'Gas Tax Swap' adopted in 2010 by the State to help fill a gap. A
more dependable funding source for road and bridge maintenance
is needed. The Transportation Agency for Monterey County is
exploring the possibility of a 2016 ballot measure for a 3/8 cent
transportation sales tax to fund transportation projects and road
maintenance. However, if passed by voters, funds would not be
available until the end of FY 2016-17 and it is not clear at this time
how much of the revenue would be dedicated to road maintenance.
Policy Considerations
State law requires removal of mud and debris from obstructing the
safety devices in the travel lane and physical obstructions within
roadways. As part of its scope of services, RMA-Public Works
provides road maintenance, including cleaning, for all County
roads. The County's NPDES Permit from the State Water Quality
Control Board regulates storm water discharges from storm drain
systems. The County's Phase II Small Municipal Separate Storm
Sewer System (MS4) General Permit mandates the sweeping of all
County roads within its Permitted Area two times per year, and the
inspection and cleaning of all storm drain systems. On July 1, 2013,the County's Permitted Area from 20 to 100 square miles. The
total length of County-maintained roads increased from 225 to 324
miles. A FY 2015-16 budget augmentation of $300,000 was
requested for street sweeping operations to comply with expanded
requirements, as well as $75,000 to implement new storm drain
maintenance requirements mandated in the NPDES Municipal
Permit. The permit requires Monterey County to develop
procedures and priorities for storm drain inspections, storm drain
cleaning, storm drain labeling, high priority facility maintenance,
and waste disposal. Implementation of the new storm drain
maintenance requirements is mandated to begin in FY 2015-16.
Due to competing priorities, the Recommended Budget does not
fund the increased cost.
During FY 2012-13 Monterey County received a notice of violation
(NOV) for not fully meeting its Permit requirements. Funding will
ensure compliance with the Federal NPDES "Clean Water Act" and
mitigate potential fines and sanctions against the County. Funding
would also allow the County to perform occasional cleaning of bike
lanes on Blanco Road between Davis Road (Salinas) and
Reservation Road (Marina), to avoid unsafe conditions that may be
created by mud and debris.
Failure to appropriately respond to the new storm water
regulations will place the County in non-compliance of its Permit.
The California State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) is
authorized to levy fines for non-compliance at a rate of up to
$10,000 per day per occurrence. As an example of fines that have
previously been assessed, the City of Grover Beach in San Luis
Obispo County was assessed a $35,000 penalty by the Central
Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board as an Administrative
Civil Liability Complaint. The City's maximum liability for noncompliance
of its Municipal Permit was $20.3 million.
Additionally, non-compliance issues pose a more significant threat
through the potential for third-party lawsuits, as authorized under
the Clean Water Act. In such an incident, the City of Malibu
settled a $104 million suit with two environmental groups for a
total of $6.6 million in legal fees and mitigation projects. This
lawsuit was filed in 2008 to encourage the City to better implement
pollution controls for storm water runoff and discharges near
public beaches and the adjacent Area of Special Biological
Significance (ASBS).
The Department has also requested a General Fund Augmentation
in the amount of $46,850 for non-grant costs required to
implement the design phase of the San Lucas Water District
project, which is being performed to enhance the provision and
protection of the municipal drinking water supplied to the
consumers of the community of San Lucas. To date, the consultant
has started work on the project and it is anticipated that all of the
required tasks up through Preliminary Engineering will be
completed during FY 2015-16. Failure to receive the funds may
require the County to rescind the $440,000 Grant Agreement for
pre-construction costs, as well as return $77,408 in grant funds
already received.The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for RMA Administration is
$6,152,012, which includes $7,036,129 in Salaries and Benefits,
$23,143 in Operating Transfers Out, and $1,631,714 in Services and
Supplies, which provide for National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) and Areas of Special Biological
Significance (ASBS) permit fees, charges from service departments,
Risk Management allocations, computer hardware, software, and
other minor expenses and operating costs, and are offset by
$2,538,974 from Intra/Inter Fund Transfers for internal services.
Expenditures are covered by $7,513 in charges for service revenues,
$609,162 in construction permit revenue, $328 in road privileges
and permits revenue, $310,000 from the Safe Drinking Water State
Aid for the San Lucas Water Project grant and $115,224 from the
Water Resources Agency to reimburse for contracted work
associated with the Carmel Lagoon Causeway project. The
remaining expenditures are covered by a General Fund
Contribution (GFC) of $5,109,785.
Staffing in Environmental Services includes one Senior Water
Resources Hydrologist, one Water Resources Hydrologist, one
Management Analyst I, two Civil Engineers, and three Water
Resources Technician positions.Significant changes from prior year include the centralization of
front counter support staff under the RMA Administration. This
organizational change arose as a result of an internal working group
created in the RMA tasked to study the current RMA counter
operations and make recommendations regarding reorganizing and
streamlining the three separate intake counter groups, as Building,
Planning and Public Works operated their counters independently.
Reflected in the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget is the transfer
of the 13 Office Assistant II's, one Office Assistant III, two Principal
Office Assistants, one Supervising Office Assistant, one Permit
Technician I's, five Permit Technician II's and one Permit
Technician III (reallocated from a Permit Technician II) for a total
of 24 positions to support the centralization of front counter staff.
The additional benefit for the centralization of front counter
support staff is achieving standardized processes and procedures
and creates the ability cross train staff more efficiently.
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for RMA Administration
includes the addition of two new positions to assist with the
increasing workload: a Business Technology Analyst and Personnel
Technician.
Historically, RMA Admin has relied on contra expenditures to
offset its operating expenses, where the contra expenditures were
generated by charging each of the internal functional areas based
on total approved positions in order to meet the allocated general
fund target. Effective in FY 2015-16, RMA Administration will
only charge its outside funds their proportionate share of RMA
Administration costs. RMA General Fund Units will no longer
receive an allocation and in turn the corresponding general funds
are reflected as part of the general fund contribution for RMA
Administration.
The RMA Administration recommended budget reflects cost
increases associated with Board approved employee-group salaries
and benefits changes for FY 2015-16, earned step increases, and
increased costs for service fees and non-discretionary charges in
services and supplies.INTERAGENCY PROJECTS: Manage special handling projects
including difficult development applications, complex property
negotiations, and significant capital project issues. Projects that
continue to require the involvement of the RMA include: Carmel
River/Lagoon; Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA);
Renewable energy initiatives/projects; Board committees
(Alternative Energy and Environment, Fort Ord, Capital
Improvement, Budget, Legislative); Airport Land Use Commission;
City of Salinas Government Center and Downtown area; Long
Range Planning work program. Other significant projects will
include: Jail Addition, Juvenile Hall, East-West Wing, Ferrini Ranch,
Paraiso Springs, and Rancho Canada Village. RMA participates
(with County Parks) on multiple groups developing regional trail
and open space planning documents.
RMA will continue to assist the CAO Budget and Analysis Division
with planning and implementation of the relocation of several
County departments and functions to the new Schilling Place
Facility.
EMPLOYEE DEVELOPMENT: Complete the biannual EOO
Harassment Prevention Training by all RMA Staff. Complete
Annual ITD Security Awareness Training by all RMA Staff.
Complete office safety training for all RMA office staff. Complete
Defensive Driving training for all RMA staff who operate County
vehicles.
STAFFING: The Administrative Staffing unit will continue to work
with the RMA units in the timely delivery of recruitment and
selection processes for hiring the best qualified candidates;
maintain updated class specifications and increase emphasis on
outreach to resources that promote diversity. Continue to utilize
technology to streamline and enhance flexibility and efficiency in
the recruitment process. Conduct more in-house classification
studies to support organizational changes and needs and reduce
the need for outside consulting services. Continue to gather data
and make recommendations for improvement as turnover trends
and systemic problems are identified.
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS: The Employee Relations unit will
continue to provide assistance to supervisors and managers in
performance management issues and the completion of
performance appraisals. We will also develop and provide training
on performance management and advising on courses of corrective
actions; develop policies and best practices and educate staff to
achieve consistency and conformance across the RMA. We will
continue to provide assistance to employees and managers in
addressing ADA related matters and partner with departments on
succession planning strategies. We are committed to fostering a
work environment that promotes a knowledgeable workforce by
partnering with departments to provide quality, cost-effective
training and development opportunities. We will also increase
efforts to educate employees about the resources available for
career advancement opportunities within the RMA and other
County departments.
PERSONNEL AND BENEFITS: The Personnel Transaction and
Benefits group shall continue the high standard of timely and errorfree
processing of personnel transactions. As well as continuing
with effective and timely employee support and communication for
protected leave rights and benefit procedures or changes during the
open enrollment period and throughout the year.
PAYROLL TRANSACTIONS: Maintain a high standard of
efficiency and accuracy with regards to payroll transaction
processing for RMA, EDD, and WIB/OET. Continue to develop
and provide training for new and existing employees for the
Employee Self Service System (ESS) and Wincams system as it
relates to payroll. Update and educate employees on County pay
related information through communications such as email and
staff meetings. Further develop and streamline additional time
management procedures that conform to the automated systems.Continue to develop and deliver training for employees,
supervisors and managers for timecard responsibilities, including
timecard review and completion.
EMPLOYEE HEALTH AND SAFETY: The RMA is committed to
protecting the safety and health of each employee. To assure the
success of our policy, the RMA will continue to use the Injury and
Illness Prevention Program as the foundation for the development,
implementation and updating of safety and health programs and
plans. The program encompasses the following items: identifying
roles and responsibilities; providing workplace safety practices;
conducting safety and health inspections to find and eliminate
unsafe working conditions or health hazards; investigating
workplace accidents promptly and thoroughly to find the cause and
to make corrections to prevent future losses; and continue to
provide relevant safety and health training to all employees.
CONTRACTS ADMINISTRATION: Continue to efficiently alter
existing RMA Contracts Administration Database to effectively
monitor all of the RMA Professional Services Agreements (PSA)
and other Agreements, including the expiration date and approved
not to exceed amount. Continue to support and coordinate with
RMA Project Managers and RMA Finance Staff to appropriately
monitor PSA and other Agreement terms and funding by
maintaining close communication. Develop internal training/
handouts which educate RMA staff on the different types of
procurements and the process from cradle to grave on establishing
an approved Agreement/amendment. Continue staff crosstraining
and expand knowledge by attending technical contract/
finance courses and/or available training. Have all RMA Project
Managers (or Agreement Requestors) attend and obtain
certification from the County's Contracts and Purchasing
Academy.
INFORMATION SERVICES: Goals and priorities for FY 2015-16
include the implementation of Civic Insight to be able to visually
display permit activity online and upgrade Accela GIS;
incorporation of the Scanning function with the front counter
operation; continue the PC and Microsoft Office upgrade for onethird
of RMA computers, as part of a three-year PC replacement
cycle plan and continue to work with the various divisions of the
RMA in identifying IT needs for the current budget year as well as
upcoming budget years. Staff will continue to update and improve
the RMA website; initialize a project for Public Works on GIS
Maintenance Asset Management; continue to conduct GIS Needs
Assessment; conduct GIS Training; and continue the project to
digitize Microfiche images.
FINANCE: Close year-end FY 2014-15 for RMA General Fund
units within the Board approved General Fund Contribution and
Auditor Controllers timeline. Complete the Business Process
Mapping for a Grant Management System. Complete staff training
in the Contracts Academy and continue with in house training on
Budget models. Take over supervision of the Building and Planning
front counter cashiering activities for better oversight. Continue to
provide administrative support to the Economic Development
Department on the East Garrison project, payroll, personnel
transactions, and Workers Compensation, and safety as needed.
Support the Successor Agency of the Redevelopment Agency of the
County of Monterey including the Recognized Obligation Payment
Schedule (ROPS) and act as the liaison between the County and
external Auditors by providing requested information in a timely
and accurate manner. Continue to adhere to all County, State, and
Federal financial rules and regulations. Continue to pass audits
with no material findings. Train additional Finance Management
staff on the WinCAMS system. Continue to perform monthly
Capital Projects contract reconciliations to ensure project
managers are working within the Board approved agreements and
contract amounts. Continue to provide RMA staff with in house
training and encourage staff to enroll in County provided training.
ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES: Implement and manage the
County's NPDES Municipal General Permit-related requirements
and provide a resource to other County departments responsible
for implementing select program elements. Develop internal
procedures and tools to document activities required by the
NPDES Municipal General Permit. Review discretionary permits,
ministerial permits, and environmental documents to ensure
compliance with Monterey County grading, erosion control, and
storm water regulations. Conduct plan review and construction site
inspections to ensure code compliance.
Provide grant administration and project management assistance
for several projects located on the lower Carmel River, including:
(1) the Lower Carmel River Floodplain Restoration and
Environmental Enhancement Project, (2) the Carmel Lagoon
Ecosystem Protection Barrier and Scenic Road Protection
Structure Projects, and (3) County Service Area 50 - Lower Carmel
River Flood Control Project.
Ensure compliance with all ongoing NPDES Municipal Permit
elements and complete all new Permit Year-3 requirements, which
include:
Develop and implement an Enforcement and Response Plan that
includes enforcement procedures and actions to violations.
Develop and implement a training program for all Permittee staff
who as part of their normal job responsibilities, may be notified of,
come into contact with, or otherwise observe an illicit discharge or
illegal connection to the storm drain system.
Develop and distribute educational materials to construction site
operators.
Conduct a comprehensive inspection and assessment of pollutant
discharge potential for Permittee owned or operated facilities.
Maintain all high priority storm drain systems on an ongoing
schedule.
Assess operations and maintenance activities for potential to
discharge pollutants in storm water, and inspect all best
management practices on a quarterly basis.
Develop and implement a process for incorporating water quality
and habitat enhancement features into new and rehabilitated flood
management facilities.
Develop and implement Hydromodification Management
procedures.
Inventory and assess the maintenance condition of structural postconstruction
best management practices.
Implement a water quality monitoring program addressing 303(d)
impaired water bodies.Develop and implement a Program Effectiveness Assessment &
Improvement Plan that tracks annual and long-term effectiveness
of the storm water program.
Implement the post-construction storm water management
requirements through the permitting process.
Ensure compliance with all NPDES program elements. Complete
all Phase II NPDES Municipal General Permit Year-2 requirements,
including:
Develop a Draft Compliance Plan for Areas of Special Biological
Significance (ASBS).
Prepare an updated Storm Water Management Ordinance for
adoption.
Develop and implement a comprehensive storm water public
education and outreach program.
Ensure adequate training of all staff implementing the construction
site storm water runoff control program.
Develop a biennial employee training program for appropriate
employees involved in implementing the pollution prevention and
good housekeeping practices.
Involve the public in the development and implementation of
activities related to the program.
Create and maintain an up-to-date and accurate outfall map.
Maintain an inventory of all industrial/commercial facilities/
sources within Monterey County's jurisdiction that could discharge
pollutants in storm water to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (MS4).
Sample any outfalls that are flowing or ponding more than 72 hours
after the last rain event.
Develop written procedures for conducting investigations into the
source of all non-storm water discharges suspected to be illicit
discharges.
Develop and implement procedures for inspecting public and
private construction projects and conducting enforcement if
necessary.
Develop and maintain an inventory of County-owned or operated
facilities that are a threat to water quality.
Develop and submit a map of the area within the permit boundary
identifying the inventoried Permittee-owned or operated facilities.
Develop and implement procedures to assess and prioritize MS4
storm drain system maintenance.
Implement a landscape design and maintenance program to reduce
the amount of water, pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers used
during Permittee operations and activities.
Implement the post-construction storm water management
requirements through the permitting process.
Implement an Operations and Maintenance (O&M) Verification
Program for post-construction storm water management
measures.
Complete and submit the Program Effectiveness Assessment and
Improvement Plan.
Prepare for monitoring requirements for the ASBS program,
postponed by the State Water Board due to insufficient rainfall in
the prior FY 2012-13.FY 2015-16 Goal: Elevate by 5% the inspections completed within
24 hours of request, to a new target goal of 95%.
FY 2015-16 Goal: Implement a method of tracking the time a plan
examiner takes to perform the initial review, comments,
corrections, and review revisions. The data collected will be used in
the performance measures to illustrate the actual time that is taken
by the plan examiner to complete a plan review.
FY 2015-16 Goal: To develop a policy process for online permitting
and coordinate with the County Treasurer once we are able to allow
for online payments.
FY 2015-16 Goal: Review and revise all Building Services policies
and procedures, including compiling an updated Building Services
policies and procedures manual which is to be posted on RMA's
website along with interactive forms to enable the public to
conduct permitting transactions online.
FY 2015-16 Goal: Respond to all complaints received within 3
working days. In the past, the expectation was that only priority 1
calls would be responded to within 3 working days. To facilitate this
commitment, a Courtesy Notice will be sent to all property owners
whose property is the subject of a complaint.
FY 2015-16 Goal: Receive code compliance complaints online
through the County website. Complainants' currently can print a
complaint online but then must mail it, scan it or deliver it for
processing.
FY 2015-16 Goal: Actively recruit to fill all Board authorized
positions.
FY 2015-16 Goal: Have all staff certified in Penal Code 832. This
will allow staff to issue a criminal citation to violators when
necessary and appropriate.
FY 2015-16 Goal: Implement a "Stipulated Agreement" process to
assist property owners in abating code violations.
FY 2015-16 Goal: Reduce the back log of Code Compliance cases.
FY 2015-16 Goal: Continue to use available remedies to address
issues of blight, housing code violations and dangerous buildings.
Continue to seek ways to streamline and improve cost recovery of
code compliance operations.
FY 2015-16 Goal: Continue to seek grants and other cost recovery
options to enhance the resources available to the Code Compliance
Division in order to strengthen the level of enforcement and reduce
substandard and dangerous conditions.The Planning Services FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget is
$5,433,023 (includes $1 million augmentation for General Plan
Implementation), with a General Fund Contribution (GFC) of
$2,540,432 and $2,892,591 in revenues (includes $1 million
Operating Transfer In for General Plan Implementation). Salaries
and Benefits reflects a net decrease of $929,028, primarily due to
organization changes associated with the centralization of Permit
Technicians and Office Assistants at the RMA front counter which
effective July 1, 2015 are reflected under the RMA Administration
Unit 8222. In total 14 positions were transferred out.
Although the additional $1,000,000 contribution from the CAO
makes it appear as if costs for Services and Supplies have increased,
without the additional funding for General Plan Implementation,
Services and Supplies reflect a decrease of $658,128 primarily
related to eliminating allocation of RMA Administration support
services such as agency oversight, accounting and finance, HR,
payroll, contracts, safety and information systems support to the
RMA's general fund units.
The Recommended Budget includes estimated revenues of
$2,892,591, increasing over the prior year by $1,237,547. However,
this increase is associated with the use of one-time funds in the
amount of $388,000 from the Coastal Impact Assistance Program
grant to assist in filling a funding gap for FY 2015-16, as well as the
$1,000,000 contribution from the CAO's 8038 fund. On March 24,
2015 the Board approved an increase to Planning land use fees
which increased the rate from $161/hour to $175/hour. This
increase was not included in the FY 2015-16 Recommended
Budget and may assist in offsetting the reliance on one-time funds.
However, it is not anticipated that these new fees will generate
sufficient revenues to offset 100% of the one-time funds.
Therefore, the RMA will need to identify recurring revenues or
need to request an increase in GFC in the following year in order to
fill the funding gap created by uncontrollable increases in internal
service costs plus any additional increases that arise in FY 2016-17.Complete review of all CSAs focusing on improved levels of service
and stronger fiscal management.
CSA 1- Continue participation in the Carmel Lagoon Ecosystem
Protective Barrier (EPB) and Scenic Road Protective Structure
(SRPS) projects.
CSA 50- Commence of the design phase of the stormwater
management and flood control project that includes four project
elements: Rio Road Bioswale, Mission Fields Pond Retrofit,
Riverside Pond Retrofit, and Carmel Rancho Storm Drain Retrofit
Projects. The CSA will also continue to monitor the progress of the
SR1 causeway project.
CSA 75- Conduct Proposition 218 election to establish an
appropriate rate structure. Staff will also proceed with issuing a
Request for Proposal to transfer the CSA's sewer system to a private
or public utility company.
Preparation of a rate study for the Boronda CSD by the Rural
Community Assistance Corporation (RCAC).
Contract with an independent engineering consultant to provide a
comprehensive lift station analysis within the Pajaro County
Sanitation District (PCSD).
Complete comprehensive analysis of County sanitation systems by
staff, supplemented by outside studies and analysis listed above to
provide a comprehensive evaluation of each system. This will allow
the County to move forward in its efforts to transfer some of all of
the sewer operations to a private or public utility company.
Issue a Request for Proposal for the transfer of ownership to a
public or private utility of all sewer and water utility functions
currently operated by the County including the Pajaro CSD and
Boronda CSD.ROADS and BRIDGES (Fund 002): The FY 2015-16 Recommended
Budget for Roads and Bridges is $34,920,678 with estimated
revenues of $30,555,122. The balance of $4,365,556 will be funded
out of available fund balance. Expenditures include $10,658,809 for
Salaries and Benefits. In addition, as part of the organizational
changes associated with the centralization of front counter
operations two positions were transferred to RMA Admin Unit
8222 effective July 1, 2015. These two positions were comprised of
an Office Assistant II and an Office Assistant III.
The largest single source of funding for this activity is the State Gas
Tax. Each county and city in California receives an annual
allocation from the State. The State has adopted a Gas Tax for FY
2015-16 that will cut this allocation by 25%. For Monterey County,
this will result in the loss of $3.1 million over the revenue received
in FY 2014-15. This will have major implications on the ability to
perform basic maintenance functions. A hiring freeze has been
implemented for FY 2015-16 for positions that impact this fund in
order to reduce costs.
DEVELOPMENT SERVICES: The Recommended Budget of
$1,016,884 reflects a decrease of $173,009 from the previous fiscal
year. The Recommended General Fund Contribution (GFC) is
$602,429.
LITTER AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL: The
Recommended Budget of $550,435 for Litter and Environmental
Control reflects an appropriations decrease of $50,149. Effective in
FY 2014-15 three Litter Guard positions were moved from the
Road Fund (Fund 002) into Unit 8194 to more appropriately
identify resources in support of these functions. The street
sweeping component of the National Pollutants Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit is included in this unit, as well
as costs for the maintenance and repair of two street sweepers.
Contracted services for hazardous waste removal and disposal have
also been budgeted under this operating unit. Functions in this unit
have no revenue offsets and rely entirely on GFC. The requested
budget included an augmentation request of $300,000 for increased
sweeping requirements in compliance with NPDES mandates.
COUNTY DISPOSAL SITES: The Recommended Budget is
$176,347 and reflects an appropriations increase of $14,685. The
requested budget included an augmentation request of $220,000
for repairs to the San Ardo Landfill Cap. Basic expenditures
provide for required management of ten closed disposal sites in
accordance with Federal and State requirements.
FACILITIES ADMINISTRATION, MAIL, COURIER, GROUNDS,
UTILITIES, AND REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT
SERVICES: The Recommended Budget for Facility Management
functions totals $7,435,367. Mail and Courier functions are fully
cost recoverable through service charges to customer departments.
A GFC total of $5,899,529 provides for Facilities Administration
and Maintenance, Grounds, Utilities, and Real Property. The
Recommended Budget includes a General Fund augmentation
request of $2,798,000 for increased insurance, operations,
maintenance and utility costs for the newly acquired Schilling Place
properties and homeless camp cleanup. Other increases include
increased costs in staff salaries and associated benefits, and
increased allocated costs from County Service Departments.
FACILITIES MAINTENANCE PROJECTS FUND (401): The
Recommended Budget for Facilities Maintenance Projects is
$6,288,729, offset by revenues of $4,938,879 and $1,349,850 in fund
balance. Project descriptions and related funds are listed in the
related Unit narrative, and in the Capital Improvements Projects
(CIP) Summary of the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget.
CAPITAL PROJECTS FUND (402): The Recommended Budget
reflects funding aligned with projects identified as on-going from
FY 2014-15. The Recommended Budget includes expenditures
totaling $2,045,801 and budgeted revenue of $1,773. The use of
available fund balance is $2,044,028. Project description and
funding are included in the Five-Year Capital Improvement
Program Budget.
FACILITIES MASTER PLAN IMPLEMENTATION FUND: The
Recommended Budget reflects funding aligned with projects to be
identified in the Five-Year Capital Improvement Financing Plan.
Expenditures for Facilities Master Plan Fund 404 total $10,110,101.
Budgeted revenue includes an Operating Transfer In of $3,151,133
in grant reimbursement for the Jail Housing Project, and
$6,225,668 in Operating Transfers In, which is comprised of
$308,000 for the Facilities Utilization Program for the Schilling
Properties, $5,843,666 from Capital Project Assignment Fund 3127
for the new Juvenile Hall, and $74,002 from Capital Project
Assignment Fund 3123 for the Jail Housing Addition. The use of
available fund balance is $733,300. Project descriptions and related
funds are included in the Five Year Capital Improvement Program
Budget.Capital Projects:
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for Fund 402 projects totals
$2,045,800. Recommended projects include the following:
King City Addition for Agricultural Commissioner - Develop
Master Plan: $10,000
Probation Carpet and Paint: $110,000
Capital Improvements Plan (CIP) Administration: $420,000
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Improvements Phase I:
$135,800.
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for Fund 404 projects totals
$10,110,101 for the following projects:
New Juvenile Hall - continue design and environmental phase:
$5,843,666
Jail Housing Addition - complete design and construction
documents: $3,225,135.
Las Lomas Drainage - complete design and environmental phases:
$678,500.
Las Lomas Lighting - continue to work with PG&E for design and
installation services: $54,800.
Schilling Facilities Utilization Program - $308,000.
County Disposal Sites:
Continued compliance with State regulations and increased
monitoring requirements related to the new Industrial General
Storm Water Permit (affecting Bradley, North Shore Lake San
Antonio, and San Ardo sites.
Seek funding to complete extensive repairs to the San Ardo landfill
cover to meet regulatory requirements in the amount of $220,000.
Project completion date required before the 2015-16 rainy season
and preparation of the Wet Weather Preparedness Report.Review all PG&E bills for County owned facilities and verify
correct rate structure is applied.
Initiate program to review power consumption in County owned
facilities to verify operations are within industry standards for
efficiency.
Complete integration of newly acquired facilities at Schilling Place
into the County facility management program, including ongoing
operations and maintenance, security and building controls.
Courier:
Continue to add stops as needed at Schilling Place locations;
review and adjust routes and stops to accommodate Schilling Place
additions and time allotments; complete new courier training in
coverage of all routes. Cross train all couriers in mail procedures to
enhance coverage.
Mail:
Maintain daily postage reconciliation variance to less than $1.00.
Achieve a monthly average of 65% presorted mail of total pieces
mailed. Presorted mail is discounted at $0.10 per piece, at average
yearly volume of 800,000 pieces.
Grounds:
Continue coverage of Fort Ord Habitat Reserve relative to trash
control, including regular inspection of areas where illegal dumping
occurs frequently.
Complete weed abatement control schedule, including fuel
management program related to fire hazards.
Continue irrigation water conservation program, while maintaining
acceptable appearance and landscape conditioning. Conservation
activity shall be reported as a component of utility management.
Utilities:
Actively participate in the Monterey County Climate Action Plan
(MCAP) to further coordinate and expand energy efficiency and
conservation efforts, including implementation of measures to
achieve the projected reduction of Greenhouse Gas (GHG)
emission by 15% within 5 years. During this fiscal year seven
additional building efficiency projects are scheduled for
completion, including installation of Building Energy Management
Systems at the Correctional Facility and Public Safety Building, and,
Lighting Retrofit projects at the Youth Center, Agricultural
Commissioner HQ, Animal Shelter, and Laurel Yard Facilities.
Implement a Utility Management Program to provide analysis of
electricity, gas and water consumption and building performance.
Continue scheduled progress on five-year EEM plan.
Real Property:
Complete hiring process to fully staff Real Property Unit to further
increase responsiveness and accountability, including more
accurate allocation of property insurance charges.
Process lease renewals prior to expiration.
Facility Maintenance Projects:
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for Fund 401 totals
$6,288,730 and includes the following projects:
Complete Facility Assessment for County-owned buildings:
$70,000.
Nuisance Abatement Revolving Fund: $200,000.
Complete the following Scheduled Maintenance Projects:
$700,000.
1171 San Miguel Canyon-Fuel Station Canopy at Public Works
Yard.
1200 Aguajito/Courthouse-Repairs to Building Joints to Prevent
Water Intrusion.
1292 Olympia Avenue, Seaside - New Roof.
Laurel Yard - Security Upgrades entry/exit CCTV.
Laurel Yard - Roof Repairs or Replacement.
Laurel Yard - Backup Generator.
Unscheduled Maintenance: $799,685.
Use funding to complete repairs, remediation, and other
unscheduled projects to maintain health and safety within County
facilities and grounds and to prevent risk or loss due to damaged or
deficient building or site conditions.
Complete ADA Improvements at the Porter Vallejo Mansion:
$129,900.
Complete soil remediation and construct new San Lucas Library:
$788,377.
Seaside Library: $313,482.
Complete elevator modernization at 1200 Aquajito/Courthouse:
$278,713.
Complete Energy Efficiency Projects - Municipal Climate Action
Plan (MCAP) Phase II: $1,000,000.
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Improvements Phase II:
$200,000.
Project Improvements: $1,000,000.
In addition to the above projects, the FY 2015-16 Budget includes
an operating transfer out of $808,573 to fund increased service
levels and expanding requirements in the Real Property Unit 8183.
Budgeted revenues for Fund 401 include: Investment Income of
$6,598, an Operating Transfer In of $600,000 from Fund 402, an
Operating Transfer in from the Library of $685,616 for the San
Lucas Library, $139,747 from the AOC for the local Courts' share of
costs for the Monterey Courthouse Elevator project, $232,251 in
Grant reimbursements and $3,274,667 from Departmental charges
for the FY 2015-16 Building Use Allowance.Litter & Environmental Control:
Issue a Request for Proposal for NPDES Street Sweeping services to
determine if efficiencies can be gained by contracting this service
out.
Continue working with Environmental Health to provide education
and outreach about the impact to the environment of illegal
dumping.
Construction Projects:
River Road Delineation - Complete Construction.
River Road Overlay - Complete Construction.
Nacimiento Lake Drive Bridge Replacement - Acquire right-of-way,
and complete Design.
Peach Tree Road Bridge Replacement -Relocate utilities and begin
project construction.
Davis Road Bridge Replacement - Continue efforts to complete
Environmental Impact Report and begin final design phase.
Highway 1 Climbing Lane - Acquire right-of-way, relocate utilities,
and complete 95% design.
Highway 68/Corral de Tierra Intersection Improvement - Acquire
right-of-way and complete Design.
Las Lomas Drainage - Complete Construction.
Las Lomas Street Lighting - Install 112 new streetlights on existing
utility poles.
Robinson Canyon Road Slip out - Complete Design, Construction
pending funding.
Moss Landing Underground Utility District 20A - Complete
construction of mainline joint trench and service conversions of 54
private properties.
Monterey Bay Sanctuary Scenic Trail - Acquire right-of-way,
relocate utilities and complete 95% Design.
Castroville Bicycle/Pedestrian Path Railroad Crossing - Acquire
right-of-way, relocate utilities and complete Design.
Johnson Canyon Landfill Road Improvements - Seek funds to fully
fund project and complete agreement with Salinas Valley Solid
Waste Authority.
Gloria, Iverson & Johnson Canyon Road Reconstruction -
Reconstruction, grinding, and paving of existing pavement with hot
mix asphalt and placement of reinforcing fabric.
Gonzales River Road Bridge Superstructure Replacement - Initiate
preliminary design and environmental phase.
Robinson Canyon Road Bridge Scour Repair - Initiate preliminary
design and environmental phase.
Bradley Road Bridge Scour Repair - Initiate preliminary design and
environmental phase.
Hartnell Road Bridge Replacement - Initiate preliminary design
and environmental phase.
Johnson Road Bridge Replacement - Initiate preliminary design and
environmental phase.
Salinas Road Left-Turn Channelization - Execute a Cooperative
Agreement between Monterey County and California State
Department of Transportation.
Roads & Bridges Maintenance:
Maintain transportation infrastructure while absorbing a 25%
reduction in Gas Tax funding from the State. Gas Tax is the single
largest source of funding for road maintenance and this reduction
will equate to a loss of $3.1M in FY15-16.
Chip seal 21.6 miles of County roadways and repair 9.3 miles of
road in preparation for the following fiscal year's chip seal.
Manage Carmel Lagoon flood including the placement of a
sandbag berm around low-lying homes. Monitoring and
mechanical management of water levels in the Lagoon to reduce
flood potential.
Perform treatments and maintenance on Coast Road per
settlement agreement.
Develop improved version of the Annual Road Maintenance Plan
and track/report work progression by Supervisorial District.
Development Services:
Continue supporting the RMA efforts in implementing centralized
permit services.
Adoption of the Carmel Valley Traffic Impact Fee Program.
Adoption of the countywide Traffic Impact Fee Program.
Update Title 12, Vehicles and Traffic, of the Monterey County
Code.
Update Title 14, Streets, Sidewalks, and Public Places, of the
Monterey County Code.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes
appropriations of $227,067,977, an increase of $56,184,498 from
the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget. Approximately $31 million of the
growth is attributed to enhanced capacity in Behavioral Health and
Clinic Services in the form of increased County staff and funding
levels of contracted providers to better serve the needs of the
community due to the implementation of the Affordable Care Act
(ACA). Accounting changes implemented at the latter part of FY
2014-15 for 1991 and 2011 Realignment funds represent
approximately $25 million of the remaining growth.
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes creation of a new
budget unit for 1991 Mental Health Realignment (HEA015-8410)
and 2011 Behavioral Health Realignment (HEA016-8410) to assure
proper accounting for these monies. As of FY 2012-13 these funds
were recognized directly into Fund 023 but upon further review by
the County Auditor-Controller's Office, the recognition and
claiming process of these apportionments was changed.
The Recommended Budget is financed by $213,831,868 in
revenues, $9,486,283 in prior year fund balance, and $3,749,824 in
General Fund Contribution (GFC). The FY 2015-16 Recommended
Budget includes 1,025.78 Full Time Employees (FTE), an increase
of 110.21 positions from FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget. The increase
in positions is in preparation for the expansion of programs to meet
community needs. These positions are fully funded by outside
funding sources. Additional positions added are as follows: Health
Administration (14.0 FTE) for expanded Health in All Policy efforts
and centralization of Information System services; Animal Services
(1.0 FTE) for expanded field services and more effective
supervision of field and clinic operations; Behavioral Health (70.97
FTE) for expanded behavioral health services; Clinic Services
(20.50 FTE) for expanded primary care services; Environmental
Health (2.0 FTE) for implementation of and fiscal management of

programs; Emergency Medical Services (1.0 FTE) for development
and monitoring of pre-hospital policies; and Public Health (0.75
FTE) for support of its Maternal, Child, and Adolescent Health
program.
Budget Impacts
CLINIC SERVICES: Post implementation of the Affordable Care
Act in January 2014, an additional 40,679 residents were enrolled
into Medi-Cal Managed Care. This, coupled with the newly insured
through the Covered California, has created a huge demand for
access to primary care services in our County clinics.
Construction of new facilities is critical in order to meet the
increased demand for services in a manner that meets regulatory
criteria for quality, access and patient satisfaction. Planning for
new clinic construction and expansion is in process to serve
communities in Salinas and Seaside. The new Laurel Family
Practice Clinic, Natividad Medical Center Family Medicine
Residency teaching clinic, will open up in July 2015, increasing
from 14 to 37 exam rooms, thus greatly increasing patient access
for primary care and emergency department diversion services.
Under a lease agreement with Community Hospital Properties,
construction for a new 18,000 square foot clinic in Seaside is
expected to commence in October 2015 with completion in FY
2017. Staff will continue to explore options for expanding services
in the Alisal, East Salinas community.
The Bureau continues to work with other safety net providers to
provide additional primary care capacity for these newly insured
patients.
CLINIC SERVICES/BEHAVIORAL HEALTH: Mental health was
recently identified as one of the primary cost drivers in the Medi-
Cal system in California. This year, the Clinic Services and
Behavioral Health Bureaus will implement a coordinated IMPACT
Model of Care designed to accommodate patients with mental
health diagnoses in the most appropriate settings. Clinic Services
will be remodeling existing space to accommodate staffing for
increased services for patients with mild to moderate mental health
diagnoses.Finalize implementation of the Health Department's Strategic Plan
(2011-15) to achieve health outcomes for Monterey County
residents focusing on development of policies that promote healthy
behaviors.
Develop a Health Department Workforce Development Plan to
'grow your own' in partnership with local educational institutions.
Finalize the Health Department quality improvement plan and
maintain ongoing quality improvement processes across the
Department and within each Bureau.
Review and update the Health Department Strategic Plan for 2016-
2020.
Integrate the bilingual Health Department website with the new
countywide website to ensure immediate access to current
information by the public.
Pending Issues
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH: The Health Department is attempting to
address the dramatic shortage of behavioral health providers in the
County, particularly in the South County region, through
expansion of County staff and increased funding levels for
contracted providers. As a result, the FY 2015-16 Recommended
Budget for Behavioral Health Fund 023 includes utilization of $8.5
million of fund balance which is not sustainable in future years.
The Department strives to appropriately train staff and contracted
providers to maximize the level of Federal Financial Participation,
Federal revenues.
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH/CLINIC SERVICES/PUBLIC HEALTH:
With the Affordable Care Act, counties will continue to be
responsible for providing behavioral health, public health and
health services to indigent adults without private or public health
care insurance coverage. Based on recent reports, Monterey
County has a high percentage of persons, 13.5% of the population,
who do not qualify for either Medicaid (Medi-Cal) or subsidized
health insurance due to documentation status. Under Obama's
Executive Action on Immigration, individuals that qualify to legally
work in the United States, will not be eligible for Medicaid or
health care coverage subsidies but they may be eligible for
employer sponsored health care coverage. California Senator Lara
introduced SB 1005 Health Care for All Act last fiscal year to
provide health care coverage to California's remaining uninsured by
expanding Medi-Cal and creating a new health exchange where the
undocumented can purchase coverage funded with State funds.
Fiscal impacts as yet are unknown. Locally, an option to fund health
care coverage for individuals not otherwise eligible for Medi-Cal or
health care coverage subsidies could be explored.
CLINIC SERVICES: There are several pending issues related to
increasing access for both physical and mental health services in
the outpatient primary care setting. Monterey County added
40,679 residents into Medi-Cal Managed Care since January 2014.
This, coupled with the newly insured through the Covered
California, has created a huge demand for access to primary care
services in our County clinics.
Construction of new facilities is critical in order to meet the
increased demand for services in a manner that meets regulatory
criteria for quality, access and patient satisfaction. Planning for
new clinic construction and expansion is in process to serve
communities in Salinas and Seaside. The new Laurel Family
Practice Clinic, Natividad Medical Center Family Medicine
Residency teaching clinic, will open up in July 2016, increasing
capacity from 14 to 37 exam rooms, thus greatly increasing patient
access for primary care and emergency department diversion
services. Under a lease agreement with Community Hospital
Properties, construction for a new 18,000 square feet clinic in
Seaside is expected to commence in October 2015 with completion


slated for FY 2017. Staff will continue to explore options for
expanding services in the Alisal, East Salinas community.
Mental Health was recently identified as one of the primary cost
drivers in the Medi-Cal system in California. This year the Clinic
Services and Behavioral Health Bureaus will implement a
coordinated IMPACT Model of Care designed to accommodate
patients with mental health diagnoses in the most appropriate
settings. Clinic Services will be remodeling existing space to
accommodate staffing for increased services for patients with mild
to moderate mental health diagnoses.
Pending issues related to payment reform: The Monterey County
Clinics are participating in Phase 1 of Capitation Pilot
Preparedness Program (CP3), a 3 year pilot program developed in
partnership with the Department of Health Care Services, the
California Primary Care Association, the California Association of
Public Hospitals and the Safety Net Institute to reform Federally
Qualified Health Center (FQHC) payment and service delivery
modules, tentatively effective July 2016. In March 2015, Clinic
Services entered into a capitation (per member per month
payment) arrangement with Central California Alliance for Health
in anticipation of payment reform and to improve upfront cash
flow. CP3 is currently in the process of developing a new capitation
payment model that would involve all FQHC payment to go
through the local Managed Care Medi-Cal Plan. This would
replace the traditional Fee for Service, per visit payment model
where payment is contingent on a face-to-face visit with a medical
provider. The development process includes extending the
definition of a patient visit, or touch, to potentially include, for
example, texting, wireless monitoring, eConsults, group visits, and
face-to-face visits with providers who are currently not
reimbursable (e.g. Nurses). This is critical as clinics will have to
document patient engagement in care delivery and will also be held
accountable for improving patient health outcomes. The pilot
would fail if health outcomes are not improved or if clinics cannot
document that they are still seeing and engaging patients in care.
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH: The continued drought is of
primary concern due to diminishing availability of water not only
for household consumer use but also its impact on the agricultural,
food, pool, spa and hospitality industries, as well as water systems
and wells. This will remain on the forefront for 2016.
Stricter State regulations per AB 885 for Onsite Wastewater
Treatment Systems (OWTS) could mandate significant changes to
our current OWTS program, as well as to certain Drinking Water
Protection Services program procedures. The impact of
implementing the County General Plan (GPU) 2010 will continue
to involve a significant amount of staff time to create and update
ordinances and implement GPU policy.
The State Water Resources Control Board has recently adopted a
standard for hexavalent chromium, which has affected several
water systems since their water does not meet the new standard.
Efforts to assist water system operators in addressing nitrate and
arsenic contamination in water systems serving communities,
including Disadvantaged Communities, within Monterey County
are ongoing.
Year 2015 brought changes to spa and pool regulations that affect
cyanuric acid levels, free chlorine levels, a new maximum pH of 7.8
and recording of fecal/blood contamination occurrences, a record
of which must be kept on site. Staff have reviewed and revised
procedures to assure compliance with new regulations.
The Reusable Bag Ordinance for the unincorporated areas of the
County that prohibits the use of single-use carryout bags was
approved in August 2014 and implemented in March 2015. The
goal of the Ordinance is to promote a shift to reusable shopping
bags to protect the environment and to reduce the amount of litter
that enters the storm drain and local waterways. Staff conducted a
successful bilingual, multi-media outreach campaign targeting the
general public as well as retailers affected by the Ordinance.
In December 2014, an ordinance was passed limiting the number of
roosters that can be kept without a permit to less than five in the
unincorporated areas of Monterey County. Efforts continue to
establish an illegal dumping ordinance by 2016.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES (EMS): Due to ongoing
discussions at State level to utilize the Maddy Fund as a source of
revenue for the State budget deficit, there may be a loss of revenue
to the EMS Agency in the amount of approximately $229,000 and a
loss to local hospitals and Emergency Department Physician
groups of $933,750. In addition, the Emergency Medical Care
Committee may recommend changes to the EMS system that may
impact EMS expenditures.
Policy Considerations
HEALTH REALIGNMENT: Over the past couple of fiscal years,
there has been a major shift in the amount of Health Realignment
resources being allocated to inmate medical care in our County.
The Health Department embraces the use of Health Realignment
resources for primary prevention efforts and early intervention
strategies to reduce the number of individuals being incarcerated as
opposed to using them for inmate medical care services.

Complete 80% of routine maintenance requests within five days
utilizing the online work order system that captures comprehensive
reporting.
Participate in the customization of a new online work order system
for facility, information technology and human resources requests
in partnership with County Information Technology Department.
Support Behavioral Health and Clinic Services efforts to establish
additional/replacement facilities to assure continued provision of
critical services.
Maintain 99.99% uptime on Department technology systems.
Continue efforts to expand data exchange and sharing through
medical records systems with community based Health
Information Exchanges, and orders/results interfaces with
laboratory and radiology systems.
Reduce the vacancy rate to an average of 10%.
Prepare 90% of annual performance evaluations in a timely manner.
Temporarily accommodate 90% of employees with industrial
injuries, either in the employee's current position or with other
work.
Develop opportunities for aligning Health Department programs
with Strategic Plan Initiatives.
Submit final documentation for Public Health Accreditation
consideration.
Finalize development and delivery of short quality improvement
and accreditation-related training videos for Health Department
staff.
Increase staff and community knowledge of health equity and
health empowerment through trainings, seminars, and other
forums.
Continue to conduct quality improvement (QI) trainings for staff
and support establishment of QI teams.
Train QI team members on how to conduct performance
improvement projects using the Plan, Do, Check, Act method.
Evaluated the existing electronic medical records to identify a
unified tool to enable efficiency, patient/client accessibility, and
collaboration/integration with other agencies.
Finalize implementation of Health Department and County
Wellness Sharepoint sites.
Upgrade Health Department data storage infrastructure and
implement a replacement plan.
Upgrade proprietary applications to most current version
supported by County Information Technology (IT) infrastructure
and network.
Incorporate Health IT staff provided training to better support
Health Department subscribers.
Streamline IT support and incorporate standard processes/
procedures to enable accountability, transparency, and accessibility.
Enable reliable, automated, and documented data exchange
activities for Behavioral Health, Public Health, Clinic Services,
Environmental Health, and Emergency Medical Services.
Incorporate/implement a health data Security Assessment and
Mitigation Plan for review/approval.
Develop/finalize the Health Department website.
100% of staff will attend annual privacy training.
Develop Facility/Equipment Preventative Maintenance Plan and
schedule.The Recommended Budget for the Department totals $240,771,538
in appropriations, financed by $232,916,513 in program revenue,
and $7,855,025 in General Fund Contribution (GFC). This
represents an increased appropriation of $19,924,783, increased
estimated revenues of $20,315,026 and a decrease of General Fund
Contribution of $390,243 from the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget.
Staff increases were made during FY 2014-15 as follows:10
positions for the In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Program to
implement the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), 1
position for Military and Veterans' Affairs Office (MVAO) to meet
program and outreach needs, and 1 position for new program
requirements in Child Welfare Services. The FY 2015-16
recommendations includes an increase in the program and
administration costs with supporting revenue to offset the increase.
The estimated costs of each division are as follows:
SOCIAL SERVICES OPERATIONS & ADMINISTRATION: This
component, budgeted for in Unit 8262, 8425, and 8464 includes
Community Benefits, Family & Children Services, Aging & Adult
Services, CalWORKs Employment Services, Human Resources,
and Administrative Services. The recommendation includes
appropriations of $114,711,596, revenues of $115,156,457, and a
negative General Fund Contribution of $444,861 which is an
increase of $419,873 in appropriations, an increase of $419,873 in
revenues, with no change in the General Fund Contributions from
the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget.
The FY 2015-16 recommendations include the following position
changes: 4 reallocated positions in Administration and
Community Benefits for data and administrative needs, and 1
position transferred from Budget Unit 8262 to 8259 to meet
program needs.
Significant impacts include increased County share of cost due to
the phase-out of the CalFresh Match Waiver, increased costs in
Enterprise Resource Planning /Information Technology
Department infrastructure, and staff salary increases. These costs
were supported with increased State and Federal allocations
combined with revenues from sales tax realignment.ENTITLEMENT PROGRAMS: Entitlement Programs, budgeted
in Units 8252, 8253, 8254, 8255, 8425, and 8464 include
CalWORKs, General Assistance, In-Home Supportive Services,
and Out-of-Home Care. The Recommended Budget includes
appropriations of $121,214,285, revenues of $113,765,814, and
General Fund Contributions of $7,448,471. This is an increase of
$2,665,422 in appropriations, an increase of $3,090,569 in revenues,
and an decrease of $425,147 in the General Fund Contribution
from the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget.
The significant change in appropriations, revenues, and General
Fund Contributions is due to a 3.5% statutory increase for In-Home
Supportive Services Maintenance of Effort (MOE), and a courtordered
2.28% Cost of Living Adjustment (COLA) on all Foster
Care and Adoption Assistance payments.
OTHER COMMUNITY PROGRAMS: This division includes
Community Action Partnership (8257), IHSS Public Authority
(8259), Area Agency on Aging (8268), and Other Community
Programs (8258). The Recommended Budget includes
appropriations of $3,810,258, revenues of $3,342,015, and General
Fund Contributions of $468,243 which is an increase of $323,643 in
appropriations, $323,739 in revenues, and a decrease of $96 in the
General Fund Contributions from the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget.
The significant change in appropriations and revenues is due to an
increase in State allocations for the Area Agency on Aging and the
Community Action Partnership.
MILITARY AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS OFFICE: The
Recommended Budget includes appropriations of $1,035,399,
revenues of $652,227, and General Fund Contribution of $383,172,
an increase of $226,647 in appropriations, an increase to revenue of
$191,647, and an increase of $35,000 in the General Fund
Contributions from the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget.
The significant change to Military and Veterans' Affairs is
attributed to an increase of $191,647 in appropriations and
revenues to fund the operations related to the Veterans' Resource
Center, and staff salary increases, and $35,000 additional General
Fund Contributions to fund the Homeless Veterans Stand Down.DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES (DSS): Collaborate with
public safety and health partners to reduce youth violence and to
implement the Community Corrections Partnership plan. Work
with the Health Department's Behavioral Health Bureau to increase
therapeutic resources for foster children, youth at risk for out of
home placement and their families. Additionally, the Department
will continue active participation in the County Welfare Directors
Association of California (CWDA) and the American Public
Human Services Association (APHSA) to advocate for increased
regulatory flexibility and funding to meet the needs locally of lowincome
families, individuals, vulnerable children, frail seniors and
individuals living with a disability.
COMMUNITY BENEFITS: Continue work to maximize
enrollment in expanded Medi-Cal eligibility under the Affordable
Care Act. This work includes: outreach to increase customer
access to health insurance through Medi-Cal and nutrition
assistance through CalFresh; continue development of the business
process changes begun with implementation of the CB CARE
Center and the Covered California Regional Call Center; and
recruiting, hiring and training eligibility staff to manage the
increased workload. Review service delivery operations and
support areas, prioritize and implement changes necessary to
improve the customer service experience and efficiency of work. At
the same time the Department will continue implementing the
many legislatively driven changes and protocols in CalFresh,
CalWORKs, and Medi-Cal that occur annually.FAMILY AND CHILDREN'S SERVICES (FCS): The Department
completed its five-year Systems Improvement Plan. This plan lays
out the framework for strengthening the Department's continuous
quality improvement efforts and development of data tools to
support decision-making. It's outcome focus is directed towards
continuing low rates of recurrence of maltreatment experienced by
children, reunification of families within 12 months when safe to do
so, improved placement stability for children in care at 2 years, and
adoption within 12 months of children being eligible. Amendments
to the plan will be made upon the State's implementation of the
new Federal measures. This plan is an important component of the
Child Welfare Continuous Quality Improvement System for Family
and Children's Services. Additionally, Family and Children's
Services will continue its work with Children's Behavioral Health to
secure the intensive mental health services required under the
Katie A settlement agreement as the State will continue its
monitoring of mental health services for our foster youth and
families.
CALWORKS EMPLOYMENT SERVICES: Continue to increase
the Federally defined work participation rate (WPR) through:
continued emphasis on intensive case management activities with
CalWORKs participants to include enhanced job search skill
building, increased subsidized employment opportunities to
enhance specific job skills, continued implementation of the Family
Stabilization component to assist families in deep crisis to remove
barriers to self-sufficiency.
AGING AND ADULT SERVICES: The Department is working
internally and with community stakeholders to build an Adult and
Disability Resources Connection which is a service delivery model
that can support frail seniors and individuals with disability in
navigating the health and social supports necessary to sustain
healthy independence.
Pending Issues
CHILD WELFARE SERVICES (CWS): DSS proposed budget
augmentations include a request for additional funding to support
a therapeutic visitation center for parents, children and foster
caregivers. A therapeutic visitation center offers an environment
and services to help parents to develop the skills necessary to care
for their children. This model not only helps more families to
reunify but also ensures that children are safer when they are
reunified with their parents. A secondary value of the visitation
center is to allow the county to continue accepting donations that
help families by giving the Branch a location to store and distribute
items that families can use to increase stability in the home.
HOMELESS SERVICES: The number of homeless adults and
families continues to be a community concern. Ongoing efforts to
address this issue continue. In FY 2014-15, DSS received an
allocation from the State to establish a Housing Support Program
for CalWORKs eligibile families. It is anticipated that this program
will be funded again in FY 2015-16. The biggest challenge to
success faced by the CalWORKs Housing Support Program is the
availability of rental units affordable to CalWORKs recipients even
with a rental subsidy that can pay all but a nominal portion of the
family's rent. Additionally, with the extension of support for youth
who age out of the foster care system up until their 21st birthday,
significant inroads have been made preventing foster youth
homelessness. Discussions continue with the Lead Me Home effort
to end homelessness and a variety of partners from other County
departments and cities.
MEDI-CAL/ACA: Implementation and enrollment activities of the
Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA) required major adjustments in
local business practices and resulted in an influx of new customers.
As of April 2015, there were 142,454 residents enrolled in Medi-Cal
by DSS. This is a 20% increase from April 2014 and a 70% increase
from April 2013. State allocations to fully fund the workload
associated with enrollment and renewals of eligibility are pending
release of the Governor's May Revise. Additionally there are still a
number of technical challenges with the Statewide CalHEERS
system that contains the automated rules engine for expanded
Medi-Cal under the ACA. The lack of a fully functioning
automated system presents challenges for the eligibility staff who
have to perform manual workarounds to provide the services to
customers. The roadmap for systems fixes does not finish
addressing needed technical corrections for two years.
MATCH WAIVER: The CalFresh Match Waiver that began during
the economic downturn will begin to be phased out in FY 2015-16.
In FY 2015-16, otherwise unused portions of a County's CalFresh
allocation will offset 75% of the County's 15% match requirement.
In FY 2016-17, the match waiver will be reduced to 50% and in FY
2017-18 to 25%.
IN HOME SUPPORT SERVICES (IHSS): Federal regulations to
require compensation for overtime worked by home care providers
were suspended in the hours before implementation as a result of a
Federal court injunction. The Federal Department of Labor is
appealing the injunction and the California legislature is
considering adopting overtime rules in IHSS to mirror the Federal
regulations that were overturned. Since the County share of IHSS
program is established by a maintenance of effort requirement that
is fixed with an annual 3.5% inflationary index, adoption of State
overtime regulations or a successful appeal by the Department of
Labor will not increase local costs. The fixed maintenance of effort
mandate, however, does not apply to negotiated salary increases.
The IHSS Public Authority is currently in negotiations with Service
Employees International Union (SEIU) United Long Term Care
Workers (ULTCW) for a successor to the Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) that expired on June 30, 2014. Any increase
in wage or benefit levels will increase County General Fund
contributions.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 County Library Recommended
Budget appropriations increased by $268,866, approximately 3%
increase over the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget. Salaries and
Benefits increased by $181,777, approximately 3% increase over FY
2014-15.
Services and supplies increased by $137,089, approximately 6.0%
increase over FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget. This was due to
significant increases in cleaning and janitorial services, building
maintenance, and general insurance liability costs which are
County negotiated budget line items. Rents and leases of buildings
and rents and lease of equipments also increased due to renewals of
leases, pricing of which is based on consumer index rates
guidelines.
Temporary help services significantly decreased by $82,386,
approximately 41% decrease over FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget. The
decrease can be attributed to grant funding of projects requiring
temporary staffing and strategic staffing to maximize availability of
staff assigned to locations.
The County Library continues to actively seek alternatives and
diversified sources of funding to supplement its budget in order to
fill the ongoing gap between fiscal resources and community needs.
The majority of the County Library's budget goes to paying staff
salaries, maintaining multiple locations, and shared County costs.
The Library staffing levels are tight, but the funds available for
books, computers and other library materials are very limited. The
County Library collaborates with various Friends of the Library
groups and the Foundation for Monterey County Free Libraries on
fundraising events, grant applications, book sales and various
outreach efforts to increase their funding contributions.
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget Revenue is projected to
increase over FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget by $385,653 or 1.5%.
This is due to increases occurring in Property Tax Revenue, as well
as a projected refunds from the Redevelopment Property Tax Trust
Fund.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget provides for maintaining Library
Services at basic levels for the FY 2015-16.Demand for library services remain high because the prolonged
economic challenges and because of lack of alternative resources in
many of the communities MCFL serves. The majority of MCFL's
budget goes toward maintaining multiple locations and for staff
salaries; resources for the purchase of books, computers and other
library materials remain limited.
Intermittent vacancies have helped the Library meet its balanced
budget goals. The temporary closure of two branches, though
having a negative effect on MCFL's ability to provide services, has
contributed to narrowing the budget gap. However, continued
deferred maintenance contributed to the temporary closure of
these two branches, and have caused concern about basic
conditions of several library facilities.
MCFL continues to seek ways to minimize the imbalance between
revenues and the increased expenditures while simply maintaining
service levels. The change in Redevelopment Agency (RDA)
property tax impacts have resulted in a slight increase in the
property tax income for the Library and in FY 2015-16 MCFL will
cautiously restart the process of exploring new projects and ideas.During FY 2015-16, MCFL will address the Board of Supervisors'
Strategic Initiatives through pursuing the following goals:
Continue to implement the FY 2013-2016 MCFL Strategic Plan
with a focus on equity of services, efficiency, sustainability, and
responding to community needs, including re-evaluating programs
and services, seeking diversified and stable funding sources.
Continue progress on clearing the new San Lucas library site and
commence construction of the new building.
Work with the City of Seaside on improving the Library building,
seek options for replacing the currently closed Parkfield Library,
and investigate long term options for the Carmel Valley Branch to
expanding the Family Place program to other branches.
Follow up on recommendations in the facilities evaluations reports
and continue to seek options for improving library facilities to
respond to community and library service needs.
Explore options for replacing the North County bookmobile.
Continue to grow computer, online and digital resources.
Continue to grow programs for youth and adults including
cultural/arts programs, afterschool homework programs,
conversational English programs, etc.
Pending Issues
MCFL continues the planning and reconstruction of the new San
Lucas Library while continuing to apply for grants and raise further
contributions from Community Donors.
The Parkfield Branch Library is currently closed and a new facility
is needed to adequately serve this remote and isolated community.
MCFL will be exploring options for replacing this building and
providing services to this remote community which has very
limited alternatives for library or other services.
MCFL continues to work hand in hand with the community and
with the Dept. of Public Works to obtain the necessary permits for
the infrastructure of the Parkfield Library.The Recommended Budget for the department totals $551,051 in
appropriations, financed by $133,398 in program revenue and
$417,653 in General Fund Contribution (GFC).
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget for FY 2015-16 covers the fixed
operation needs of the Cooperative Extension. However, due to an
increase in salaries and benefit costs, the baseline budget does not
cover any variable operations costs. Additional augmentation funds
have been requested to cover costs of services and supplies.Promote the economic sustainability of the County's economic
base from the agricultural industry by conducting research to solve
current pest problems. Provide diagnostic services that lead to the
discovery of new diseases that can be stopped before they spread.
Provide anti-bioterrorism diagnostic services for the agricultural
industry. Maintain and enhance the resources of the region by
conducting food safety (E. coli) research for local growing
conditions.
ENOTOMOLOGY RESEARCH PROGRAM: Research on biology
and management of cabbage maggot, thrips, garden symphylan,
springtails and bagrada bug will continue. Continue research on
organic controls of bagrada bug in Brassica crops.
PLANT PATHOLOGY RESEARCH PROGRAM: Continue to
investigate and study the two soilborne strawberry diseases that are
now in Monterey County. Continue surveying, detecting, and
identifying the races of spinach downy mildew. Continue to provide
diagnostic services to all components of the agricultural industry.
Expand the capabilities of our diagnostic lab by adding molecular
testing methods that can detect the DNA of target plant pathogen.
IRRIGATION AND WATER QUALITY RESEARCH PROGRAM:
Increase assistance to growers to improve irrigation and nitrogen
use efficiency. Continue supporting the establishment of a new
California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS)
weather station near Soledad. Assist growers in implementing
practices to improve water quality, such as vegetated ditches and
denitrification bioreactors. Continue trials on assessing the
fertilizer value of background levels of nitrate in ground water.
Expand CropManage online decision support software to
additional commodities produced in Monterey County.
VEGETABLE AND WEED SCIENCE RESEARCH PROGRAM:
Develop information on the depth to which various vegetables
extract nitrate from the soil profile and use this information in
designing fertilization programs. Evaluate efficient nitrogen
fertilization of cool season vegetables to assist growers comply with
the new restrictions on the use of fertilizer by the Regional Water
Quality Control Board. Research computer assisted technologies
that mechanically thin and weed lettuce and make crop production
more efficient and economical. Develop an effective late season
weed control system for cool and warm season vegetables to reduce
weeding costs and safeguard yield.
VITICULTURE RESEARCH PROGRAM: Continue long-term
studies evaluating cultivar clonal selections and rootstocks for their
performance under local conditions. Continue studies to measure
the effects of plant material and cultural practices to promote the
early development and productivity of newly established vineyards.
Continue to evaluate the potential of both endemic and invasive
pest issues in becoming production problems for coastal vineyards.
Improve the quality of life for the County's youth, seniors and
families by training adult volunteers to work directly with youth.
Provide opportunities for youth to become engaged in positive,
research-based activities and develop responsibility and leadership
through community service. Train Master Gardener volunteers
who conduct community enhancement service projects.
Maintain and enhance the natural resources of the County by:
Providing information through classes, workshops, newsletters,
personal consultations and a web-site that leads to the use of softer
or less chemicals for pest control or effective alternatives to
chemical controls. Provide farmers and policy makers unbiased,
research-based information. Develop alternatives to pesticides that
might degrade water quality or air quality.The Recommended Budget for the Department totals $8,798,334 in
appropriations, financed by $7,115,396 in program revenue and
$1,682,938 in General Fund Contribution (GFC). GFC is
recommended to increase by $29,000 for FY 2015-16.
Appropriations are reduced by $351,491 from last fiscal year's
approved budget as a result of reduced program revenue.
The projected revenue in the Fund 452 Parks Resorts decreased
due to the low water levels at the Parks Department's lake
operations. Reduced visitation is anticipated for the 2015 season as
a result of the current extreme drought.
Budget Impacts
In order to achieve a balanced budget for FY 2015-16, the Parks
Department Recommended Budget eliminates six vacant unfunded
and six filled positions in both Fund 001-Parks and Fund 452-Parks
Resorts. This budget also re-assigns seven positions from Lake
Nacimiento and Lake San Antonio to locations in North County.
To lessen the impact of layoffs, capital assets funding of $425,000
was eliminated in Fund 001 Parks. Both staff shortages and lack of
available maintenance budgets continue to impact the
Department's ability to operate at a minimum acceptable standard
as established in the Parks and Recreation profession.
Reduced revenue generated by the Lake operations (452-Parks
Resorts) forces the Department to close down Lake San Antonio.
Although unbudgeted, a baseline level of maintenance and
improvements are still required throughout the park including
water and septic systems. Significant costs needed to operate Lake
Nacimiento are unbudgeted, including peak season temporary
labor, the baseline level of maintenance and improvements, and the
cost of the Invasive Species Protection Program (quagga mussel
inspection).As noted in prior budget submissions, many of the park facilities
and park assets have outlived their usefulness and are serving years
beyond their expected life. The cost to repair or upgrade continues
to rise as maintenance continues to be deferred due to funding
shortages rather than being addressed as the needs become
apparent. Ongoing deferred maintenance has caused years of
compounded facility issues and the cost of unforeseen expenses, or
emergency needs, leads to the depletion of budget appropriations
otherwise slated for annual operating and scheduled maintenance.
There are crucial facility needs without a dedicated funding source,
as well as safety or compliance requirements which will continue to
be paid out of the parks operating budget when legally required.The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for the Parks General Fund
Units totals $5,482,636 in appropriations financed by $3,799,698 in
program revenue and $1,682,938 in General Fund Contribution
(GFC). GFC is recommended to increase by $29,000 from the
previous fiscal year.
Budget Impacts
The Parks Department is experiencing difficulties in maintaining
core services due to lack of revenue. Options to mitigate the lack of
resources may include shifting staff to cover core services,
increasing active recruitment for live-on volunteers and working with the other agencies and County departments that offer
collaborative opportunities.
The Recommended Budget includes the transfer of seven positions
from the Lakes Resort operations to North County parks and
permanently eliminates five unfunded-vacant positions. In order
to balance the budget, the annual appropriations of $425,000 for
capital assets were eliminated. The current level of funding does
not provide the Department with adequate resources to address
capital improvements and deferred maintenance needs.
Implementation of an online reservation system to assist in the
management of park properties would require an additional
$57,150.

Begin work on implementing the Strategic Plan in FY 2015-16,
goals include:
- Prepare interim business plans for each park.
- Collaborate with Public Works and other departments to identify
options to address infrastructure maintenance, replacement, and
development needs.
- Evaluate the Department's organizational structure and modify as
needed to improve reporting relationships, management
effectiveness and communications with staff.
- Improve reporting and analyses of revenues and costs associated
with each park.
Pending Issues
SCRAMP generates revenue from major racing events and track
rentals. Due to SCRAMP's inability to make required payments to
the County, the County retains (beginning in FY 2012-13) the 20%
track rental SCRAMP administration fee and applies it to the
racing events revenue owed to the County. Total revenue from
SCRAMP is budgeted at $409,125 for racing events and $1,858,548
for track rentals. Depending on SCRAMP's ability to maintain
fiscal stability this revenue may be at risk. The Department is
currently reviewing options for repairs being mandated on the
County by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) for erosion that
has occurred at Laguna Seca Recreation Area as part of an
expansion project at the Turn 6 area of the race track about a
decade ago. BLM requires that the repairs be resolved during FY
2015-16. Funding levels for temporary employees have not
increased for years. These employees play a critical role in
tollbooth collections and fill in at peak times. Revenue collection
will continue to be a challenge without additional temporary
employees.
Policy Considerations
The Parks Department budget eliminates capital funding
(historically at $425,000). The Parks Department requests
$277,000 in capital funding for improvements to deferred
maintenance that are identified as critical.
Implementation of Reserve America online reservation system is
incomplete due to the lack of staffing. A full time management
specialist is requested to focus on the implementation. The
management specialist, estimated at $150,000 would be allocated
to Fund 001 - Parks, and Fund 452 - Parks Resorts.
The Parks Department is responsible for patrolling new park
property at Fort Ord; however, no funds have been provided. The
Parks Department requests $50,000 to provide this function.
The Marks Ranch is a Park property which the County maintains
responsibility. The County received a $45,100 grant from the State
of California from the Habitat Conservation Fund to construct a
trail at the park. The Parks Department requests funding the
matching portion of the grant of $7,150, due in FY 2015-16.
Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 expenses are budgeted based on FY 2014-
15 activities through December 2014, annualized for the twelve
month fiscal year. To appropriately reflect expected future
expenditures, annualized amounts are normalized by excluding
one-time events and adjusting for anticipated expenses.
Expenditures for FY 2015-16 are budgeted at $219,342,512, a
$8,500,366 increase over the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget, which is
approximately a 4.0% increase.
Salaries and Employee Benefits are budgeted at $127,823,983, an
increase of $7,756,722 over the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget, which
represents an approximately 6.5% increase. The main reasons for
the increases are: step rate increases for several bargaining groups,
insurance costs, new positions for Trauma Level II designation, an
expanding Family Practice Residency Program, increasing quality
assurance resources, additional components of electronic health
records implementation, and other support positions. Additionally,
to fill critical specialties and expand services, there will be an
increase in employed and contracted physicians, primarily in
Trauma Level II.
Services and Supplies increased by $9,803,009 from the FY 2014-15
Adopted Budget, which represents an approximately 15.4%
increase. The main drivers for the increases in expenses are:
healthcare IT systems maintenance and licensing, rising
pharmaceutical drug costs, healthcare reform compliance costs,
trauma program, and increasing utilities costs.
Capital Assets will decrease by $8,808,934 below the FY 2014-15
Adopted Budget, an approximately 50.2% decrease. The $8,732,033
budget is comprised of building construction/renovation totaling
$2,514,935, medical equipment totaling $882,961, equipment
replacement totaling $801,720, and information technology
totaling $4,532,417.
FY 2015-16 Total Available Financing revenues are budgeted at
$219,310,611, a $25,028,997 increase (12.9%) over FY 2014-15
Adopted Budget. Fees & services are budgeted at $181,749,884, an
increase of $22,250,270 from the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget of
$159,499,614, an approximately 14.0% increase. The increase is due
to Medicaid expansion through Covered California, new enrollees
in Medi-Cal Managed Care, reimbursement rate increases from

Central Coast Alliance for Health (CCAH), and revenue from
trauma services.
Intergovernmental Revenues are budgeted at $37,560,727; a
$2,778,727 increase at approximately 8% compared to the FY 2014-
15 Adopted Budget. The majority of the increase is due to
Affordable Care Act mandated payments for Medi-Cal Managed
Care adult expansion.
Fund Balance use is budgeted at $31,901, a $16,528,631 decrease
compared to the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget, an approximately
99.8% decrease. The main driver for the decrease is a slightly higher
revenue growth over expenditure growth, which includes a
decrease in Capital Projects for Building and Improvements,
Information Technology and Medical Equipment.
Budget Impacts
Impact on revenues and expenditures based on the population
transition from uninsured to Covered California and a full year of
Trauma Level II services.

Successfully meet the new Medicaid Section 1115 Waiver first year
performance requirements which bases Federal funding on
performance results. This will be the third five-year Waiver
pending State and Federal approval.
Achieve 100% compliance on The Joint Commission quality of care
core measures.
Reduce inpatient mortality, 30-day unplanned readmission, and
infection rates through the implementation of process
improvements based on best practices.
Implement strategies to reduce frequency of patient falls.
Deploy Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers
and Systems (HCAHPS) patient satisfaction improvement plan
which focuses on cultivating a healing environment.
Achieve Leapfrog Survey "A" rating for quality/patient satisfaction.
Continue to enhance Language Access Services to ensure that all
Limited English Proficiency patients have access to qualified
medical interpreter services.
Complete bed capacity plan for future growth by evaluating
Medical/Surgical, Intensive Care Unit (ICU), Intermediate Care
Unit, Women & Children's services options.
Continue nursing unit refurbishment projects focusing on trauma
continuum of care enhancements.
Install new nurse call system with communication features to
improve patient satisfaction and timeliness of care.
Install TV/cable enhancements in patient rooms.
Implement Security improvement plan.
Begin construction of Radiology Modernization Project, Radiology
Department facility and equipment enhancements.
Complete Emergency Department Rapid Medical Evaluation
(RME) Remodel Project.
Implement and complete the Hospital Way Finding Signage System
project for interior signage.
Implement new employee satisfaction/culture of safety survey.
Implement new clinical documentation system to streamline
documentation and enhance caregiver direct time with patients.
Continue NMC/Health Department clinics integration activities
including improved operations, access to care, space planning, and
new Medicaid Section 1115 Waiver implementation.
Improve access to targeted specialty care.
Review and select an ambulatory care electronic medical record
(EMR) system for physician and clinic offices.
Implement Meditech Operating Room (ORM) module.
Implement Electronic Health Record (EHR) for Rehabilitation
Therapy Services.
Complete and implement data disaster recovery plan.
Implement Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
ICD-10 (International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision) as
required for everyone covered by the Health Insurance Portability
Accountability Act (HIPPA). The ICD-10 is used by physicians and
other health care providers to classify and code all diagnoses,
symptoms and procedures recorded in conjunction with hospital
care.
Improve staff recruitment/retention resulting in reduction of
registry/agency staffing.
Achieve growth goals in terms of volume and revenue for key
clinical services.
Achieve Productive Full Time Equivalents (FTEs) per adjusted
occupied beds productivity goals.
Maintain financial stability.