The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget for the CAO's
Departmental section is $7,544,358, an increase of $226,057, or
3.1%. Reflected in this budget is a $52,356, or 0.7%, increase in
Salaries & Benefits which is the net effect of re-establishing the
Assistant County Administrative Officer position that was
eliminated in FY 2011-12; the addition of a Management Analyst
III position approved by the Board in FY 2011-12 to manage the
development and implementation of the countywide performance
management program; the net addition of one Director of Human
Resources position, 0.75 FTE Principal Personnel Analyst position
and two Personnel Technician-Confidential positions and deletion
of one Assistant County Administrative Officer position, two
Supervising Personnel Analyst position, one Principal Compliance
Analyst position, one Supervising Clerk-Confidential position and
one Senior Secretary-Confidential position in the Human
Resources Division.
Services and Supplies decreased by $648,799, or 32.2%, due to a
decrease in one-time Non-Capital Equipment costs and decreases
to Other Professional & Special Services for one-time professional
service contracts related to the 2010 Redistricting Plan. Other
Charges were reduced by $822,500, or 30.9%, primarily due to
lower workers compensation and general liability costs charged out
to County departments by the Risk Management Division.
ADMINISTRATION & FINANCE: The FY 2012-13
Recommended Budget for the Administration & Finance Division
is $1,246,761, an expenditure increase of $147,665, or 13.4%. The
increase reflects the net increased Salaries & Benefits costs to reestablish
the Assistant County Administrative Officer position and
reduced PERS retirement and flexible benefit plan costs.
BUDGET & ANALYSIS: The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget
for the Budget & Analysis Division is $1,333,222, an expenditure
increase of $14,595, or 1.1%. These additional costs reflect
increased workers compensation charges.
CONTRACTS/PURCHASING: The FY 2012-13 Recommended
Budget for the Contracts/Purchasing Division totals $747,206, a
reduction of $67,722, or 8.3%. The reduction reflects decreased
PERS retirement costs, decreased workers compensation charges,
and services and supplies reductions.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AND LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS: The
FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget for the Intergovernmental and
Legislative Affairs (IGLA) Division totals $991,401. Salaries and
benefits increased $92,915 with the addition of a Management
Analyst III position during FY 2011-12 to manage the development
and implementation of a countywide performance measurement
program. This cost was offset by a reduction of $93,491 to services
and supplies accounts to meet the GFC target.
RISK MANAGEMENT: Risk Management administers the
General Liability and Workers' Compensation programs on a
countywide basis. Costs for this unit totals $1,100,099, an
expenditure decrease of $13,787 from the FY 2011-12 Adopted
Budget. These costs are offset by funding from the related internal
service funds (ISFs). Effective March 24, 2012, the Risk
Management Division was transferred to the County Counsel
Department. This change is also noted under each of the affected
unit's (General Liability and Workers' Compensation) Description
sections. Risk Management positions transferred to the Office of
the County Counsel include one Senior Risk & Benefits Analyst,
one Principal Risk & Benefits Analyst, one Management Analyst II,
one Safety Officer, one Workers Compensation Manager, one
Ergonomics Manager, one Senior Secretary-Confidential and one
Principal Compliance Analyst that was deleted in FY 2011-12.
HUMAN RESOURCES: Effective March 24, 2012, the Human
Resources and Benefits Divisions became part of a new Human
Resources Department. The affected units are: Central Human
Resources, Employee Relations, County Training, Compliance, and
Employee Benefits. This change is noted under each of the affected
unit's Description sections.
The FY 2012 -13 Recommended Budget for the newly formed
Human Resources (HR) Department, including Employee
Relations, HR, County Training, and Employee Benefits total
$2,469,389, an increase of $479,665. Revenues are estimated to
remain flat at $2,350, but GFC increased $479,815 to $2,467,039 or
24.1%. The increase in GFC is due to a change in funding for the
Benefits Unit from reimbursement through department allocations
to total GFC of $580,646. The remaining HR Division
departmental units experienced a 5.1% reduction in GFC totaling
$100,981. Budgeted appropriations, revenues and GFC will be
transferred to the new Department units on 7/1/12.
Position changes during FY 2011-12 included the addition of 1.75
Principal Personnel Analyst positions for the HR Centralization
project, reallocation of one Supervising Personnel Analyst to one
Principal Personnel Analyst, reallocation of one Assistant County
Administrative Officer to one Director of Human Resources,
reallocation of one Supervising Clerk-Confidential and one Senior
Secretary-Confidential to two Personnel Technician-Confidential
positions. The Division also deleted one Supervising Personnel
Analyst and reclassified one Principal Personnel Analyst to one
Associate Personnel Analyst in order to meet the GFC target for FY
2012-13.
OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES (OES): The FY 2012-13
Recommended Budget for the Office of Emergency Services (OES)
totals $1,176,379, reflecting a $72,430, or 6.6%, increase from the
prior year. The increase reflects additional funding received for the
current and prior year for Homeland Security Grant projects that
are to be completed within FY 2012-13. During FY 2011-12, 0.75
FTE Emergency Services Planner position was restored by Board
action. This budget is subject to change based on the approval of
the Homeland Grant Authority.
ADMINISTRATION: Reduced PERS retirement costs and flexible
benefit plan expenses in the Administration & Finance unit were
key factors in helping this unit meet its General Fund Contribution
(GFC) target.
BUDGET AND ANALYSIS: Reductions in data processing
services charges in the Budget & Analysis unit was the most
significant factor in helping this unit meet its GFC target.
CONTRACTS/PURCHASING: Reductions in PERS costs,
workers' compensation charges, and various services & supplies
expenses were the key factors in the Contracts/Purchasing unit's
ability to meet its GFC target.
HUMAN RESOURCES: To meet the Department's GFC target,
one Principal Personnel Analyst and one Supervising Human
Resources Analyst were eliminated and a second Principal
Personnel Analyst was reallocated to an Associate Personnel
Analyst. The elimination and decrease in level of these positions
will result in a lack of sufficient staff to facilitate the HR
Centralization as approved by the Board of Supervisors.
An augmentation request by the Department for $120,000 for
contracted labor relations assistance was funded in 1050_8039
Other General Expenditures.
RISK MANAGEMENT: Effective March 24, 2012, the Risk
Management Division was transferred to the County Counsel
Department.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AND LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS (IGLA):
Reductions in professional services expenses, data processing
services charges, and general liability charges were the main factors
in IGLA's ability to meet its GFC target. A new Management
Analyst III position was approved by the Board in FY 2011-12 in
the IGLA Division to assist in the implementation of the
This program is a high priority for the Board and the CAO in order
for the County, as an organization, to begin identifying, measuring,
and monitoring key performance indicators within departmental
programs and activities to help determine, quantifiably, if desired
outcomes are being achieved.

ADMINISTRATION: Update, develop, and recommend fiscal
policies to assure the financial stability of the County.
Work with departments to produce periodic financial reports and
annual three-year financial forecasts for the Board of Supervisors.
Develop and recommend Board of Supervisors' principles and
strategies for development of the FY 2013-14 Recommended
Budget.
Enhance the Recommended Budget publication to continue to
provide greater transparency and user-friendliness.
CONTRACTS/PURCHASING: Improve management of the
County's vendor insurance requirements by identifying and
implementing new methods for managing insurance documents to
ensure that policies do not inadvertently lapse during the term of
the contract.
Develop performance measures that track major workload
indicators and other performance activities within the Contracts/
Purchasing unit, as well as measurable efficiency and effectiveness
outputs related to these activities.
Continue to work cooperatively with the Auditor-Controller's
Office to establish an e-procurement process geared towards
streamlining selected procurement practices, including the ability
for the County to process vendor payments electronically.
Continue to improve outreach in the area of green procurement, in
accordance with the County's climate-friendly purchasing policy.
HUMAN RESOURCES: Effective March 24, 2012, the Human
Resources and Benefits Divisions became part of a new Human
Resources Department. The affected units are: Central Human
Resources, Employee Relations, County Training, Compliance, and
Employee Benefits. This change is noted under each of the affected
unit's Description sections. See each Unit section for Budget Year
Goals.
RISK MANAGEMENT: Effective March 24, 2012, the Risk
Management Division was transferred to the County Counsel
Department. This change is also noted under each of the affected
unit's (General Liability and Workers' Compensation) Description
sections. See each Unit section for Budget Year Goals
INTERGOVERNMENTAL & LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS: .
Direct preparation and implementation of the County's FY 2012-13
legislative principles, priorities, and platform.Provide legislative analysis and coordinate advocacy services in
support of County legislative priorities and critical County
initiatives.
Direct development and implementation of the County's
performance management program.
Coordinate County and joint agency efforts to secure funding for
anti-gang programs and other critical County initiatives.
Provide high level, responsive media relations.
Provide programming oversight for the County government
channel. Ensure that programming is meeting the needs of both the community and the County organization through the use of a
content review focus group. Ensure County departments are aware
of the low and no-cost aspects of the County government channel
for outreach purposes.
Work with the Board of Supervisors and department heads to
develop and implement performance measures to ensure
implementation of County strategic initiatives, goals, and
objectives.
Work with the Board of Supervisors and department heads to
develop and implement performance measures to ensure
implementation of County strategic intiatives, goals, and
objectives.
Update, develop, and recommend fiscal policies to ensure the
financial stability of the County.
Work with departments to produce periodic financial reports and
the annual Three-Year Financial Forecast.
Develop and recommend Board of Supervisors' principles and
strategies for development of the FY 2012-13 Recommended
Budget.
Enhance the Recommended Budget publication to be more userfriendly
and transparent.
Develop performance measures that track workload and major
activities within this unit, as well as measurable efficiency and
effectiveness outputs related to these activities, and begin reporting
on these measures in the FY 2012-13 budget document.
Achieve the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA)
Distinguished Budget Presentation Award for the third straight
year.

Improve management of the County's vendor insurance
requirements by identifying and implementing new methods for
managing insurance documents to ensure that policies do not
inadvertently lapse during the term of the contract.
Develop performance measures that track major workload
indicators and other performance activities within the Contracts/
Purchasing unit, as well as measurable efficiency and effectiveness
outputs related to these activities.
Create additional contract templates (e.g., basic services
agreement, consulting agreement, agreement for hazardous goods
and services, etc.), which meet County Counsel's requirements to
better protect the County while at the same time offering more
flexibility for County departments.
Continue to work cooperatively with the Auditor-Controller's
Office to establish an e-procurement process geared towards
streamlining selected procurement practices, including the ability
for the County to process vendor payments electronically.
Continue outreach efforts for the County's surplus property
program, resulting in timely disposal of surplus property and
increased revenue to the County.
Continue to identify opportunities for increasing the use of the
County's procurement card for small, routine purchases, which will
result in increased rebate revenue to the County from U.S. Bank.
Continue to improve outreach in the area of green procurement, in
accordance with the County's climate-friendly purchasing policy.
In keeping with the Board's commitment to the tenets of interestbased
bargaining: Concluded negotiations with seventeen (17)
bargaining units with Board adopted MOUs, settle all grievances
within the time limits set forth in the applicable MOU while
working to limit arbitrations.
LOD will continue to provide three mandatory trainings in
Customer Service, Performance Management/Progressive
Discipline and 7 Habits for Highly Effective Managers until the
entire employee population has had an opportunity to attend.
Offer elective learning programs through the Growing Our Own
website at www.co.monterey.ca.us/training
Create a succession plan for continuation of these mandatory
learning programs for newly hired employees in order to maintain
an improved communication within the County's culture.
Launch a customized on-line New Manger Orientation so new
hires understand their role within the main systems in the county
such as: Budget and Finance, Equal Opportunity, Human
Resources, Auditor-Controller, Board Reports etc.
Implement the Writing Academy
Provide graduation for Human Resource Academy participants
with an opportunity for them to spotlight their six month capstone
projects that are aligned with business needs within their
respective departments
Launch Finance Academy in alignment with Board of Supervisor
strategic initiatives and Departments' goals.
Expand training as a pilot enterprise to local cities through a
system of fee for service.
Expand the Bridge Mentoring program into some departments via
the support of Human Resource Analysts from the HR Academy.
RISK AND FINANCE: Provide departmental claims reports on a
regular basis. Prepare and submit claims settlement activity
reports to the CAO and Board of Supervisors, reflecting claims
settlement activity. Improve and expand data analysis of workers'
compensation and general liability claims by leveraging systems
and database reporting tools provided by the third party
administrator. Identify opportunities to improve workflow,
improve communications with excess insurers and improve general
liability claims handling, capitalizing on the transfer of Risk
management to County Counsel.
WORKERS' COMPENSATION & GENERAL LIABILITY:
Complete the transition from legacy Workers' Compensation and
General Liability systems to new TPA's systems.
CONTRACT REVIEW: Properly shift, transfer or assume
contractual risk, in a manner that adequately protects the County
of Monterey's interests. Diligently review departmental, insurance,
indemnity and limitation of liability contract language. Complete
review of at least 300 contracts.
SAFETY: Create a safety culture by providing countywide safety
training and audits. Restructure the Safety Program Management
Committee meeting to provide department safety representatives
with training, updates and tools to assist with improving county
wide safety. Work with departments to develop departmental
safety committees. Improve safety awareness and continue the
trend of reducing the number of injuries throughout the County.
Provide education and training to employees who are at risk for
developing cumulative trauma disorders and repetitive motion
injuries so that they can actively participate in maintaining a safe
workplace and remain engaged in the prevention of these injuries
and illnesses in the workplace.
ERGONOMICS: Mitigate worksite injuries by routinely evaluating
worksites and work practices that may lead to development of
work-related musculoskeletal disorders. Implement hazard
prevention and control measures that will effectively minimize, or
abate entirely, the risk factors revealed through worksite analysis.
Reduce the financial toll on the County of Monterey for direct and
indirect medical, administrative and workers' compensation costs
experienced related to repetitive motion injuries and cumulative
trauma disorders, by offering ergonomic services for improved
medical-disability management.
Continue to provide staff support to the Board of Supervisors'
Legislative Committee.
Direct preparation and implementation of the County's 2013
legislative principles, priorities, and platform.
Provide legislative analysis, coordination, and advocacy services in
support of the County's legislative priorities and critical County
initiatives.
Coordinate County and joint agency efforts to secure funding for
anti-gang programs and other critical County initiatives.
Direct the development and implementation of the County's
performance management program.
Assist with the transition of County staffing for Fort Ord Reuse
Authority (FORA) duties from the Economic Development
Department to the Resource Management Agency (RMA).
Provide high level, responsive media relations.
Provide programming oversight for the County Government
Channel. Ensure that programming is meeting the needs of both
the community and the County organization via a content review
focus group. Ensure departments are aware of the low and no cost
aspects of the County Government Channel for outreach purposes.
Represent the CAO on various interagency committees, including
the Interagency Criminal Justice Collaborative, the Emergency
Communications Users' Advisory Council, and the Emergency
Communications/Next Generation (NGEN) Governance
Committee.
Respond to special project needs as requested by the County
Administrative Officer (CAO) and the Board of Supervisors.
Develop performance measures that track workload and major
actives within this unit, as well as measurable efficiency and
effectiveness outputs related to these activities, and begin reporting
on these measures in the FY 2012-13 budget book.

Community Emergency Response Teams (CERT) will conduct two
exercises and increase membership by 55 new members
throughout the County.
Three year Training and Exercise Plan updated. Conduct three
EOC/ Field Exercises and three EOC trainings of staff to ensure the
state of local readiness for the occurrence of any natural,
technological or human conflict-related emergency or disaster that
may impact any segment of Monterey County including relocation
of EOC.
Complete UASI hazard identification process, risk management
and assessment. Demonstrate improved Rick Analysis for UASI
plan.
Hazard Mitigation Plan revision is completed, approved by FEMA
and adopted by BOS.
Operational Area is 75% NIMS compliant; OES 95% NIMS
compliant
All grants are awarded, tracked, and closed out within 12 months.
Stakeholders have TLO assigned to their agency.
Access and Functional Needs planning activities to include
outreach and Functional Needs Support Services (FNSS) supplies
for mass care shelters.
RESPONSE:
An Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) will be approved by the
Operational Area Coordinating Council (OACC) and adopted by
BOS. The plan will be validated and exercised by EOC/OES and
throughout the County.
All specific hazard annexes and response plans will be reviewed for
NIMS/SEMS compliance.
Web EOC will be fully implemented with new EOC capabilities,
with improved interoperability and connectivity. Two WebEOC
trainings will be conducted.
Office of Emergency Services staff is capable of mutual aid
deployment per EMMA standards.
Mutual Aid and Memorandum of Agreements (MOA) are in place
with all emergency response agencies and NGO that interface with
OES and the OA.
All Special teams are credentialed per FEMA guidelines
Logistical supplies for Med Surge and Alternate Care Sites are
inventoried and typed for EOC deployment.
Refine evacuation polygons, community outreach for specific
hazards/ populations.
RECOVERY:
Refine the continuity of operations/government operations plan for
the County.
Disaster Recover y Plans including Logistics , Resource
Management, and Lifeline restoration will be developed.
Conduct a Volunteer Management/Donations Management
exercise.
Community Emergency Response Teams (CERT) will conduct two
exercises and increase membership by 55 new members
throughout the County.
Three year Training and Exercise Plan updated. Conduct three
EOC/ Field Exercises and three EOC trainings of staff to ensure the
state of local readiness for the occurrence of any natural,
technological or human conflict-related emergency or disaster that
may impact any segment of Monterey County including relocation
of EOC.
Complete UASI hazard identification process, risk management
and assessment. Demonstrate improved Rick Analysis for UASI
plan.
Hazard Mitigation Plan revision is completed, approved by FEMA
and adopted by BOS.
Operational Area is 75% NIMS compliant; OES 95% NIMS
compliant
All grants are awarded, tracked, and closed out within 12 months.
Stakeholders have TLO assigned to their agency.
Access and Functional Needs planning activities to include
outreach and Functional Needs Support Services (FNSS) supplies
for mass care shelters.
RESPONSE:
An Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) will be approved by the
Operational Area Coordinating Council (OACC) and adopted by
BOS. The plan will be validated and exercised by EOC/OES and
throughout the County.
All specific hazard annexes and response plans will be reviewed for
NIMS/SEMS compliance.
Web EOC will be fully implemented with new EOC capabilities,
with improved interoperability and connectivity. Two WebEOC
trainings will be conducted.
Office of Emergency Services staff is capable of mutual aid
deployment per EMMA standards.
Mutual Aid and Memorandum of Agreements (MOA) are in place
with all emergency response agencies and NGO that interface with
OES and the OA.
All Special teams are credentialed per FEMA guidelines
Logistical supplies for Med Surge and Alternate Care Sites are
inventoried and typed for EOC deployment.
Refine evacuation polygons, community outreach for specific
hazards/ populations.
RECOVERY:
Refine the continuity of operations/government operations plan for
the County.
Disaster Recover y Plans including Logistics , Resource
Management, and Lifeline restoration will be developed.
Conduct a Volunteer Management/Donations Management
exercise.
Monitor, and implement, additional insurance benefit changes as
they occur under the Health Care and Education Reconciliation
Act.
Complete mapping of leave processes and analyze results for
implementation of recommendations.

CONTRIBUTIONS - PROPOSITION 172: The County
contributes a portion of its Public Safety Sales Tax (Proposition
172) revenue to fire protection service providers in unincorporated
areas of the County. For FY 2011-12, the County Administrative
Office and the Association agreed to a new negotiated
disbursement model for Proposition 172 revenues. Beginning in
FY 2011-12, the County will share with the Association the full
9.13% of Proposition 172 revenues for the most recently audited
fiscal year (e.g., the FY 2012-13 allocation will be 9.13% of FY 2010-
11 audited actuals). Under this formula, the Association's share of
Proposition 172 revenues will increase by $134,995 to $2,236,630 in
FY 2012-13. Similar to the new agreement with emergency
communications user agencies, the new allocation methodology
ties future allocations to audited actuals, resulting in greater
predictability for budgeting purposes, and eliminating the need for
year-end reconciliations and payment true-ups.
CONTRIBUTIONS - OTHER AGENCIES: The FY 2012-13
Recommended Budget is $325,381 (same level as FY 2011-12) and
reflects payment of fees and dues to other government agencies,
such as the Monterey Bay Unified Air Pollution Control District
and the Association of Monterey Bay Area Governments (please
see the unit narrative for a complete list of agencies funded by this
program).
TRIAL COURTS: The FY 2011-12 Recommended Budget for
expenditures is $9,360,959. Expenditures are slightly increased
over FY 2011-12 due to an anticipated increase in County Facilities
Payment amount for four of the five facilities transferred to the
State. Revenues of $4,495,615 are funded by court fines, forfeitures
and penalties and are not anticipated to increase above FY 2011-12
levels.
GENERAL LIABILITY: In FY 2012-13 the General Liability unit
appropriations and revenues will be transferred to the Office of the
County Counsel (1210). Recommended FY 2012-13 expenditures
for the ISF total $7,012,478, an increase of $2,292,730 compared to
FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget. $1,000,000 of the increase is due to
the transfer of costs from the Insurance unit which was deactivated
in FY 2011-12. The remainder is primarily due to an anticipated
increase in claims related costs.
WORKERS' COMPENSATION: In FY 2012-13 the Workers'
Compensation unit will be transferred to the Office of the County
Counsel (1210). Recommended FY 2012 -13 expenditures for the
ISF total $18,095,647, a decrease of $2,077,098 compared to FY
2011-12 Adopted Budget.
CONTINGENCIES: The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget for
General Fund Contingencies totals $5,550,162, an increase of
$333,195 from the previous year. This funding level complies with
the Board of Supervisors' policy (adopted in January 2005),
establishing the General Fund Contingencies appropriation at 1%
of estimated General Fund revenues.
COUNTY MEMBERSHIPS: The FY 2012-13 Recommended
Budget of $48,649 is a $2,253 decrease, or 4.4%, from the prior year.
The budgeted total is sufficient for the County's current
membership costs for the California State Association of Counties
(CSAC) and the National Association of Counties (NACo).
INSURANCE: This unit has been deactivated. The costs formerly
in this unit have been moved to the appropriate Internal Service
Fund (ISF), either General Liability ISF or Benefit Programs ISF.
MEDICAL CARE SERVICES: Due to an accounting change,
effective FY 2012-13, this unit appropriates Vehicle License Fee
Realignment revenue to the Health and Social Services
Departments, and the County's portion of the Sales Tax Revenue
match for health and mental health services. Effective July 1, 2012,
the Mental Health match will be administered in Fund 023-
Behavioral Health; and the Health and Social Services department
monies will be administered in Fund 025-Realignment/ VLF.
Recommended appropriations for this unit are $11,930,018, an
increase of $5,730,018. Health Realignment revenue decreased by
$1,668,000 or 100% from the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget.
OTHER FINANCING USES: This unit provides operating
transfers to various County programs including the County's Public
Improvement Corporation (PIC) Debt Service Fund (Fund 251) to
finance public facility improvements and the Monterey County
Next Generation (NGEN) Operational Area Emergency
Communications System. It also provides contributions for the
Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA) program, the Fort Ord
Reuse Authority (FORA) annual membership fees, Redevelopment
& Housing's pollution and liability insurance costs for the East
Garrison Redevelopment project, operation of the Prunedale
Senior Center, consultant services for the regional economic
forecast report, contracted publishing services for the annual
Recommended Budget book , contractual ser vices for
implementation of the 2010 General Plan, consultant services for
development and implementation of the performance management
program, and transfers in support of the following County
departments and programs: County Library, Law Library, and the
Public Works/Road Fund chip seal paving program, stormwater
management program, and Carmel Lagoon sandbar emergency
response work. The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget increases
appropriations in this unit by $175,768 (1.2%), to $14,360,950.
Operating Transfer In revenue increased by $500,000, causing GFC
to decrease $324,232 (2.3%) to $13,860,950 due to completion of
previously funded projects.
OTHER GENERAL EXPENDITURES: Recommended
expenditures in this unit for FY 2012-13 are $367,283, a $349,200
increase from FY 2011-12. These additional expenditures are
budgeted for outside assistance, as needed, for investigations
overseen by the Equal Opportunity Office (EOO) and/or labor
relations negotiations.
NON-PROGRAM REVENUE: This unit includes all non-program
revenues that are not directly associated with operating
departments. Non-program revenues are discretionary funds.
Primary sources of non-program revenues include property taxes,
sales taxes, transient occupancy taxes (TOT) also referred to as
hotel taxes, interest earnings, property transfer taxes, utility
franchises, interest on short-term investments for cash flow
purposes, open space subventions, discretionary State and federal
aid, property tax administrative cost recoveries, and the sale of
fixed assets. A portion of Vehicle License Fee (VLF) revenue for
programs that were realigned under State/local program
realignment, and tobacco settlement funds, are also budgeted in
this unit. The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget for Non-
Program Revenue totals $165,264,674. This total represents an
increase of $3,014,519 (1.9%) over the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget,
primarily related to estimated growth in revenue from property
HOMELAND SECURITY GRANT PROGRAM: A critical
component of the Office of Emergency Services (OES) grant
programs for homeland security-related activities is the Emergency
Management Performance Grant (EMPG). This grant funding
supports the need and enhances the capabilities of public safety
first responders (police, fire, and emergency medical services),
public health, and emergency management to prevent, protect,
mitigate, and respond and recover from terrorist attacks, major
disasters, and other emergencies. These funds are spend
exclusively on related local planning, organization, acquisition of
equipment, training (including large scale exercises), and
administrative management of the grant. The grant funding is
matched 50/50 with County General Funds. The funding is
managed as reimbursable grants, requiring the County to first incur
the costs for equipment, supplies, and personnel and then be
reimbursed by the State. In any given fiscal year, OES manages
three grant cycles with over $1,000,000 in obligated funds.
This grant was previously budgeted in the Office of Emergency
Services unit 8056. Recommended appropriations and revenue for
FY 2012-13 are $420,000.
CLUSTER LOANS: This unit transferred to the new Economic
Opportunity Department -1070 (effective July 1, 2011).
DEVELOPMENT SET-ASIDE: This unit transferred to the new
Economic Opportunity Department -1070 (effective July 1, 2011).
REVOLVING LOAN PROGRAM: This unit transferred to the new
Economic Opportunity Department -1070 (effective July 1, 2011).
DENTAL: Effective July 1, 2012, this unit will be transferred to the
new Human Resources Department (1060). Recommended budget
for FY 2012-13 is $3,155,000, a decrease of $57,560 or 1.8%. Costs
for this ISF are allocated to departments based on utilization and
benefit design.
VISION: Effective July 1, 2012, this unit will be transferred to the
new Human Resources Department (1060). Recommended budget
for FY 2012-13 is $582,000, a decrease of $30,724 or 5.0%. Costs
for this ISF are allocated to departments based on utilization and
benefit design.
EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM: Effective July 1, 2012, this
unit will be transferred to the new Human Resources Department
(1060). Recommended budget for FY 2012-13 is $100,100, a
decrease of $18,340 or 15.5%. Costs for this ISF are allocated to
departments based on utilization and benefit design.
DISABILITY: Effective July 1, 2012, this unit will be transferred to
the new Human Resources Department (1060). Recommended
budget for FY 2012-13 is $209,800, a decrease of $190,200 or 47.6%.
Costs for this ISF are allocated to departments based on utilization
and benefit design.
UNEMPLOYMENT: Effective July 1, 2012, this unit will be
transferred to the new Human Resources Department (1060).
Recommended budget for FY 2012-13 is $1,806,000, a decrease of
$240,000 or 11.0%. Costs for this ISF are allocated to departments
based on utilization and benefit design.
MISCELLANEOUS BENEFITS: Effective July 1, 2012, this unit will
be transferred to the new Human Resources Department (1060).
Recommended budget for FY 2012-13 is $3,409,000, a decrease of
$34,000 or 1.0%. Costs for this ISF are allocated to departments
based on utilization and benefit design.

The FY 2012-13 recommended expenditures and revenues,
$9,360,959 and $4,495,615 respectively. Expenditures did not
increase over FY 2011-12 as all courthouse facilities transfers have

been implemented and the CFPs for all facilities have commenced.
Revenues are funded by court fines, forfeitures and penalties and
are not anticipated to increase above FY 2011-12 levels.
Analyze program utilization to identify possible changes to the
Usual and Customary Rate (UCR) paid for services to ensure local
provider participation.
Monitor on-going changes in the Health Care and Education
Reconciliation Act to ensure compliance.
Research options to support employee utilization of dental benefits
in conjunction with health benefits to provide early detection of
health conditions.

Monitor on-going changes in the Health Care and Education
Reconciliation Act to ensure compliance.
Research options to support employee utilization of vision benefits
in conjunction with health benefits to provide early detection of
health conditions.
Provide EAP services training to employees to improve knowledge
of the many free and low-cost services available to them.
Provide supervisors and managers with EAP training to improve
management skills and assist in the reduction of employee
performance issues.
Consider methods of integrating EAP services to enhance County
Wellness program services.
Update Benefits Website to facilitate links to various EAP services
to improve ease of access for County employees.
Review current level of benefits to determine if cost evaluation
should be initiated to consider possible changes to the program.
Work with vendor to offer employee training to improve employee
satisfaction through effective utilization of the program.
Review the Short Term Disability component of the program to
identify possible areas of improvement at little or no cost to The
County.
Consider options other than a self-funded Short Term Disability
program to improve employee satisfaction and contain costs.

Work with third party administrator to improve departmental
processes through timely and knowledgeable administration of
claims and hearings.
Research methods to reduce unemployment costs.
Consider partnering with the Employment Development
Department (EDD) to identify free resources that may be available
to employees considering a change in employment.

Review life insurance benefit options available through current
administrator to identify possible enhancements at little or no cost
to The County.
Consider incorporating free health and wellness modules that are
available through currrent life insurance provider into Benefits
Website to assist employees in maintaining their good health.

Maintain and, when possible, enhance the state of local readiness
for the occurrence of any natural, technological, or human conflictrelated
emergency or disaster that may impact any segment of
Monterey County.
Maintain an integrated Operational Area response capability for
hazard identification, risk management and assessment, and
prevention for both the public and private sectors, and maximize
the availability of public and private resources for allocation when
needed to address local emergencies.
Refine the Continuity of Government Operations Plan for the
County, expanding on conceptual alternatives to standard
emergency operations and, through bi-annual table top training,
familiarize Emergency Operations Center (EOC) staff with the
process for relocating the County EOC should the current Center
become unusable.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 Recommended Budget for the
Economic Development Department is $25,965,571. FY 2012-13
anticipated revenues are $7,502,091, General Fund Contribution of
$1,789,086 and the use of Fund Balance to provide a statutorily
balanced budget.
Salaries and benefits costs are captured in the Economic
Opportunity Administrative Unit 8221 (Fund 001) and total
$1,734,434.
Services and Supplies cost total $22,898,044, Other Financing Uses
total $1,437,849, and net Other Charges is ($104,756).
Revenues total $7,502,091: Intergovernmental Revenues
$5,010,802; Miscellaneous Revenue 1,359,179; Other Financing
Sources $948,730; Revenue from Use of Money and Property
$175,880 and Charges for Services $7,500. General Fund
Contribution totals $1,789,086.
Staff adjustments were made during FY 2011-12 by deleting funded
vacant positions: one (1) Redevelopment and Housing Director;
one (1) Redevelopment Program Manager; one (1) Redevelopment
and Housing Project Analyst III; one (1) Redevelopment and
Housing Project Analyst II: and one (1) Secretary.
Staff adjustments for the FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget
rendered the following positions eliminated: (1) Redevelopment
and Housing Analyst; and (1) Assistant Director of Redevelopment
and Housing.
THE ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY ADMINISTRATION Unit
contains salaries and benefits for all staff as well as centralized
administrative and consultant costs for the Department. Most of
the costs incurred in this unit are reimbursed by outside funds.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT is represented by the Workforce
Investment Board (WIB) Fund 021-Unit 8396; Development Set
Aside Fund 001-Unit 8043; Economic Opportunity Fund 001-Unit
8397; Cluster Loans Fund 001-Unit 8042; and Revolving Loan
Program Fund 011-Unit 8044 and Economic Opportunity Grant
Fund 011-Unit 8398.

In 2011, EDD initiated a strategic planning process for economic
development. Based on input from more than 150 key stakeholders
and the newly created Economic Development Committee, four
pillars of economic opportunity were identified: Tourism;
Education, Research and Technology; Agriculture; and Small
Business Development. Resources will be used from the budget
units, other departmental units and internal and external
stakeholders to achieve specific objectives identified in the
Economic Development Work Plan. Grants are generally budgeted
after they are awarded.
HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT is represented
in Community Development Grants and Reuse Fund 13-Unit 8199
and 8200; and Inclusionary Housing Fund 009-Unit 8208.
The Community Development Grants and Reuse Fund includes
two grants awarded during FY 2010-11: the Neighborhood
Stabilization Program 3 (NSP3) and from HOME Investment
Partnerships Program (HOME). During FY 2009-10, the County
received NSP funds to purchase, rehabilitate, and resell homes in
areas impacted by the housing crisis to income-qualified
households. The budget includes the use of NSP Program Income
for this program, as well as ongoing costs to implement and
administer previous grants and Program Income from Community
Development Block Grants (CDBG), HOME, and other sources.
The Inclusionary Housing Fund appropriates fund balance carried
forward from prior years. Revenues for inclusionary housing
efforts are expected to decline because of the slowdown in private
housing development in the unincorporated area, along with a
policy shift towards requiring developers to construct inclusionary
housing units on site instead of paying fees. Despite the decrease in
revenues, there is a continuing need for ongoing monitoring of
existing units, processing of owner requests to refinance or resell
their inclusionary homes, and review of new development projects
for compliance with the Inclusionary Ordinance.
REDEVELOPMENT SUCCESSOR AGENCY AND HOUSING
SUCCESSOR AGENCY replaces the former Redevelopment
Agency (RDA), which was established by ordinance in 1972, the
Redevelopment Agency (RDA) was a planning and financing entity
formed to eliminate blight and revitalize deteriorated areas within
designated Redevelopment Project Areas. The Agency received
property tax increment in three Project Areas established under
California Redevelopment Law. February 1, 2012, due to the
Dissolution Act, the RDA was terminated.
RDA had three (3) project areas established: Castroville/Pajaro;
Boronda; Fort Ord/East Garrison. These projects had respectively
a Debt Service, Capital Project and Housing Fund. With the
Dissolution Act, Debt Service funds became Trust and Obligation
Retirement funds.
The Capital and Housing Set-Aside funds that were held by the
RDA are now held by the County as Successor Agency/ Housing
Successor Agency of the RDA, respectively. The funds held by the
County as Successor Agency include funding to complete
enforceable obligations that were in effect at the time the RDA was
eliminated and qualify under the provisions in the law, as well as a
total of $250,000 toward administrative costs. The use of funds in
these units is subject to Oversight Board approval; the
Recommended Budget reflects the funds that are expected to be
available to meet existing obligations and pass through to other
taxing entities.
The Castroville/Pajaro Redevelopment Successor Agency (formerly
the Castroville/Pajaro Redevelopment Projects) budget is
estimating receipt of grant revenues to complete the Pajaro
Neighborhood Park, which is scheduled for completion in FY
2012-13 and committed funding for pedestrian and traffic safety
improvements to Merritt Street in Castroville. Once the financial
commitments of the RDA are met, remaining funds will be
distributed to taxing entities within the project areas.
The Boronda Redevelopment Successor Agency (formerly the
Boronda Redevelopment Projects) budget reflected the anticipated
successful completion of the third phase of the Boronda Storm
Drain project during FY 2011-12. The fourth phase of the project
has been abandoned, or rendering remaining funds, less the cost of
dissolution, to be distributed to various taxing entities.
The Fort Ord Redevelopment Successor Agency (formerly Ford
Ord Redevelopment Project s) and the Eas t Garrison
Redevelopment Successor Agency (formerly East Garrison
Redevelopment Projects) are committed through a Development
and Disposition Agreement (DDA) and various reimbursement
contracts with the developer of the East Garrison portion of Fort
Ord. In addition, under State law, 35% of net property taxes and
50% of lease income are payable to the Fort Ord Reuse Authority.
The budget recognizes payments to FORA and repayment of a loan
from the Housing Fund. The remaining appropriations are to be
used for the East Garrison project, including the historic district,
community facilities, and other project implementation
requirements in accordance with the DDA.
The Castroville/Pajaro Housing Successor Agency and Boronda
Successor Agency are expected to be used for continuing the
operation of the existing Kent Court affordable housing project and
for monitoring other affordable housing in the Project Areas to
ensure the units remain available for low and very low-income
households.
At the time of budget preparation, several cleanup bills pending in
the State legislature are intended to address policy and technical
implementation issues in the Dissolution Act, particularly with
respect to the housing funds. Depending on the outcome of
legislation, the FY 2012-13 budgets for the Castroville/Pajaro and
Boronda Housing Successor Agencies fund balances will be used or
transferred to other entities.
The Fort Ord and East Garrison Successor Agencies (formerly
Housing Set-Aside Funds, respectively) have ongoing uncertainty
with respect to current and future property taxes. Revenues
received will be used to meet the Agency's obligation to provide
funds to support affordable East Garrison housing development.
During FY 2012-13, revenue and expenditure pending from a
developer deposit will need be transferred and identified in the East
Garrison Public Financing Authority Fund 180-Unit 8406. The
fund serves a specific defined financial purpose. The costs are
financial and legal expenses associated with a potential Mello Roos
debt issuance.
If specific Economic Development Department contracts were
implemented through a modification of budget in FY 2011-12,
funding may be necessary to complete work in FY 2012-13.

Create a workforce development strategy to connect the local labor
force and training resources to meet the needs of industries with
the best growth potential.
Develop action plans for four primary economic development
pillars: tourism, education/research technology, agriculture, and
small business.
Submit application to seek an award of $500,000 to support Veteran
employment and training efforts.
Develop a financial resources toolbox to improve access to capital
for local businesses.
Enhance coordination of economic development resources and
promote collaboration between the County, local jurisdictions, and
organizations.
Simplify and streamline regulatory processes.
Engage in a consolidated countywide marketing and branding
effort as a tool for comprehensive business attraction, local
business expansion and retention efforts.
Continue to work with Oversight Board to implement dissolution
of Redevelopment Agency as required by law and satisfy continuing
financial and project obligations.
Develop a plan for use/distribution of Housing Successor Agency
assets.
Implement efforts to secure financial resources for community and
economic development efforts to replace the loss of redevelopment
tax increment revenue.
Pending Issues
At the time of budget preparation, several bills modifying the
provisions of the Redevelopment Dissolution Act are being
considered by the State legislature. If these bills are passed there
may be administrative changes to the way the RDA is dissolved and
assets are distributed.

At the time of budget preparation, several bills modifying the
provisions of the Redevelopment Dissolution Act are being
considered by the State legislature. If these bills are passed there
may be administrative changes to the way the RDA is dissolved and
assets are distributed.

Total appropriations and General Fund Contributions (GFC) for
the Equal Opportunity Office (EOO) are recommended at
$570,516, an increase of $26,049 or 4.8%. The Office has no
revenue sources and is reliant on GFC for all funding. Salaries and
Benefits increased $44,392 due to salary, step and workers
compensation increases offset by a decrease in PERS retirement
costs. Various Services and Supplies accounts were reduced
$18,343 to meet the budget year General Fund Contribution (GFC)
target. During FY 2011-12, an Associate EO Analyst position was
restored from 0.8 to 1.0 FTE by Board action.
An augmentation request for $42,284 was funded for FY 2012-13
allowing the restoration of the Administrative Secretary-
Confidential position from 0.5 FTE to 1.0 FTE. This position was
reduced to meet the department's GFC target.
A second augmentation request to add investigative staff was
modified to provide a contingency of $150,000 for outside
investigative services in 1050_8039 Other General Expenditures.
The recommended budget includes funding to complete, print and
distribute the Montery Plan.

Select a new vendor to provide online training on the prevention of
sexual harassment, in accordance with the County's Non-
Discrimination Ordinance, State law (AB 1825), and other related
State and Federal laws.
Provide diversity training to all County employees. The Equal
Opportunity Office values diversity at all levels of County
government. Diversity is a principal component of the Monterey
Plan for Equal Access to Employment and Contracting
Opportunities.
Continue to work with the Sheriff's Office to ensure that inmates of
the Monterey County Jail have access to a fair and accessible
grievance process.
Continue to provide training to all County employees on the
County's Non Discrimination Policy, Diversity Policy and the Equal
Opportunity for Persons with Disabilities and Reasonable
Accommodation Policy.
Present to the Board of Supervisors for adoption a revised
Monterey County Plan for Equal Access to Employment and
Contracting Services.
Continue to staff the Equal Opportunity Advisory Commission, the
Commission on Disabilities and the Board of Supervisors Equal
Opportunity Committee.
Continue to utilize the Equal Opportunity Advisory Commission
for all department heads and/or their designees to present their
accomplishments under the Monterey County Plan. This is an
ongoing annual process. This goal will assist in improving the
quality of services provided by Monterey County departments to its
diverse population.
Continue to work collaboratively with department heads, labor
organizations and community groups to achieve compliance with
equal opportunity policies and laws.
Partner with the Human Resources Department to establish
processes and procedures in areas such as recruitment and
retention, classification, upward mobility, selection and other
related personnel activities that promote a diverse workforce free of
discrimination.
Develop a discrimination prevention program for presentation to
and discussion with Board of Supervisors Equal Opportunity
Standing Committee.
Pending Issues
There are no pending issues.
Policy Considerations
The EOO requests augmentation of $260,998 to fund two Senior
Equal Opportunity Analyst positions and hire a vendor to facilitate
a whistle blower program.
In FY 2011-12, the EOO experienced a high level of complaints.
Due to the complexity of some of the complaints and the lack of
trained Senior EO Analyst positions, the Office was forced to
contract with non-County investigation services . The
Recommended Budget includes funding to contract for
investigations in FY 2012-13, but the Office believes the addition of
a Senior EO Analyst position is a cost effective way to meet the
need.
The EOO is responsible to provide harassment and discrimination
training to all employees of the County Pursuant to Monterey
County Code 2.80.010 (E) and Monterey County Code 2.80.130 (B).
The lack of personnel has made it difficult to provide these
trainings on a continuous basis. The County employs 4,638
employees and provides an online sexual harassment training
program. The EOO believes the addition of one Senior EO Analyst
for instructor led training will provide a positive interaction
atmosphere and allow an opportunity for employees to ask
questions. This is not an option with online training. Not funding
this position may put the County at a greater risk for liability and
punitive damages if lawsuits arise. Employers that provide
prevention training can effectively reduce the litigation and nonlitigation
costs associated with harassment and discrimination
claims.
The EOO received direction from the Board of Supervisors to
implement a Whistle Blower Program. This program is intended to
address ethics and integrity violations, EOO related issues, HR
related issues, work place safety, loss prevention and other issues
that employees or the public would like to anonymously report.
The program would be handled through a 3rd party vendor that
has no connection to the County thus, making it easier for County
employees and or members of the public to report such incidents.
Under California law it is unlawful for an employer to make or
enforce a rule or policy or to retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency
if the employee reasonably believes the information involves a
violation of state or federal law. Not funding this program may
increase the County's liability for claims.

The Recommended Budget for the Auditor-Controller's
departmental units totals $4,977,834 in appropriations, $662,551 in
estimated revenue and General Fund Contribution of $4,315,283, a
decrease of $187,542 or 4.2% from the previous year. Significant
changes in appropriations include increased Salary and Benefits
costs due to a net addition of two positions, partially offset by
reduced PERS retirement cost s . Inter- and Intrafund
reimbursements and Charges for Services revenues increased in
part due to reimbursement or recovery of costs for 3 new positions.
The Auditor-Controller's budget includes the elimination of one
Internal Auditor III ($108,293), the addition of two Auditor-
Controller Analyst I positions ($258,792) and the addition of one
Business Analyst ($135,572) . The two Auditor-Controller Analyst
I and one Business Analyst postions were approved by Board action
in April 2012. A Chief Deputy Auditor-Controller is on loan to
Water Resources Agency (WRA) and the cost of the position will
be reimbursed.
The following positions have been transferred between units within
Appropriation Unit AUD001: Internal Auditor III from Unit 8375
(Internal Audit) to 8371 (Debt Management); and Auditor-
Controller Analyst I from Unit 8011 (Auditor-Controller) to 8373
(Systems Management).
As a result of the dissolution of redevelopment agencies in the State
of California, the Office of the Auditor-Controller, per legislation
ABx1 26, has been given a variety of additional responsibilities. In
order for the Office to successfully transition the agencies and
perform mandated successor agency responsibilities, the Board of
Supervisors approved two additional Auditor-Controller Analyst I
positions in April 2012. The Auditor-Controller will charge the
Redevelopment Property Tax Trust Fund for the costs of
administering the provisions of ABx1 26.
Due to the complexity of the County payroll/HR and benefits
systems, the large number of bargaining units, and the large
number of employees and transactions processed, it has been
difficult for current staff to meet the needs of County departments.
To allow for the Office to meet regulatory requirements and
provide better customer service, an additional ERP Business
Analyst position was approved by Board action in April 2012. The

The Auditor-Controller reduced one vacant Internal Auditor III
position. Loss of the Internal Auditor III position will result in a
restructuring of current tasks to other staff and outside
contractors. The loss will affect the Office's ability to aggressively
look at ways to reduce costs, and improve the economy, efficiency,
and effectiveness of operations. The position reviews, evaluates
and recommends enhancements to internal controls, department
programs, franchise revenues and systems.

Continue improving the AP procedures by utilizing more tools
available in the Advantage system.
Continue improving the knowledge level of AP users on AP specific
guidelines in Advantage system.
Continue to provide AP Advantage trainings based on user needs.
Improve the Vendor Withholding process in Advantage System.
Complete the Procurement Card interface to streamline payments.
Continue working with Contracts/Purchasing staff on maintaining
vendor accuracy and preparing readiness for tax law changes in
2012.
Continue to provide training in auditing, process flow, bargaining
unit Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) and FLSA as it
pertains to Payroll Timekeepers.
Continue reconciliation of payroll accounts with process flow for
monthly process.
Continue to cross train payroll staff for more efficient processing of
payroll.
Maintain/Update as needed Desktop User Manual for Advantage
HRM system to assist County staff.
Continue to provide guidelines for payroll process for FMLA,
Workers Compensation & other payroll issues.
Develop Monterey County specific procedures using Tax Managers
Subcommittees' Property Tax Manual as a basis.
Move to Megabytes new .net format as they start releasing screens
to the users.
Provide more information on the Auditor-Controller's website for
taxpayers, namely school bond information such as principal and
bond beginning and ending dates.
Work on consolidating Tax Rate Areas (TRA).
Create an electronic file for property tax file archives.
Implement new responsibilities under Redevelopment Dissolution
(ABx1 26) legislation.

Prepare the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) for
the fiscal year ending June 30, 2012.
Apply for and receive the Annual Award on Financial Reporting
Excellence from the Government Finance Officers Association
(GFOA) for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2012.
Prepare and compile the Countywide Cost Allocation Plan for fiscal
year 2013-14.
Prepare and submit the annual County and Special Districts
reports to the State of California.
Prepare the 2012-13 adopted budget book.
Document and analyze capital asset data.
Review and establish separate funds as appropriate for certain
activities accounted for in the General Fund.
Assist Systems Division staff in development of new reports and
interfaces, modification of existing ones, and application of system
patches necessary to ensure the system runs as designed.
Implement new modules such as Accounts Receivable, Cost
Reimbursement and Cost Allocation to pursue the vision of
creating an Enterprise Wide Solution and eliminate shadow
systems when possible.
Carry out additional research and process development for inhouse
CAFR creation.
Carry out research and process development for new Government
Accounting Standards Board (GASB) accounting and financial
reporting standards effective FY 2012-13.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 Recommended Budget for the
Treasurer-Tax Collector functions is $6,839,798, reflecting a
reduction of $32,512 (0.5%) below the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget.
Expenditures for salaries and benefits include a reduction of
$164,228 (3.5%) due primarily to reduced employee healthcare
insurance costs and agreements with employee bargaining groups
to share in the cost of PERS Retirement.
Estimated revenue is $46,356 (0.9%) higher than FY 2011-12, and
General Fund Contribution (GFC) reflects a 5.4% decrease,
dropping by $78,869.
The recommended departmental budget meets the County
Administrative Office's identified reduction in GFC without the
deletion of any positions. It also includes the acquisition of
replacement capital equipment at a cost of $50,500.
Budget Impacts
Services and supplies increases totaling $144,984 (5.6%) are offset
by a decrease of $164,228 (3.5%) in salaries and benefits and
$46,356 (0.9%) in increased revenue. The department continues to
mitigate the effects of budgetary reductions sustained in the last
few years by maximizing resources. Staff duties and processes are
monitored and analyzed as the development and implementation
of an intra-departmental cross-training plan continues to ensure
productivity and constant service levels.

Upgraded remittance processing hardware and software resulting
in enhanced mail processing procedures, efficient records scanning
and storage, and improved internal controls.
Maintained increased workload by continuing to cross-train staff
on inter- and intra-divisional critical functions allowing processes
to move forward despite fluctuations in resources and staffing.
Implemented new industry specific software programs, improving
customer service and increasing production capacity while
reducing costs and promoting countywide green initiatives.
Developed and implemented a Customer Service survey
distributed to customers making payments at the collection
counter. The survey evaluated the following: customer wait time,
and the staff's ability to patiently and politely answer questions and
provide corresponding collection policy information. The survey
was conducted over 30 business days in the summer and again in
the fall, receiving approximately 1,350 responses. The average score
was 4.8 out of 5. The survey results provided valuable feedback for
improvement, helped increase staff morale, and reinforced the
Department's commitment to provide quality customer service.
Budget Year Goals
Meet and exceed recommended budget guidelines.
Continue to increase efficiencies by improving automated
processes both intra-departmentally and with external stakeholders.
Continue the implementation of a succession plan that identifies
critical functions, improves process documentation and
encourages staff to seek educational and professional development
training.

The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget includes total
appropriations of $6,771,962, total revenue of $3,309,903 and
General Fund Contribution (GFC) of $3,462,059, representing a
4.7% decrease from the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget.
Appropriations for Salaries and Benefits decreased by $159,027,
$131,055 due to reduced PERS retirement costs. The remainder of
the decrease,$27,972, includes the elimination of one Senior
Assessment Clerk (budgeted for 6 months at 0.5 FTE) and one Real
Property Appraiser II (budgeted for 3 months at 0.25 FTE) offset by
the Board approved restoration of one Office Assistant II position
in July 2011.
Services and Supplies appropriations were reduced by $122,809 in
order to meet the Office's GFC target for FY 2012-13.
Charges for Services revenues decreased $131,225, offset slightly by
increases to other revenue sources for a total decrease in revenue of
$110,485 or 3.2% from the prior year adopted budget.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget provides resources to maintain FY
2012-13 basic service levels in the County Clerk-Recorder's Office.
Service levels in the Assessor's Office, severely impacted in prior
years, will be further reduced in FY 2012-13. Budget reductions in
the Assessor's Office include the deletion of two positions (one
Senior Assessment Clerk (0.5 FTE) and one Real Property
Appraiser II (0.25 FTE)) that were eliminated in FY 2011-12. One
Office Assistant II position was restored in July 2011 by Board
action.
In FY 2011-12, the Assessor's Office reduced the assessed valuation
of over 35,000 residential properties due to declines in market
value. As a result of the decline in property values, the Assessor's
Office workload has increased significantly. Although the overall
volume of property sales and new construction has declined,
property reassessments and assessment appeals have increased the
Assessor's Office workload as these processes are much more labor
intensive and require greater analysis.
The remainder of the Assessor's workload and the basis for the
majority of increases in assessed valuations are the reassessment of
properties changing ownership, either as a result of a sale or an
inter-family transfer; the reassessment of new construction; and the
analysis of annual business property statements.
From FY 1999-00 to FY 2007-08, assessed valuations in Monterey
County increased by an average of 8% per year. Property values,
however, leveled off in FY 2008-09 and, in FY 2009-10, the local tax

roll declined for the first time in the history of Monterey County.
The Assessor's Office will again review the value of all residential
properties in Monterey County and will also conduct an extensive
review of commercial properties with current base year values. It is
estimated that over 35,000 properties will receive Proposition 8
reductions. There has also been a sharp increase in the number of
assessment appeals. The Assessor's Office will review all
Proposition 8 reductions on an annual basis until base year values
have been restored. The Assessor's Office's workload has increased
significantly and yet, during this time, 12 out of 60 full-time
positions have been eliminated.
Appropriations for County Counsel are recommended at
$2,779,147, a decrease of $400,813 from Fiscal Year (FY) 2011-12.
Estimated revenues increased $32,980 to $432,180, while General
Fund Contribution (GFC) declined $433,793, or 15.6% to
$2,346,967.
Reimbursements to the Office for legal services provided, budgeted
in Interfund and Intrafund Reimbursement accounts, act as a
reduction to expenditures incurred by the Office. Interfund and
Intrafund reimbursements are recommended at $3,067,736, a
reduction of $388,706. Included in the reimbursement accounts
were costs associated with the Office's increased legal services rates
for FY 2012-13. Appropriations of $299,578 were reduced and
redirected to other General Fund departments to fund the
increased legal services costs.
Salaries and Benefits costs increased $106,069 with the addition of
2 Senior Deputy County Counsel positions, and one Senior Legal
Secretary-Confidential position reallocated to one Management
Analyst III position offset by savings provided by the deletion of
one Principal Compliance Analyst position included in the transfer
of all Risk Management positions from the County Administrative
Office in March 2012. One Assistant County Counsel position was
also retitled to one Chief Assistant County Counsel position during
FY 2011-12.
Services and Supplies costs were reduced by $118,176 in order to
meet the Office's GFC target. Charges for Services which includes
revenues for legal services provided to non-General Fund
departments increased $32,980.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget provides funding to maintain FY 2011-
12 service levels. During FY 2011-12, the Office had a net staffing
increase of 10.0 positions. In December 2011, two Senior Deputy
County Counsel positions and one Senior Legal Secretary -
Confidential position were added; and one Assistant County
Counsel position was re-titled to Chief Assistant County Counsel.
In March 2012, eight positions from the County Administrative
Office - Risk Management Division were transferred to the Office
of the County Counsel including one Senior Risk & Benefits
Analyst, one Principal Risk & Benefits Analyst, one Management
Analyst II, one Safety Officer, one Workers Compensation
Manager, one Ergonomics Manager, one Senior Secretary-
Confidential and one Principal Compliance Analyst position that
was reallocated with one Senior Legal Secretary- Confidential
position to one Management Analyst III position.
The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget includes rate increases of
approximately 11% for the Office's legal services rendered effective
July 1, 2012. Legal service rates were last increased by the Office in
FY 2006-07. The revised rates, calculated with the assistance of the
Auditor/Controllers Office, will be applied to services billed to
County departments and non-County organizations and by law,
cannot exceed the cost of providing the services . The
Recommended Budget includes a reduction of the Office's
appropriations of $134,215, 4.8%, to meet the GFC target. An
additional $299,578 (for a total of 15.6%) in appropriations was
reduced from the Office's budget and redirected to offset the
increase in legal services cost to other General Fund departments.

Effectively advise and represent the County's legal interests.
Provide timely, responsive, and competent legal advice to all clients
in order to enable them to effectively carry out their functions and
achieve their goals.
Defend County land use, General Plan and other actions in the
event of legal challenge and prosecute code enforcement violations.
Successfully manage and conclude tort claims and litigation in a
fair manner, which respects both the rights of claimants and
litigants and provides fiscal accountability to the public.
Resolve cases early, as appropriate, to reduce County costs.
Provide timely invoices to clients in order to maximize increased
revenue and Intrafund and Interfund reimbursements in order to
balance the Department's budget.
Maintain the professional and technical competence of all
employees through appropriate continuing education, modern
technology, and electronic case management and assignment tools,
in order to provide innovative solutions to legal problems.
Assist in re-engineering of Natividad Medical Center to a selfsustaining
entity.
Assist in the implementation of the General Plan adoption, as
directed by the Board of Supervisors.
Recommended appropriations for the Clerk of the Board (COB)
totals $718,724 a decrease of $14,984 from the prior fiscal year.
Estimated revenues total $22,500, a decrease of $29,500, due to
reduced estimated assessment appeals application submittals and
General Fund Contributions (GFC) increased $14,516 to $696,224
or 2.1%.
The department had two augmentation requests authorized. The
first provided $12,376 for increased salary and benefit costs related
to the reallocation of 1.0 FTE Senior Board Clerk position to 1.0
FTE Management Analyst I position to keep pace with the evolving
work requirements within the Office. The second augmentation
increased appropriations and GFC by $30,000 to help fund a 0.5
FTE Board of Supervisors Clerk position added in July 2011 and
previously funded exclusively from assessment appeals processsing
fee revenue.
Salary and Benefit costs overall decreased minimally, $1,024, due to
saving in PERS retirement, workers compensation and health care
costs combined with the increased cost of the position reallocation.
Services and Supplies appropriations were reduced by $13,960 to
meet the Office's GFC target.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget provides resources to maintain prior
year service levels, but the department has lost it's budget flexibilty
due to reductions to most discretionary accounts.Budget Year Goals are discussed at the Unit level (Assessment
Appeals Board and Clerk of the Board).
Pending Issues
Equipment in the Board of Supervisors Chamber will need to be
replaced soon. Given the wear and tear on the equipment (e.g.
projectors and monitors) due to consistent use, allocating funds for
the cost of repairs and replacement will reduce the impact of
unanticipated charges to the Clerk of the Board budget. The
Information Technology Department (IT) works with the
contracted vendor on maintenance, but equipment replacement
costs are not included in the contract.
Policy Considerations
The Clerk of the Boards office is tasked with complying with
numerous mandates and managing various programs related to
functions of the Board of Supervisors, Assessment Appeals, FPPC
Form 700 filings, Boards, Committees and Commissions, records
management. Full staffing of the Clerk of the Board's office would
include five (5) FTE positions, as approved when the COB's office was designated as a stand alone department in August 2008. It is
requested that the Board of Supervisors fully fund the .5 FTE Board
Clerk position at a full time contribution level. Recommended appropriations are $3,962,455, a decrease of
$1,168,161 from the Fiscal Year (FY) 2011-12 Adopted Budget,
based upon one scheduled presidential general election occurring
in November 2012. Election related appropriations in Services and
Supplies decreased $1,281,634 while Salary and Benefit costs
increased $113,476 due to a fully staffed department with no salary
savings expected.
Estimated Charges for Services revenues decreased by $545,000
and Intergovernmental Revenues decreased by $488,529 for a total
of $1,111,000 in Revenue for FY 2012-13 in keeping with the
elections scheduled for the year. General Fund Contribution (GFC)
is $2,851,455, a decrease of $133,132 or 4.5% from the previous
year.
Budget Impacts
In addition to providing for the FY 2012-13 daily operations and
services, the Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in
expenditures and revenue from the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget
based on a reduced number of scheduled elections. State law
mandates local agencies reimburse the County for election services;
however, there is no mandate for the State to reimburse counties
for conducting a State or Federal election. While the 2012-13
budget will provide funding for the Department to conduct the
election, the 4.5% reduction in GFC will create difficulties in
providing sufficient and timely customer service.
The Department must still comply with all mandates and
regulations surrounding election administration, even with a
reduced budget. A reduced Annual Budget for the Elections
Department would have the following impacts:
Voters and other callers may see an increase in wait time for
telephone customer service due to reduced number of temporary
help for the Department's election phone bank. The Department
expects an increase in calls from voters as they are faced with a new
statewide primary election system as well as calls relating to any
changes in polling place locations due to the outcome of
Redistricting or the final results of the Department's accessibility
survey of all polling places under the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA).
Voters may see an increase in wait time at the polls due to a
reduced number of poll workers. This may be further complicated
by a lack of voter understanding the effects of the State's new Top
Two Open Primary on the general election ballot, as well as the
probability of numerous and complicated State propositions.
A reduction to the Department's voter education and outreach
public service announcements in print, radio, and/or television.
Maintaining consistent public education about the voter
registration and elections process, including changes to election
districts and voting precincts based on the 2011 Redistricting
project, will be very important to the success of the election and the
enfranchisement of voters.
Generally longer wait time for the release of election results on
Election Night. This delay is due to a reduced number of poll
workers and temporary staff at the Department. Poll workers
manage the precinct's closing procedures; fewer poll workers to
process and close the polls will increase the Department and
public's wait time for those precinct results. Temporary staff assists
the Department in processing returns from over 120 voting
locations throughout the County. Fewer temporary staff will
lengthen the time it takes to process voted ballots and release
results to the public and media, even more so with the typically
high projected turnout in Presidential elections.
Ongoing goals that relate to redesigning the Department's bilingual
services program area and associated materials; improving the
content of and access to the Department's procedures leading to
increased transparency and public education; and obtaining an
online training program for poll workers, will remain ongoing goals
for the Department, in addition to continuing to find opportunities
for efficiencies and cost savings for the conduct of elections while
still meeting legal mandates.
Complete all projects associated with the 2011 federal VOTE Grant
program, including redesigning the Department's website to
include updated technology features and useful information and
tools for voters and pollworkers, as well as conduct a countywide
assessment of all polling place facilities, altering locations to
locations with higher levels of accessibility. All projects under the
Grant must be completed by December 31, 2013.
Continue to participate with the California Secretary of State and
UC Berkeley to study the process for conducting the one percent
manual tally of ballots, as required by state law. Monterey County,
along with others, can receive up to $5,000 to offset the cost of this
project.
Monitor State legislation that is in line with the Board's Legislative
Priorities such as those that permit jurisdictions in California,
including counties, to conduct all-mail ballot elections. The
Registrar of Voters plans to attend bi-monthly meetings of the
leg i s l ative commi ttee and has been named the new
Correspondence Secretary for CACEO and can be more prepared
to communicate to the Board of Supervisors regarding the
Association's legislative concerns.
Continue to organize and meet with a public Observer Panel and
improve upon the Department's transparency and public education
activities. Members of the Panel are focused on increasing voter
participation, especially the youth. The Department plans to work
to increase youth participation through the Student Poll Worker
Program by assisting the Panel and working together with the local
school districts.
Continue to have the ability to send staff to continuing educational
courses through the Learning Development Network (LDN) and
through CACEO. Continuing education has proven to expand the
staff's skills and has led to the development of in-house programs
that have led to efficiencies, cost savings, and overall improvements
to the Department's operations.
Pending Issues
Governor's Suspension of Election Mandates
The State's FY 2011-12 final budget included the suspension of six
funded election program mandates including: Absentee (Vote by
Mail) Ballots, Permanent Absent (Vote by Mail) Voters I, Absentee
(Vote by Mail) Ballots: Tabulation by Precinct, Voter Registration
Procedures, Fifteen-Day Close of Voter Registration, and the
Brendon Maquire Act (special election due to the death of a
candidate). Should the County decide to cease practicing any of the
above mandates, the largest impact to voters would be the
suspension of the vote by mail programs, virtually eliminating the
requirement for the County to automatically mail out vote by mail
ballots to over 100,000 voters, rather creating a reapplication
process requiring voters to indicate they would be absent from
their precinct on Election Day. The Department would be required
to request Federal preclearance for the change effecting voters, and
would be required to have a large voter education program
informing voters of the change. Any costs to educate voters and
manage incoming requests for a mail ballot would outweigh the
loss in reimbursement for the activity under SB 90, estimated at
$300,000 annually.
Help America Vote Act Funds - Deadline Extended
The Department is conscious of the December 31, 2015 deadline to
spend Federal funding granted to Monterey County under the Help
America Vote Act (HAVA). Currently, the remaining funds are in
two categories and can be spent on voting technology and items
related to VoteCal, the State's current version of the statewide
registration database. Remaining funds are estimated at
approximately $326,096. The Department has begun to review new
vote tabulation systems that may improve the processing of paper
ballots and nearly eliminate the need for some temporary staff and
election supplies. New technologies may not be available for years
due to the testing requirements. Additionally, due to limited grant
funding available and the County's future budget conditions, new
systems may have to be combined with the County's existing
accessible voting technology required under HAVA, as the County
may not have adequate funds to replace the entire voting system.
The Elections Department signed a five-year lease agreement for
the current facility, ending in 2015. In coordination with Public
Works and other applicable departments, the discussions of
appropriate sites for the construction of a 24,000 square foot
facility continue. The current building of 12,000 square feet is
leased at an annual cost of $280,000, with additional overflow space
rented at an annual cost of $12,000. Confidential and valuable
materials are moved between locations as needed during an
election cycle, reducing the Department's ability to improve
efficient operations. Consolidating the Department's locations to
one building should reduce cost and improve efficiency while
decreasing the vulnerability of the County's election supplies
though a single secure site location.The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget provides $13,161,735 for
Emergency Communications dispatch services and NGEN Project
expenditures. Financing includes $11,955,349 in program revenue
and General Fund Contributions (GFC) of $1,206,386. The
Recommended Budget represents a decrease of $4,116,923 from
the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget, primarily due to completion of
most milestones in the NGEN Capital Project during FY 2011-12.
General Fund Contributions declined by $155,984 (11.4%)
compared the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget.
The decrease in costs for the dispatch operation results from
recognition of savings from MOU provisions as well as additional
operational savings put in place during FY 2011-12.
The Department is continuing to administer the NGEN capital
project. The remaining capital costs for the NGEN project are
included in this year's recommended budget. Much of the activity
for the project took place in FY 2011-12.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 Recommended Budget includes
appropriations of $20,024,795, and reimbursements of $18,874,987,
resulting in net expenditures of $1,149,808. Estimated revenues are
$1,149,808, providing a balanced budget without a General Fund
Contribution.
The Information Technology Department (ITD) has successfully
transitioned to a zero General Fund Contribution department
where the department's budget is based on the revenue generated
through the services rendered to its clients. The FY 2012-13
Recommended Budget changed from the FY 2011-12 Adopted
Budget where total appropriations decreased by $785,376.
The $785,376 decrease in appropriations was a net result of a
decrease in salaries and benefits by $899,828; which was offset by
increases in services and supplies by $483,640; capital assets by
$134,855; and reimbursements by $504,043.
The salary and benefits decrease are due to reductions in vacant
positions. The service and supply increase is due to increases in
operational costs and needs in areas , such as internal
communication, building and equipment maintenance,
miscellaneous supplies, courier service, and minor computer
equipment. Major areas of increase are in outside professional
service, communication, maintenance, equipment rental, training,
and insurance. Capital asset increases are the result of FY 2012-13
project requirements.
Staff adjustments were made during FY 2011-12 by deleting (1)
Software Programmer Analyst III and adding (1) FTE Programmer
Analyst Confidential.
Staff adjustments for the FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget
rendered the following positions eliminated: (1) Information
Technology Technician; (1) Software Programmer Analyst III; (2)
System Programmer Analyst IIIs; and (1) Office Assistant III.
Budget Impacts
Fiscal Year (FY) 2011-12 experienced departments exceeding their
hours for ITD services. ITD resources are budgeted based on
planned use of services. FY 2012-13 planned services are less than
FY 2011-12.
Implement Server Virtualization, reducing the 285-servers in data
center by 50% to approximately 143-servers to improve system
integration capabilities and to lower over costs of maintenance and
support. Cost savings and efficiencies will be documented and
reflected in future budgets.
Complete the Radio Analog Overlay Project for the Monterey
County Operational Area Emergency Communications System
(NGEN) implementation.
Reduce telephone lease line costs by utilizing the County newly
implemented Voice over Internet Protocols (VoIP) telephone
system. Cost savings and efficiencies will be documented,
communicated and reflected in future budgets.
Collaborate with County Departments to initiate and implement
the County Website Portal project. The project purpose is to
expand access by citizens, businesses and visitors to key County
services via the Web. The goal is to improve service delivery to
County constituents; improve operational efficiency; and reduce
service delivery costs. Measurements will be developed,
documented and communicated to assess degree of success for
targeted outcomes; as well as project cost and funding alternatives.
Assist the Auditor-Controller in implementing the Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP) System 3.9 upgrade. The ERP includes
Human Resources/Payroll, Financial, Budget Preparation and
Property Tax components, where the upgrade will improve
application performance and assure reliable access to ERP system
modules.
Initiate a project to develop a Business Continuity and Disaster
Recovery Plan to support critical County business application and
telecommunication services during and after major disasters.
Develop a plan, with a 2-year schedule, to phase out single use or
low use mainframe and mini-computers. The plan will include to
what degree operational costs are reduced and the reduction of
carbon footprint for information technology equipment.
Complete processes, necessary approvals and implementation
requirements to establish an ITD Internal Service Fund.
Develop and implement a funding strategy for ITD equipment,
infrastructure upgrades and replacement; categorized as High Risk
Items, Modernization Needs, and Long-term Technology Needs.
Immediate focus will be on what is considered High Risk Items: 1.
Disk Array Storage Area Network (SAN), storage system
recommendation; 2. Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
(DHCP) and IP address management (IPAM) stability
recommendation; 3. Address Local applications vulnerabilities
patching issue recommendation; 4. Provide server disaster recovery
recommendation; 5. Do an upgrade of technology to address proxy
server redundancy recommendation; 6. Email server redundancy
recommendation; and 7. Firewalls for the State of California
dedicated connection recommendation.
Pending Issues
A request has been filed with the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) to extend the mandated completion date of
January 2013 to June 2013 for the Monterey County Operational
Area Emergency Communications System (NGEN).

The Recommended Budget for the Office totals $18,755,463,
financed by $10,378,968 in program revenue and $8,376,495 in
General Fund Contributions. Recommended General Fund
Contributions (GFC) declined $348,001 (4.0%) from the FY 2011-
12 Adopted Budget.
The Recommended Budget incorporates $1,252,720 in
augmentations and includes seven grant funded positions
supporting prison investigations, disability and health care fraud
investigations, consumer protection, and traffic safety.
The Recommended Budget includes 128.25 positions, an increase
of 7.25 positions over the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget. Additional
positions include 2.0 position restorations funded by the July 2011
labor agreements and the 7.0 new grant-funded positions described
earlier. Partially offsetting the increased number of positions is a
reduction of 1.75 truancy attorney positions due to the Office's loss
of grant funding.
Budget Impacts
The on-going budget reductions have required us to examine
whether we can continue to maintain current service levels. The
complexity and severity of budget issues throughout the state
remains a significant threat to the funding of DA programs and
raises a cloud of uncertainty around the potential negative impact
on our community. This hopefully is not a long term issue, because
when the economy improves service levels should be restored. Our
abilities to protect the public will diminish as our resources are cut
and not restored. As an example, when we have been at full
strength, four investigative aides served over 22,000 subpoenas on
witnesses. We have been forced to eliminate 25 percent of that
section. The increased case load for the remaining investigative
aides will tax them and defendants will not be held accountable
because we are not able to obtain all witnesses necessary for court.
DIMINISHING RESOURCES: Diminishing resources negatively
impact the ability to provide services in specialized areas such as
Elder Abuse and Child Sexual Assault. Police departments
throughout the County are taking significant financial reductions,
impacting their ability to investigate these areas and the District
Attorney has provided and continues to provide those resources to
assist those departments.
REALIGNMENT: The implementation of AB109 began this past
October, shifting state prisoners to local authorities, leading to a
profound change in how the criminal justice system and the public
safety agencies protect the community. The elimination of parole
and return of state prison inmates to local authorities for
management will be challenging for the entire County.
Additionally, as the recidivism rate is approximately 70%, local
crime rates may increase. The long-term impact on the District

Attorneys Office remains uncertain. The lack of adequate funding
to implement realignment is also a concern. The unknowns for
realignment are significant, making it difficult to plan for the
future.
Collaborate with other state and local agencies to devise new
approaches to disrupting gang violence. The damage that gang
violence inf licts on the County's residents requires law
enforcement to keep searching for a coordinated approach to this
most pressing problem in our community.
Increase in-house training. To the extent in-house training can
meet both mandatory and necessary training of attorneys,
investigators and support staff, it will be a far less expensive
alternative.
Maintain the temporary buildings now housing District Attorney
personnel at an adequate level to allow safe access from the
buildings and provide protection from intrusion by arsonists,
weather, insects and other pests.
Pending Issues
CJIS/SUSTAIN: As stated above, if the system we are pursuing does
not meet our needs, then along with the criminal justice agencies
we continue to explore all options that will allow an electronic
interface to share information for a more efficient and cost effective
operation. County justice agencies continue to maintain the
current Criminal Justice Information System (CJIS) on the County's
mainframe. The current system is obsolete and is no longer
adequate. It must be replaced. The costs associated with obtaining
a more efficient system continue to increase and remains a
substantial operational and budgetary challenge.
RELOCATION: We continue to be housed in modular units in
both Salinas & Marina, and in office facilities at the Monterey
Courthouse. The court has delayed constructing new South
County facilities. If they continue their project, the County will
need to meet this challenge by providing offices for D.A. use as
close to the new courthouse as possible. We have been located in
modular units for approximately 9 years when we expected to be
there for only two years. The issue of appropriate office space for
the District Attorneys Office continues to remain one of our most
pressing issues.
The Depar tment of Child Suppor t Ser vices budget i s
recommended at $10,714,556, a decrease of $153,884 from the FY
2011-12 Adopted Budget. As required by legislation, effective
January 1, 2000, this budget has been submitted to the State for
approval. The negative General Fund Contribution reflected in the
Fiscal Summary above is for administrative support activities
charged to the program through the Countywide Cost Allocation
Plan (COWCAP) and the non recoverable portion of the 'Pajaro'
judgment.
Budget Impacts
The State Department of Child Support Services continues to hold
the allocation of funds at a basic level as what was received ten
years ago. This flat allocation of funding has resulted in loss of
staffing over the years, approaching almost a 40% reduction of
staffing over this period of time. The Department continues to
implement cost savings strategies and will continue to maintain our
basic core Federal and State mandated services. The costs of the
Worker Compensation system continue to impact our operational
budget.
Providing our Child Support Services to individuals that are
current recipients or are border-line recipients of services from
other agencies avoids costs to other agencies and to taxpayers. The
avoidance of costs to other programs is based on the Department
maintaining core services. The Department, with a caseload of
19,790 children, distributed over $38,020,538 for the year 2011,
which represents needed money that helps families reach and
maintain self-sufficiency.

Continue to deliver our core services and at the same time improve
in all Federal/State performance measures.
Continue to provide a quality service to our customers and be a
leader in the use of best practices and innovation, so that families
and children are receiving the optimal amount of child support and
health insurance coverage.
Continue to have a proactive outreach program with emphasis on
collaboration and sharing of services so that we optimize our
mandated services in the most efficient manner and continue to be
a leader within the State of California Child Support Program.
Leverage technology to increase effectiveness and efficiency.
Lower energy costs by continuing to educate staff regarding the
importance of conserving energy, by implementing green ideas,
and installing green equipment.
Develop and retain employees by providing ongoing professional
development courses and through the County's "Learning
Development Network" and have a high participation rate for staff
attending appropriate County Health Department Wellness classes
to help lower Worker Compensation costs.
The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget is $8,953,079, financed by
$270,000 in program revenue and $8,683,079 in General Fund
Contributions. Recommended General Fund Contributions are
$273,180 (3.1%) lower than the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget,
reflecting the decline in local discretionary revenue available to
finance County services.
Budget Impacts
The indigent defense function will be significantly impacted by the
Recommended Budget. This impact includes not funding the
restoration of needed attorney and legal support staff positions cut
during prior fiscal years. Baseline funding for trial related services,
investigations, and professional contracts necessary to perform the
Public Defender's mandated function are also impacted by reduced
funding.
Trial related services such as forensic tests, crime scene
investigation, laboratory tests, psychological evaluations, DNA
analysis, gun-shot residue and ballistic examinations, and accident
reconstruction are required to prepare cases for trial and/or
potential disposition other than attorneys and investigators as case
law mandates that competent counsel includes the right to
necessary ancillary services. The ability to provide these services
has been significantly impacted due to Countywide budget
reductions in recent years.
Competent legal representation of accused adults and minors
necessarily includes defense investigation. The Alternate
Defender's Office is comprised of independent attorneys who
contract with the County. However, their contracts do not include
the costs of investigation. The same is true of those numerous
situations when third tier attorneys are appointed by the court and
must investigate those cases. These investigation costs are by
appointment of the Superior Court and they are the responsibility
of the County's general fund regardless of budgeted appropriations.
Staffing for the Law Office of the Public Defender has been reduced
during the last three budget cycles. This included reduction of 1.5
legal secretaries in FY 2009-10 and 1.0 attorney and 1.0 legal
secretary in FY 2011-12. These reductions impaired the County's
ability to provide competent counsel for indigent adults and
children accused of crimes. The Public Defender was able to obtain
the volunteer legal services of three attorneys, which enabled the
PD to provide an attorney to appear in all misdemeanor courts
during all sessions. However, this volunteer effort has proven to be
unsustainable. Eventually the volunteer attorneys had to leave in
order to support themselves and repay their student loans.
Depending on good fortune to find volunteer legal staff will not
meet the obligation of the County in perpetuity.
Recent years have seen significant increases in the severity of cases
which the PD has been assigned to defend. Increasing sentence
enhancements, gang allegations and targeted prosecutions have
placed increased burdens on attorney staff. Potential sentences
have continued to increase. Despite the implementation of A.B.
109, Realignment has resulted in continued incarceration with only
a very minimal use of blended sentences as envisioned in the
legislation. At the same time, the number of PD attorney staff has
not kept pace and in fact have been reduced. The ability to even
have an attorney present in each criminal court has been
compromised.
The prior years' reductions in legal secretary support will
ultimately jeopardize the legal representation of our clients due to
delays in opening newly appointed PD cases resulting in delayed incustody
interviews of clients, or court delays due to attorneys not
adequately prepared for their daily court appearances. Previously
used County agencies providing work experience to qualified
trainees at no cost to the Department are no longer available due to
State budgetary reductions.
The implementation of A.B. 109 Criminal Justice Realignment will
challenge all components of the indigent defense agencies as
supervision and custody of less-serious offenders is shifted from
the State to counties.
Ultimately, the responsibility for indigent defense rests with the
County. A tenuous balance exists between efficiency and economy
on the one hand and justice on the other. Ongoing financial
pressures challenge the Sixth Amendment's mandate to provide
competent counsel for all persons charged with crimes where
confinement may be sought. While important, dollars are not the
only and perhaps not even the primary consideration in this
particular area of the County's activity.
Development of a group of reputable experts in various forensic
fields who are able to accept regular appointments for prenegotiated
reasonable fees is still being implemented.
Alternate Defender Office attorneys will also utilize a Public
Defense Fee Program as soon as approved by the Court.
The Alternate Defender's Office advocates facilitating a third tier
attorney panel when neither the PDO nor the ADO is available for
appointment (i.e., multi defendant cases, informant witness cases,
and capital cases). Increased access to panel attorneys at a prenegotiated
rate will yield significant financial savings.
The FY 2012-13 recommended appropriations for the Sheriff 's
Office total $72,661,527. This is an increase of $286,308 over the
FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget. Revenue is estimated at $24,475,449,
a $1,251,497 increase, and the recommended General Fund
Contribution (GFC) totals $48,186,078, a decrease of $965,189
(2.0%) compared to FY 2011-12. Recommended positions total
423.5, an increase of 35 positions over the FY 2011-12 Adopted
Budget. Significant changes in appropriations, revenues, and
positions are described below:
APPROPRIATIONS:
Increase in salaries and benefits due to 16 restored positions,
$2,224,929.
Net concessions savings in PERS and health insurance costs,
$1,544,307.
Addition of seven federal Community Oriented Policing Services
(COPS) grant funded Deputy Sheriff-Operations positions,
$842,992.
Addition of one AB 109 (Public Safety Realignment) funded Deputy
Sheriff-Corrections position, $122,568.
Addition of 12 Custody and Control Specialist positions, $446,819.
Deletion of one Forensic Evidence Technician position, $105,110.
Increase in overtime to reflect actual cost, $174,976.
Decrease in other post employment benefits (OPEB) allocation,
$32,808.
Decrease in unemployment insurance premium allocation,
$26,129.
Decrease in workers' compensation insurance premium allocation,
$555,775.
Decrease in retirement costs due to rate changes, $240,141.
Decrease in health insurance premium, $89,490.
Decrease in general liability insurance premium allocation,
$342,696.
Increase in Information Technology Department data processing
charges, $65,729.
Increase in inmate medical service to reflect actual costs, $220,318.
Decrease in reimbursements to other agencies due to
discontinuation of Recovery grants and other grants, $220,492.
Increase in Fleet's vehicle related charges, $132,851.
Net decrease in funding for patrol vehicles due to GFC reduction,
$127,000.
Decrease in various services and supplies due to GFC reduction,
$190,926.
Decrease in intra- and inter-fund reimbursement due to expected
reduced services, $25,000.
Decrease in equipment cost due to completion of projects,
$495,000.
REVENUES:
Increase in Public Safety Sales Tax (Proposition 172) revenues,
$1,247,942.
Increase in State reimbursement for one AB109 funded Deputy
Sheriff-Corrections position, $122,568.
Decrease in State reimbursement due to completion of projects,
$300,000.
Increase in Federal COPS grant, $844,084.
Decrease in COMMET grant revenue, $35,000.
Decrease in various Federal grants, $419,455.
Increase in civil process revenue, $26,982.
Increase in Work Alternative Program (WAP) revenue, $35,000.
Decrease in Court Security Services revenue due to personnel
related costs decrease, $252,000.
Decrease in Inmate Welfare Fund program reimbursement,
$63,830.
Net decrease in various program revenues, $44,794.
Increase in Operating Transfer In-health realignment for inmate
medical services, $90,000.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget significantly restricts the Sheriff 's
Office flexibility in assigning resources to rapidly changing service
requirements. The Recommended Budget lowers the assumed cost
of vacant positions and reduces the overtime budget to levels that
are below actual levels experienced in the past several years. Both
of these measures may negatively impact the Department's ability
to maintain current service levels.
The impacts of the recent enactment of State Realignment through
AB 109 is being assessed and may require significant changes to
operation and management of the County Jail as more inmates with
longer sentences are sentenced to local confinement. In addition,
the recent loss of Federal funding for the Gang Task Force has
resulted in a new joint effort with the City of Salinas and other
agencies. Funding for this new effort and the roles and
responsibilities of each of the partners is still being defined as the
participation of Federal and State agencies remains uncertain.
The evolving nature of these and other programs requires the
Sheriff 's Office to have the flexibility to allocate resources to
ef fectively manage and suppor t the se programs . The
Recommended Budget reduces such flexibility.
In addition, the budget does not provide the flexibility to meet
equipment and facility needs that are critical to the continued
provision of public safety services. Continued underfunding for the
necessary facility repairs and improvements, and for the
replacement of patrol cars, jail vans, and buses, will at some point
have negative consequences on the Office's ability to provide
adequate services.

ADMINISTRATION BUREAU: Goals for FY 2012-13 include the
implementation of a new Records/Jail Management system and
timekeeping/scheduling system. Based on the results of an audit of
the Civil Division and the analysis of various classifications within
the organization, propose a reorganization to provide the most
efficient and cost effective organizational structure of the
management and administrative staff.
ENFORCEMENT OPERATIONS BUREAU: Create a more tactical
approach to reducing gang violence and drug trafficking through
the LEOC. Utilize donations from the Sheriff's Advisory Council
to purchase a drug-sniffing canine to increase our interdiction
efforts.
CUSTODY OPERATIONS BUREAU: Ensure that the number and
types of inmates in the County Jail as a result of AB 109 is
effectively managed for both inmate and employee safety through
contracting with other facilities to house some of our inmates. If
awarded funds through the AB 900 grant process, begin the
planning and construction of a new facility adjacent to the existing
County Jail.
Pending Issues
ENFORCEMENT OPERATIONS BUREAU: The current staffing
levels continue to provide only the minimal level of service to the
unincorporated area. This situation threatens the public welfare as
well as officer safety due to the large areas covered by each deputy,
which lengthens response times and limits the timeliness of
backup. In addition, there are insufficient deputies to provide the
type of concentrated enforcement activities to respond to crime
trends within the community.
CUSTODY OPERATIONS BUREAU: Although the Monterey
County Jail is already operating significantly over capacity, two
issues are creating additional pressures on this facility. Both the
Federal Court ruling and State Realignment legislation have
resulted in increased numbers of inmates to be housed in the Jail.
Given the current overcrowded condition, any increase in inmates
requires the release of other inmates until the construction of new
facilities can occur. Custody Operations has a fleet of three buses
used to transport inmates to court and to other penal institutions.
The oldest bus was built in 1984, and the others in 1988 and 1991.
Because the buses are law enforcement equipped and operated,
they are exempt from diesel particulate emissions standards.
However, in 2014, State emission reduction goals require 100%
compliance and may apply to the inmate transportation buses. If
this happens, the three buses will need to be replaced and/or taken
off the road.The Recommended Budget for the Department totals $36,612,431,
financed by $20,703,545 in program revenue and $15,908,886 in
General Fund Contributions (GFC). Recommended appropriations
and revenues are increased over the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget
by $4,104,463 and $4,424,085, respectively. Most of this increase is
related to the State's Public Safety Realignment (AB 109). AB 109
realigns responsibilities for lower level offenders, adult parolees
and juvenile offenders from the State to local jurisdictions.
Recommended GFC is $319,622 (2.0%) less than the FY 2011-12
Adopted Budget.
The Recommended Budget also includes a total of 288.0 positions,
representing an increase of 45 positions over the FY 2011-12
Adopted Budget. A total of 36 positions were restored by the Board
in July 2011, including 26 reinstatements made possible by the
State's action to restore Vehicle License Fee (VLF) funding to local
government and 10 reinstatements funded by the various cost
savings agreements negotiated with the County's labor
associations. An additional 12 positions were added in FY 2011-12
through the Board Report process, including 11 positions
supporting the AB 109 Realignment and an additional probation
officer as part of the agreement with Salinas Union High School
District to help monitor and supervise juvenile probationers and
assist with at-risk students. The recommended Budget also deletes
three vacant positions.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget deletes 3.0 vacant positions in response
to the Department's budget reduction target. This reduction of
authorized positions will result in a series of adverse impacts on
staffing, service level and programs.
A reduction of 0.5 Probation Officer II in the Supervision and
Administration Section will impact service levels in the Juvenile
and Adult Probation Divisions.
Reduced funding in the Adult Field Supervision Unit will
compromise evidence-based practices, decrease public safety, and
result in delayed support to the Courts, public, clients and allied
agencies.
A reduction of 2.5 positions in the Juvenile Institutions and
Alternative Programs Section will impact both juvenile institutions
and the juvenile programs created as successful alternatives to
detention, creating a snowball effect on overcrowding, and
escalating costs of placement and public safety as described below.Elimination of 1.0 Juvenile Institutions Supervisor (JIS) will reduce
the number of youths that can be accomodated by the Community
Service Work Program (CSWP). CSWP is used as a sanction for
low-level offenders diversion and alternative to detention, and
provides valuable services to allied agencies and the local
community. The reduction of staffing for the CSWP will impact the
Department's ability to reduce the population at Juvenile Hall and,
as a result, might increase overtime cost. This alternative to
detention keeps minors who are in violation of probation off the
streets and involved in constructive activities during peak time for
juvenile crime.
A reduction of 1.0 Probation Aide in the Alternative Programs and
Community School will reduce the ability to supervise program
participants in school and during breaks, administer drug tests and
assist in managing crisis.
The loss of 0.5 Probation Aide in the Rancho Cielo program will
reduce efficiencies in collection and delivery of program
participants, and the ability to supervise participants in school and
during breaks, and assist in managing crises.The Probation Department is dedicated to achieving and
maintaining the following goals:
To improve the quality of life for youth, seniors and families by
preventing and reducing the frequency, severity, and impact of
criminal and delinquent behavior among adults and juveniles who
come within the jurisdiction of the Probation Department
(ongoing).
To enhance public safety programs throughout Monterey County
by collaboration and cooperation with other departments and
agencies and by the development of new and innovative methods to
address the issues of public safety (ongoing).
To expand services to the young adult population and address
specific needs, e.g. mental health, substance abuse and vocational
training (ongoing).
To create more manageable caseloads for officers, particularly in
the Domestic Violence Unit.
To continue to enhance the collection of probation fees in
collaboration with the Treasurer's Revenue Division.
To continue to participate in the process toward a new, more
functional juvenile detention facility.
To continue to serve as the lead agency to maintain core functions
and expand the Silver Star Resource Center (SSRC), as a "one stop"
program for gang prevention and intervention (ongoing).
To continue to serve as the lead agency for the Juvenile Justice
Crime Prevention Act (JJCPA) Programs (ongoing).
To serve as the lead agency for the Community Correction
Partnership, and for the implementation of the Community
Correction Program, as mandated by PC 1230 (SB 678) to reduce
the number of felony probationers sent to prison through the
implementation of evidence-based probation supervision strategies
and programs.
To enhance data collection capabilities in the Case Management
System (CMS) to track, monitor and report data on its juvenile and
adult populations, and to analyze, and evaluate the success of
programs and program participation. To develop new data
requirements for realigned adult and juvenile populations.
Pending Issues
The State's Public Safety Realignment (AB 109) to the County level,
implemented by the effective date of October 1, 2011, imparts
major operational changes in the Adult Division's operations. The
realignment significantly increases Probation's span of control on
"non-non-non" (non-serious, non-violent, non-sex offenses, and
without any prior conviction) adult offenders, as well as offenders
released to local authority under Post Release Community
Supervision (PRCS) status. While Probation Departments
continues to plan and adjust for this significant change, funding
allocated at the State level is not yet stabilized.
The operational and financial impact of the state-mandated Static-
99R assessment for adult sex offenders, continues to be assessed.
Further, the cost of Global Positioning System monitoring for highrisk
sex offenders while on probation continues to be absorbed by
the Department.
The 2011-2012 Juvenile Accountability Block Grant (JABG) is now
requiring new data that has not been collected in the past. This
appears to be a trend in data requirements from both the State and
federal entities.
The Department is incurring additional costs for mandated core
training required by Title 15 for part-time and temporary Juvenile
Institutions Officers. Increasing mandated Standard and Training
for Corrections (STC) costs challenge the Department's ability to
cover all training expenses.
Due to the implementation of Proposition 21, juveniles facing adult
court proceedings continue to generate additional costs associated
with extended detention in Juvenile Hall. Depending on the
number of arrests and the court processes, the Department's
budget is constrained to absorb these increased costs in FY 2012-
13.
A second phase of DJJ Realignment (SB 81 and AB 1628), with the
supervision responsibilities of wards released from DJJ transferred
from the state to local probation departments, is complete. The
major impact of DJJ Realignment is the increased number and
sophistication of youth housed at the Youth Center, as well as
increased need of secure custodial programs and adequate
detention facilities.The Recommended Budget for the Department totals $8,981,511 in
appropriations, financed by $6,396,986 in program revenue and
$2,584,525 in General Fund Contribution (GFC). GFC was
decreased by $137,871 representing a 5.1% reduction.
Budget Impacts
Due to fluctuations in the Countywide Cost Allocation Plan
(COWCAP), and a reduced General Fund Contribution (GFC), the
department's ability to meet it's required Maintenece of Effort
(MOE) as set forth by California statute regarding general fund
support for agricultural programs is uncertain. Should the
department fail to meet it's MOE in FY 2012-13, FY 2013-14 will
require additional General Fund Contribution.
Increased costs and reduced resources available for agricultural
programs will impact the department's service delivery. However,
the department will redirect existing resources to increase
efficiencies and minimize these impacts.

The expected reductions in Federal funding may present budgetary
challenges in FY 2012-13. The Department continues to support
State and Federal activities, especially as related to facilitation of
commerce. The Department currently issues approximately 7,000
Phytosantary Certificates annually for shipments related to Light
Brown Apple Moth quarantines. The Department will need to be
able to make program adjustments to continue to provide these
services.
The department will work with the California Department of Food
& Agriculture (CDFA) to continue new detection efforts for a new
grape pest, the European Grapevine Moth and a new citrus pest,
the Asian Citrus Psyllid. The status of funding to cover the costs
asociated with implementation of these programs is uncertain.
Reduction in funding levels could significantly impact these efforts
and may require local resources to protect the County's agricultural
from these and other pests.
State registration of a new fumigant, methyl iodide, remains a
controversial decision, with continuing focus on local use of
fumigants. This will result in a redirection of staff resources to
fumigation issues.
Implementation of the new General Plan will require a dedication
of staff resources. The Department will also be taking on an
expanded role in the administration of the County's Agricultural
Preserve (Williamson Act) program.
The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget for the Resource
Management Agency totals $57,355,695 in appropriations,
financed by $38,194,821 in program revenue, $12,793,384 in
General Fund Contribution (GFC) and $6,367,490 in other fund
balances. GFC was decreased by $744,551, representing a 5.5%
reduction.
During FY 2011-12 there have been significant changes in the
leadership of the RMA starting with the hiring of a new RMA
Director and Deputy Director. This new leadership team has and
will continue to review the RMA organization and make changes in
order to enhance efficiencies in operations and improve customer
service. Some of these changes have been included in the FY 2012-
13 recommended budget by reallocating vacant positions (Omsbud
to Management Analyst III and Associate Personnel Analyst to
Allocation TBD) to better suit the needs of the RMA functionally,
operationally and to facilitate centralization. In addition, in FY
2011-12 the Redevelopment & Housing Office separated from
RMA and became the Department of Economic Opportunity.
Additional information regarding significant areas of budgetary
change from FY 2011-12 to FY 2012-13 is discussed at the division
level.

The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget for RMA Administration
(Unit 8222) includes $3,446,575 in Salaries and Benefits and
$644,125 in Services and Supplies. Most of the budget expenditures
will be charged back to the various agency budgets by Intra/Inter
Fund Transfers ($3,593,482) for services provided. This will leave a
General Fund Contribution (GFC) of $497,218.
RMA Administration was increased by one staff position (Assistant
Director of Redevelopment and Housing) to assist in managing
additional responsibilities that are being transitioned under the
RMA's purview as a result of the State action to eliminate
redevelopment agencies. This position will also assist with the
General Plan Implementation. In addition, to the above staffing
changes, the recommended budget includes increased services
totaling $60,000 for debris removal and cleanup of the Fort Ord
habitat land that was recently transferred over to the County. The
FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget includes an overall increase in
GFC of $222,272.Implement a performance based culture with the development of
efficiency and effectiveness measures.
INTERAGENCY PROJECTS: Successful completion of all special
handling projects including difficult development applications,
complex property negotiations, and significant capital issues.
These projects include: General Plan Implementation; assist with
processing of significant project applications (Ferrini Ranch,
Paraiso Springs, Rancho Canada Village, Monterey Downs/Horse
Park); participation in the Association of Monterey Bay Area
Governments (AMBAG) interagency process including the Energy
program; coordinated effort for a Downtown Government Center
with the City of Salinas; participate with implementation of the
economic development pillars; continued coordination of staff
support for the Alternative Energy and Environment Committee;
collaboration with jurisdictions to implement renewable energy
initiatives (e.g.; solar ordinance, small wind energy ordinance and
pilot project); and interagency coordination and implementation of
the Stormwater Management program including options for
funding.
RMA INTERDEPARTMENTAL FISCAL INITIATIVES: Continue
to improve interagency coordination regarding estimating,
budgeting and collecting fees for services such as Development
Applications, Appeals, Fleet, Community Services Areas/Districts,
Capital projects, etc. Examine opportunities for collection of fees
for unfunded mandates and General Plan policies (traffic impacts,
development impacts, Capital Improvement and Financing Plan,
etc). Enhance agency efforts to identify, seek and obtain public and
private grants . Complete work funded under a Coastal
Implementation Assistance Program (CIAP) grant.
EMPLOYEE DEVELOPMENT: Complete RMA/County Policy
Refresher Training by Building Department, and Public Works
Department Employees. Complete bi-annual Prevention of
Unlawful Sexual Harassment Training and Annual ITD Security
Awareness Training by all RMA Staff.
STAFFING: Evaluate RMA organization to realize greater
efficiency with more centralized functions of service (internal and
external). Continue to work with the RMA units in the timely
delivery of recruitment and selection processes while updating the
job class specifications. Conduct classification studies to support
organizational changes and needs. Develop the bilingual
certification RMA guidelines. Continue to gather data and make
recommendations for improvement as turnover trends and
systemic problems are identified.
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS: Continue to provide assistance to
supervisors and managers in performance management issues and
the completion of performance appraisals. Develop and provide
training on performance documentation, writing Performance
Improvement Plans and writing disciplinary notices.. Establish
policies and best practices to achieve consistency and conformance
across all RMA units.
PAYROLL AND PERSONNEL TRANSACTIONS: Maintain high
standard of efficiency and accuracy with regards to payroll and
personnel transaction processing. Continue to develop and deliver
training for new and existing employees for the Employee Self
Service system. Update and educate employees on County benefits
through communications such as email, staff meetings and the
RMA Newsletter. Develop new time management procedures that
conform to the new automated system. Develop and deliver
training to review timecard completion and requirements for
employees, supervisors and managers.
EMPLOYEE HEALTH AND SAFETY: Review and distribute
revised RMA IIPP, OSHA compliance programs and re-implement
the Safety Committee and Accident Review. Continue to facilitate
and/or provide relevant safety training for RMA employees.
CONTRACTS ADMINISTRATION: Develop and monitor a
tracking mechanism for all of the RMA's PSAs/Agreements,
including the expiration date and PSA/Agreement/Purchase Order
(PO) balance. Continue to support and coordinate with RMA
Project Managers and RMA Finance Staff for appropriate
monitoring of PSA/Agreement terms and funding. Continue staff
cross-training and expand knowledge by attending technical
contract/finance classes.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: The RMA administration and
finance projected IT goals for FY 2012-13 includes the completion
of the Wincams/Advantage interface. It also includes the PC and
Microsoft Office upgrade for 1/3 of total staff, as part of a 3 year PC
replacement cycle plan.
FINANCE: Continue to explore cost allocating functionality by
using the newly implemented Wincams Interface with the County's
financial system, Advantage. Continue to implement standardized
and streamlined processes in accounts payable and cash receipts
based on the Process Improvement Team recommendations; and
continue to automate work products to maximize efficiency,
improve accuracy, and streamline reporting by reducing manual
tasks and entry. Begin using the Advantage Accounts Receivable
module to track other agency reimbursements.
Pending Issues
It is unclear what the full impact will be on the County as a result of
the elimination of the Redevelopment Agency. While we have
included in the FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget funds to cover a
staff position and debris removal and cleanup, there is still
uncertainty as to whether this will be sufficient resources to
adequately handle these new responsibilities.

INTERAGENCY PROJECTS: Successful completion of all special
handling projects including difficult development applications,
complex property negotiations, and significant capital issues.
These projects include: General Plan Implementation; assist with
processing of significant project applications (Ferrini Ranch,
Paraiso Springs, Rancho Canada Village, Monterey Downs/Horse
Park); participation in the Association of Monterey Bay Area
Governments (AMBAG) interagency process including the Energy
program; coordinated effort for a Downtown Government Center
with the City of Salinas; participate with implementation of the
economic development pillars; continued coordination of staff
support for the Alternative Energy and Environment Committee;
collaboration with jurisdictions to implement renewable energy
initiatives (e.g.; solar ordinance, small wind energy ordinance and
pilot project); and interagency coordination and implementation of
the Stormwater Management program including options for
funding.
RMA INTERDEPARTMENTAL FISCAL INITIATIVES: Continue
to improve interagency coordination regarding estimating,
budgeting and collecting fees for services such as Development
Applications, Appeals, Fleet, Community Services Areas/Districts,
Capital projects, etc. Examine opportunities for collection of fees
for unfunded mandates and General Plan policies (traffic impacts,
development impacts, Capital Improvement and Financing Plan,
etc). Enhance agency efforts to identify, seek and obtain public and
private grants . Complete work funded under a Coastal
Implementation Assistance Program (CIAP) grant.
EMPLOYEE DEVELOPMENT: Complete RMA/County Policy
Refresher Training by Building Department, and Public Works
Department Employees. Complete bi-annual Prevention of
Unlawful Sexual Harassment Training and Annual ITD Security
Awareness Training by all RMA Staff.
STAFFING: Evaluate RMA organization to realize greater
efficiency with more centralized functions of service (internal and
external). Continue to work with the RMA units in the timely
delivery of recruitment and selection processes while updating the
job class specifications. Conduct classification studies to support
organizational changes and needs. Develop the bilingual
certification RMA guidelines. Continue to gather data and make
recommendations for improvement as turnover trends and
systemic problems are identified.
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS: Continue to provide assistance to
supervisors and managers in performance management issues and
the completion of performance appraisals. Develop and provide
training on performance documentation, writing Performance
Improvement Plans and writing disciplinary notices.. Establish
policies and best practices to achieve consistency and conformance
across all RMA units.
PAYROLL AND PERSONNEL TRANSACTIONS: Maintain high
standard of efficiency and accuracy with regards to payroll and
personnel transaction processing. Continue to develop and deliver
training for new and existing employees for the Employee Self
Service system. Update and educate employees on County benefits
through communications such as email, staff meetings and the
RMA Newsletter. Develop new time management procedures that
conform to the new automated system. Develop and deliver
training to review timecard completion and requirements for
employees, supervisors and managers.
EMPLOYEE HEALTH AND SAFETY: Review and distribute
revised RMA IIPP, OSHA compliance programs and re-implement
the Safety Committee and Accident Review. Continue to facilitate
and/or provide relevant safety training for RMA employees.
CONTRACTS ADMINISTRATION: Develop and monitor a
tracking mechanism for all of the RMA's PSAs/Agreements,
including the expiration date and PSA/Agreement/Purchase Order
(PO) balance. Continue to support and coordinate with RMA
Project Managers and RMA Finance Staff for appropriate
monitoring of PSA/Agreement terms and funding. Continue staff
cross-training and expand knowledge by attending technical
contract/finance classes.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: The RMA administration and
finance projected IT goals for FY12-13 includes the completion of
the Wincams/Advantage interface. It also includes the PC and
Microsoft Office upgrade for 1/3 of total staff, as part of a 3 year PC
replacement cycle plan.
FINANCE: Continue to explore cost allocating functionality by
using the newly implemented Wincams Interface with the County's
financial system, Advantage. Continue to implement standardized
and streamlined processes in accounts payable and cash receipts
based on the Process Improvement Team recommendations; and
continue to automate work products to maximize efficiency,
improve accuracy, and streamline reporting by reducing manual
tasks and entry. Begin using the Advantage Accounts Receivable
module to track other agency reimbursements.
Policy Considerations
Completion of tasks regarding compliance with AB 32 (Global
Warming Solutions Act) and related General Plan implementation
tasks will require policy considerations by the Board regarding the
pace of program adoption.Stay on time related to the General Plan Implementation Work
Program as far as timelines set up in the policies or by the land use
departments.
Improve the Administrative Permits process to include more
Combo Administrative Permits, push button resolutions, and
improvements to staff report templates.
Continue to improve on technology streamlining techniques and
tools, including public access to GIS, more on-line permitting,
more records available on line, and GIS Parcel Reports customized
to different customer needs.
Establish a Condition Compliance tracking system in Accela
Automation (or equivalent) system.
Continue to develop performance measures that track workload
and major activities within the department including efficiency and
effectiveness measures related to these activities.
STATUS OF FY 2012 GOALS
Goal: Begin Implementation Work Program for 2010 General Plan,
including identifying stakeholder groups, scoping workshops,
ordinance preparation, initiation of policy documents for planning
areas, and substantial consultant work completed on technical
aspects of the Work Program.
Status: The Work Program for 2010 General Plan implementation,
including identifying stakeholder groups, scoping workshops,
ordinance preparation, initiation of policy documents for planning
areas, and substantial consultant work has been initiated, with
several ordinances already adopted, many draft ordinances
submitted from consultants, and many more tasks underway.
Goal: Initiate Local Coastal Program Update, including completion
of Moss Landing Community Plan process.
Status: The Moss Landing Community Plan will be released in FY
2012 for review and preparation of the related EIR has commenced.
The Local Coastal Program Update has been started for Del Monte
Forest, as part of a related development project, and will begin early
next year for North County. A grant to assist with funding is
expected to be awarded in September 2012.
Goal: Complete processing of the nine remaining EIR projects.
Status: Four of the EIR projects were held up for technical
information to be submitted by applicants or applicants that chose
to delay the processing. Five of the EIR projects were decided or
will likely be decided this FY.
Goal: Allow submittal of Application Requests through the webbased
Accela Automation system.
Status: On-line permitting is currently being worked on for simple
permit processing, and submittal of Application Request forms,
using Accela Automation. Both of these functions are expected to
be available for use before the end of the fiscal year.

Road Fund: The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 Recommended Budget
for the Road Fund is $26,357,766. Of this, $11,195,525 is for Salary
and Benefits. The Recommended Budget includes several unfilled
position of which the following are not funded going into FY 2012-
13: Assistant Engineer, (3) Road Maintenance Workers, Traffic
Engineer, Supervising Sanitation Worker, Sanitation Worker,
Sanitation Treatment Plant Operator, and Secretary. In addition,
(3) vacant Senior Road Maintenance Workers were reallocated to
(3) vacant Road Maintenance Worker positions and (1) vacant
Road Maintenance Worker was reallocated to (1) vacant Traffic
Maintenance Worker. The significant decrease in Services and
Supplies is attributable to the differences in the scheduled projects
in process from year to year.
Surveyor: The Recommended Budget of $521,503 reflects a
decrease of $97,871 in appropriations. Due to an increase in
development activity, an increase of $112,414 in revenue from fees
and reimbursable work is also being recommended. The
recommended General Fund Contribution is $289,204.

Litter & Environmental Control: The Recommended Budget for
Litter and Environmental Control is $540,541, a net appropriation
decrease of $25,137. This budget unit has assumed the
administration of the County's Storm Water Management program
which contains a number of new and revised regulatory programs
that have been adopted by the State. These regulatory programs
contain new performance requirements that the County is
mandated to perform to remain in compliance with the permits
under each program.
County Disposal Sites: The Recommended Budget is $158.684.
This includes expenditures for administration and engineering of
ten closed disposal sites in order to remain in compliance with both
Federal and State regulations. This includes issuing contracts for
monitoring at three of the closed disposal sites providing for early
detection of public health hazards. The budget also provides State
mandated reports.
Facilities Administration, Mail and Courier Services: The
Recommended budget for the Facilities Bureau which includes
Facility maintenance, mail handling, courier services, grounds,
utilities, and real property is $6,521,776. The Mail and Courier
budget units are fully cost recoverable from other County
departments that utilize these services. The General Fund
Contribution of $5,854,792 is attributable to Facilities
Administration and maintenance, grounds, utilities, and real
property. The Recommended budget also includes two additional
positions: Building Maintenance Supervisor and Senior Building
Maintenance Worker, as well as reflects the transfer of a
Management Analyst III position to Architectural Services Unit
8173.
Facilities Maintenance Project s Fund: Recommended
appropriations total $3,042,441. An itemized listing of the projects
included in the FY 2012-13 budgets, along with a brief description
and funded amount, can be found in the unit description section of
this book under Unit 8184.
Fleet Management: Fleet Administration has recommended
appropriations totaling $5,882,810. Due to inter/intra-fund
reimbursement net appropriations reflect $348,431 which is offset
by revenue receipts from the Monterey County Office of Education
for the sale of fuel. Therefore, the General Fund Contribution
reflects zero, as Fleet operations is full cost recovery. Shuttle
Services has a General Fund Contribution of $78.029.
Vehicle Replacement Program: The Recommended Budget
assumes vehicle purchases equal to the estimated monthly vehicle
lease payments made by Departments for FY 2012-13. The amount
budgeted for vehicle purchases in FY 2012-13 is $1,466,724. There
are no positions budgeted in this budget unit as all staff costs are
budgeted in Fleet Management (Unit 8185).
Architectural Services: The Recommended Appropriations is
$1,109,720 and is a full cost recovery operation and therefore the
General Fund Contribution reflects zero. Staff in this Unit charge
directly to projects they support, and is predominantly covered by
Fund 401, 402, or 404. The Recommended budget includes the
transfer in of a Management Analyst III from the Facilities Admin
Unit 8176, as well as an additional position for a Facilities Project
Manager.
Capital Projects Fund: The Recommended Budget reflects funding
aligned with projects identified as on-going from FY 2011-12.
Total budgeted amount for Capital Projects Fund 402 in FY2012-13
is $2,833,852. An itemized listing of the projects included in the FY
2012-13 budget along with a brief description and funded amount
can be found in the Capital Projects Section of this book under
Unit 8174.
Facilities Master Plan Implementation Fund: The Recommended
Budget reflects funding aligned with projects identified as on-going
from FY 2011-12. Total budgeted amount for Facilities Master Plan
Fund 404 in FY2012-13 is $3,590,000. An itemized listing of the
projects included in the FY 2012-13 budgets along with a brief
description and funded amount can be found in the Capital
Projects Section of this book under Unit 8174.
Budget Impacts
Facilities Administration: Staffing position changes include the
addition of one Senior Building Maintenance Worker position, and
one Building Maintenance Supervisor position, as well as the
transfer of one Management Analyst III position that was
reallocated to Architectural Services Budget Unit 8173.

COUNTY DISPOSAL SITES: Due to State Budget issues, and the
resultant affect on the budgets of the State Water Resources
Control Board (SWRCB), the annual permit fees required for each
of the disposal sites may increase. PW staff will continue to work
with the County's consultant and RWQCB staff to revise the MRP's
for all CDS for reduced inspections, thereby reducing the operating
budget for the current and future years.
Phase I of the Vapor Recovery Upgrades for above ground tanks
will be due July 2014 and Phase II will be due on January 2016.
Currently, there is no funding allocated to the implementation of
this requirement. In FY 2012-13 PW plans to re-address this issue
with the Board of Supervisors with a plan for implementation
including a cost breakdown.

Monterey County Standards: Review the new Caltrans Standard
Plans and Standard Specifications dated December 2010 and
rewrite the completed standards to comply with Caltrans 2010
Standard Plans and Specifications.
Nacimiento Lake Drive Bridge: Continue the Environmental
Impact Report, determine R/W area needed and process
acquisition, and finalize PS&E.
Peach Tree Road Bridge: Continue with PS&E and determine R/W
needed for the project.
Schulte Road Bridge: Commence construction and complete
project by fall of 2013.
San Juan Road Overlay Project: Award contract and construct
project.
Blackie Road Safety Improvement: Advertise and award project,
and be in construction in September 2012.
Carmel Valley Road at Boronda Road Intersection: Certify the
Environmental Impact Report.
Blanco Road Bike Lane: Complete construction by fall of 2012.
Davis Road Bike Lane: Complete PS&E.
Monterey Bay Sanctuary Scenic Trail, Moss Landing Section: Final
selection of alternate trail location, completion of environmental
documents and completion of final design plans, specifications,
and estimate.
Moss Landing Storm Drain and Street Improvements: Secure
source of funding for construction.
Moss Landing Underground Utility District, 20A: Begin
construction of underground utilities.
County of Monterey Recommended Budget FY 2012-13 454 Resource Management Agency
Moss Landing Underground Utility District, 20B: Begin
construction of underground utilities upon completion of 20A
project.
Scenic Road Dry Weather Diversion: Finalize grant requirements
and begin alternatives analysis and preliminary project design.
Storm water Program: Completion of Annual Report for Permit
Year 6; implementation of final standards for Low Impact
Development (LID) and Hydrograph Modification Control
established by the Central Coast Water Quality Control Board;
implementation of Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) program
for Pajaro River, development of Waste Load Allocation
Attainment Plan for Salinas River TMDL; implementation of ASBS
Special Protections, implementation of new Phase II Municipal
NPDES Permit regulations, possible implementation of portions of
the new Agricultural Order, and continued monitoring of the
Industrial General Permit and State Water Quality Protection
Areas (Ocean Plan) regulations. Continued organization of
Regional Monitoring Program to address monitoring and other
regulatory requirements of ASBS, TMDL and Phase II Municipal
Permit programs, and investigation of reorganization of Regional
Stormwater Group in response to new regulatory requirements.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 Recommended Budget includes
appropriations of $136,832,135, an increase of $10,004,774 from
the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget. The Recommended Budget is
financed by $130,615,168 in revenues, $2,546,391 in prior year fund
balance (Fund 92 and Fund 016), and $3,670,576 in General Fund
Contribution (GFC). The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget
includes 793.8 positions, which represents a net increase of 32.50
positions from the 761.25 positions in the FY 2011-12 Adopted
Budget.
The most significant change in the FY 2012-13 Recommended
Budget is a GFC reduction of $7,985,901 due to a change in
accounting for Health and Mental Health Realignment. Health
Realignment and Maintenance of Effort funding will be deposited
into Fund 025 beginning in FY 2012-13 as opposed to Fund 001.
Mental Health Realignment and Maintenance of Effort ($2.7
million) will be operated out of Fund 023. Health operations will
not be negatively impacted by this change in accounting.
Also included is continued support of $750,000 from Natividad
Medical Center for the cost of the Residency program operated in
the Laurel Clinics.
Budget Impacts
ANIMAL SERVICES: In the FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget,
the General Fund Contribution (GFC) for Animal Services is
$1,284,407, an increase of $235,369 from the FY 2011-12 Adopted
Budget GFC of $1,049,038.
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH: In December 2011, the Board of
Supervisors authorized the Auditor-Controller to establish a
special revenue fund for Mental Health (Fund 023) effective FY
2012-13. Additionally, units 8073-Adult Mental Health Services,

8076-Alcohol and Drug Services, 8081-Behavioral Health
Administration, and 8082-Children Mental Health Services will be
combined into one unit , 8410-Behavioral Health. The
Appropriation Code for Behavioral Health will change from
HEA002 to HEA012. The Recommended Budget includes
significant capital expenditures ($2.4 million) for the new Coastal
Clinic in Marina along with reinstatement of 12.0 FTE and
programs/services from prior year reductions. Due to the move
from the General Fund 001 to Special Revenue Fund 023,
appropriations increased by $1.5 million to reflect COWCAP
charges. Revenue increased due to anticipated growth in Mental
Health Services Act (MHSA) dollars which will allow additional
draw down of Federal Financial Participation funds. Mental Health
Vehicle License Fee funds will be recognized directly in
Appropriation Code HEA012.
PUBLIC HEALTH: The General Fund Contribution (GFC) for
Children's Medical Services was reduced from $777,926 to
$645,875, a decrease of $132,051 from the previous year. The
reduction was achieved by deleting planned expenditures to refresh
computer equipment and reducing other expenditures to the
minimum level required. This year's GFC reduction is the first step
toward the goal of matching GFC to the Maintenance of Effort
(MOE) amount prescribed by Health & Safety Code Section
123940, which currently is $609,159. If absorbed in one budget
year, the total reduction would have been $168,767. After careful
evaluation it was determined that this level of reduction would
require two budget cycles for full implementation. In the coming
year, staff will work to develop a strategy to achieve the necessary
program and budget adjustments to meet the GFC goal.
PUBLIC GUARDIAN/ADMINISTRATOR: Mental Health
Realignment funds are not included in the FY 2012-13
Recommended Budget for the Public Guardian/Administrator
Division as eithe

Continue implementation of Strategic Plan to achieve
improvements in health outcomes for Monterey County residents
in partnership with Natividad Medical Center and the community.
Objective: Develop population based policies that help improve
health in an equitable manner.
Develop and begin process for public health accreditation.
Develop department-wide quality improvement/performance
management program.
Continue to maintain re-designed Health Department website to
ensure immediate access to current information by the public.
Pending Issues
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH: In FY 2011-12, alcohol and drug and
mental health programs were significantly realigned from the State
to the counties. In FY 2012-13, there will be more proposed
changes. The Behavioral Health Bureau responded to the changes
and has plans to further re-engineer revenue and expenditures.
These State changes are occurring in the midst of the formation
and anticipation of Federal health care reform. The elimination of
the State Department of Alcohol and Drug Programs produces
challenges but can be an opportunity for increased services by
better leveraging realigned funding with Federal Medicaid. At this
time there is no clear path to this revenue maximization and there
remains a concern about the decline in funding for addictive
disorders. AB 109 clients are a new referral source while also being
a new challenge for rehabilitative services.
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH: There are several areas of concern
for the Environmental Health Bureau in the immediate future
resulting from past and pending Federal and State legislation.
There could be potential legislation at both the Federal and State
levels that could affect the scope of responsibility in the local food
protection program due to the controversy surrounding E. Coli
O157:H7 and local Agri-business. Stricter regulations for On-site
Wastewater Treatment Systems (OWTS), per Assembly Bill 885,
could mandate significant changes to our current OWTS program,
as well as to the Drinking Water Protection Program. The
magnitude of these changes is unknown at this time, although
implementation has been delayed, regulations are expected to be
finalized in FY 2012-13.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES: Maddy Fund revenue to the
EMS Agency may be decreased by approximately $229,000 and by
$933,750 to local hospitals and Emergency Department Physicians
due to ongoing discussions at the state level to utilize the Maddy
fund as a source of revenue for the state budget deficit.
CLINIC SERVICES: The Fiscal Year 2012-13 proposed State
budget includes a target of 10% reduction in rates paid to Federally
Qualified Health Centers, but is subject to Federal negotiation.
Previous attempts by the State to institute rate reductions have
been successfully challenged in court and were not approved by the
Federal government.

The Public Health Laboratory will increase the number of Public
Health Microbiologists qualified to perform phlebotomy.
Implement new Public Health Laboratory Data System.
The Public Health Regional Team will continue to work to increase
the workload percentage of diabetes cases to 15%. This will be
achieved by working in partnership with Health Department Clinic
Services to enhance referrals. Clinic Services clients with HgA1C
test results greater than eight will be automatically referred for case
management follow-up. The Hg A1C test is a common blood test
used to judge the level of control of type 1 and type 2 diabetes. In
addition, new group classes will be established at the Seaside
Family Health Center and the Laurel Internal Medicine Clinic.
Efforts will continue to deliver case management services to
pregnant and parenting teens. The scope of work for the Teen
Parenting Program will be adjusted according to current results.
The mother/baby unit expectations will be reduced from 100 to 50,
35 in Salinas and 15 in South County, outreach and assessment
activities by the Public Health Nurse III will be increased, and a
survey will be developed to give to eligible participants who refused
the services to identify barriers to participation.
The rate of breastfed infants ages 0-12 months enrolled in the
Women, Infants and Children (WIC) program will increase to 48%
and the exclusively breastfed rate will increase to 23%. For infants
0-6 months the breastfed rate will increase to 38% and the
exclusively breastfed rate will increase to 18.5%.
Pending the outcome of the Supreme Court decision on the
Affordable Care Act, continue the original goal to implement a
comprehensive case management service to 1,300 eligible residetns
that will qualify for the Monterey County's Low Income Health
Program. Case management objectives are to promote linkage to a
medical home, improve health self-management, health literacy,
disease management compliance, increase access to chronic disease
prevention, and reduce health disparities.
Implement new electronic case management record system for
Public Health Regional Team case management services.

The Recommended Budget for the Department totals $180,747,618
in appropriations, financed by $173,224,062 in program revenue,
$7,550,450 in General Fund Contribution (GFC), and $604,697 in
fund balances. GFC was decreased by $1,351,544 representing a
15.2% reduction. This recommendation includes the addition of 16
positions. The estimated costs of each division are as follows:
SOCIAL SERVICES OPERATIONS & ADMINISTRATION: This
component, budgeted for in Unit 8262, includes Community
Benefits, Family & Children Services, Aging & Adult Services,
CalWorks Employment Services, Human Resources, and
Administrative Services. The recommendation includes
appropriations of $89,264,097, revenues of $89,052,554, and
General Fund Contribution of $211,543 which is an increase of
$13,544,878 in appropriations, an increase of $14,005,593 in
revenue, and a decrease of $460,715 of General Fund Contribution
from the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget.
The significant change is a growth in 1991 sales tax realignment
growth and increases in Federal funding. This recommendation
includes the addition of 17 positions of which one was transferred
from unit 8259 (IHSS Public Authority) and consists of the
following: one Eligibility Supervisor, five Eligibility Worker II, two
Eligibility worker III, and one Social Services Aide II for
Community Benefits; two Social Worker III for In Home
Supportive Services; one Employment Training Supervisor, and
two Employment Training Worker III for CalWORKS Employment
Services; one Management Analyst II for Homeless Prevention and
one Management Analyst II transferred from the IHSS Public
Authority; and one Senior Department Information System
Coordinator for Systems Support. Service and Supplies increase of
$4,061,735 from the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget is recommended
due to the implementation of the CalWORKS Wage Subsidy
Program, increases in service departments (County Counsel,
Information Technology, etc), computer hardware needs for state
systems, and an increase in contractor agreements for known rate
changes.
This recommendation also includes a separate fund (022) be added
for 2011 Social Services Public Safety Realignment for transparent
state reporting.

ENTITLEMENT PROGRAMS: ENTITLEMENT PROGRAMS:
Entitlement Programs, budgeted for in Units 8252, 8253, 8254, and
8255, include CalWORKs, Out-of-Home Care, In-Home Support
Services, and General Assistance. The recommended budget is
appropriations of $81,145,240, revenues of $74,575,391.5, and
General Fund Contribution of $6,569,849. This is a $9,164,133
increase in appropriations, a $10,120,694 increase in revenue, and a
$956,561 decrease in General Fund Contribution from the FY
2011-12 Adopted Budget.
The significant change is a decrease in General Fund Contributions
for Out of Home Care and In Home Supportive Services due to the
offset of Sales Tax Realignment revenues. This recommendation
also includes a separate fund (022) be added for 2011 Social
Services Public Safety Realignment for transparent state reporting.
OTHER COMMUNITY PROGRAMS: This division includes
Community Action Partnership, IHSS Public Authority, Area
Agency on Aging, and Other Community Programs. The
recommended budget is appropriations of $3,821,432, revenues of
$3,366,589, and General Fund Contributions of $455,346 which is a
decrease of $466,688 in appropriations and a decrease in revenues
of $447,505 from the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget.
There is a significant change to Other Community Programs due to
the September 2012 expiration of the Homeless Prevention/Rapid
Re-housing Grant that was funded with American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) funds.
This recommendation includes the transfer from IHSS Public
Authority of one filled Management Analyst to Social Services,
Unit 8262 for Aging & Adult Services.
MILITARY AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS OFFICE: The
recommendation is appropriations of $680,000, revenues of
$366,288, and General Fund Contribution of $313,712. There are
no significant changes to programs or General Fund Contribution.
OFFICE FOR EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING: The
recommendation is appropriations of $5,836,849, revenues of
$5,863,240, and no General Fund Contribution. The significant
change is the continued loss of grants, a reduction in formula
funding, and the expiration of grants from the FY 2011-12 Adopted
Budget.
Budget Impacts
During FY 2011-12, DSES staffing levels were significantly reduced.
The Department priorities were focused on sustaining direct
services for the community. As a result, DSES experienced a deep
reduction in the ability to plan and strategize for strategic and
organizational issues both known and unanticipated. The
reductions have impacted managers whose span of control has
expanded thus further eroding the capacity to plan and respond to
emerging needs.
In FY 2012-13, the increased revenue from realignment sales tax
coupled with leveraged federal and state resources will allow DSES
to acquire additional staffing resources to provide limited workload
relief in heavily impacted program areas and address other
important infrastructure needs. The requested augmentations are
identified below.
AGING AND ADULT SERVICES: Two additional Social Worker
positions are recommended to address heavy workload in the In-
Home Support Services (IHSS) Program and to reduce delays in
completing required reassessments.
COMMUNITY BENEFITS: Nine positions, representing one unit,
are recommended for addition in Community Benefits. These
positions include one Eligibility Supervisor, five Eligibility Worker
II, two Eligibility Worker III, and one Social Service Aide II.
CALWORKS EMPLOYMENT SERVICES: Three positions,
including one Employment & Training Supervisor and two
Employment & Training Worker II, are recommended to support
expanded activity to enhance the County's federally required Work
Participation Rate.
DIRECTOR'S OFFICE: One Management Analyst II is
recommended for addition to provide support for implementation
of the Lead Me Home plan to end homelessness and to support the
Director's Office in program development.
ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT: One Senior Departmental
Information Systems Coordinator (DISC) is recommended to
support the Department's efforts in producing and monitoring
management information reports essential for performance
management and program integrity. Additionally, one time
funding is recommended to allow for planning and initiation of
facility projects that support general operations. Necessary facility
improvements that need to be pursued include: re-orienting the
lobby at 1000 South Main Street for Community Benefits to
improve customer safety and provide an alternative entrance to the
main lobby so that customers do not enter the building directly in
front of the busy driveway; and, continuing to plan for the
implementation of a customer Contact Center that will centralize a
variety of tasks associated with case maintenance program
activities. The Contact Center will provide another access point for
the over 70,000 customers receiving benefits in the CalWORKs,
CalFresh and Medi-Cal programs.
MILITARY AND VETERANS AFFAIRS: A Military and Veterans
Representative II to support veterans returning from the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan and veterans of retirement age not currently
receiving benefits was not included in the Recommended Budget.

Youth violence prevention partnerships focus on
employment programs, child welfare and community action. The
Community Corrections Partnership plan focuses DSES efforts to
promote safe and successful re-entry of people returning from
prison and jail through access to resources for meeting basic needs,
incentives for housing assistance and incentives for employment
assistance.
Advocate for increased regulatory flexibility and funding to meet
the needs of low-income families and individuals; vulnerable
children; frail seniors; and individuals living with disability, through
leadership in the County Welfare Directors Association of
California (CWDA) and the American Public Human Services
Association (APHSA).
Pending Issues
CalWORKS/TANF: The governor has proposed major
restructuring of the CalWORKs program that would have
significant impacts on service levels to low income families and
children. The proposal would create additional workload
requirements for counties while reducing funding. The proposal
includes reducing the grants (which are currently below 1984
levels); reducing the length of time on aid from 48 months to 24
months for those recipients not meeting Federal work participation
requirements; reducing supportive services including child care;
and providing a variety of incentives and penalties for families
receiving CalWORKs and CalFresh assistance.
GENERAL ASSISTANCE: Due to provisions in AB 109, which
require the early release of state prisoners back into their
communities, the number of individuals who apply and qualify for
the General Assistance program may increase the amount of
General Funds provided for this program.
IN HOME SUPPORTIVE SERVICES (IHSS): The Governor has
proposed major changes to the program that would result in
reductions of services for consumers of the IHSS program and a
reduction of the county-paid-contribution. Currently, the State is
appealing a judgment ruling against a 20% reduction of hours. The
Governor also proposed eliminating domestic and related services
in some households which will further reduce service levels and
reduce the county-paid-contribution if implemented. However, a
provision of the 2011 Budget that reduced all consumer paid hours
by 3.8% will expire at the end of June, 2011. If the Legislature and
the Governor do not extend the reduction in the Budget Act, the
county will have an increase in costs associated with the paid hours
restoration.
OUT OF HOME CARE: Foster Care and related out-of-home care
programs were part of the Governor's realignment proposal that
was enacted as part of the Budget Act last year. Under the new
provisions, the County is responsible for all non-Federal costs with
the State shifting its share of cost to new sales tax revenues
provided as part of AB 18.
Families who adopt foster children with special needs may receive
Aid to Adoptive Parents (AAP). The AAP program received an
increase in the rate paid retroactive to July 1, 2011. In addition, the
courts have ordered a yearly Consumer Needs Index (CNI)
increase that will become part of the grants in July 2012. It is also
anticipated the Foster Family Agencies will prevail in a similar
court challenge regarding foster care rates. Estimates for these
increases are included in the Department's requested budget.
COMMUNITY ACTION PARTNERSHIP: The President's budget
proposal for Federal Fiscal Year 2012 recommends reducing total
funds for Community Service Block Grant (CSBG) by half. The
President further proposes that the remaining funds be distributed
through a competitive grant-making process; rather than by
formula allocation as stated by current law. These changes are not
included in the Department's requested budget as Congressional
action on the Federal Fiscal Year 2012 budget is still in early stages.
ADULT PROTECTIVE SERVICES funding has changed as part of
the Safety Realignment. Counties no longer have a Maintenance of
Effort (MOE) and now receive funding in the form of Federal pass
through funds and State sales tax apportioned by formula by the
State Controller's office (SCO). To the extent that the sales tax
provides a comparable amount of funding, the program will not
require major changes. If the sales tax receipts are less than prior
years, the program could be affected.
CHILD WELFARE SERVICES: Activities and services related to
this program were part of the Safety Realignment provisions that
were passed last fiscal year as described above. Historical State
General Fund (SGF) contributions have been deleted and replaced
with a portion of sales tax that is allocated to fund a variety of
programs. As mentioned above, if the sales tax receipts are less
than prior years, the program could be affected.
The Department has included $969,930 in the budget request to
provide subsidized wages for participants placed in training and job
opportunities through the CalWORKs program. The CalWORKs
wage subsidy program increases the County's federal Work
Participation Rate (WPR). The County must meet Federal WPR
requirements in order to avoid the imposition of fiscal penalties
and this funding offsets the impact of declining Workforce
Investment Act funding and helps diversify revenue streams for the
program. However, the Department has had difficulty meeting the
federal WPR requirements which could result in the levying of
fiscal penalties.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 County Library Recommended
Budget appropriations increased by $119,028, an approximately
1.5% increase over the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget.
Salaries and Benefits decreased by $89,098, an approximately 1.7%
decrease from the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget. The decrease was
primarily due to a reallocation of several vacant positions; and
decreases in the use of temporary employees; retirement costs and
flex benefit plan contributions.
Services and Supplies increased by $62,664 an approximately 2.9%
increase over the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget. This increase in
Services and Supplies was due to an increase in external
communication expenditures for a contract with AT&T for high
speed Broadband connectivity; janitorial services; computer
software; and a cost increase in the cost allocation plan.
The FY 2012-13 County Library Recommended Budget revenue
increased by $186,767, an approximately 2.8% increase over the FY
2011-12 Adopted Budget. Increases in revenue were due to a
$61,613 projected increase in property tax revenue, an increase of
approximately 1.0% over the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget and a
$70,000 increase in other contributions which will bring the FY
2012-13 budgeted revenue in line with the past two fiscal year
average contributions revenue from the Library Foundation and
Friends. Intergovernmental revenue increased in the FY 2012-13
Recommended Budget by $50,000, an increase of approximately
74.6% over the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget due to an increase in
grant revenue.
Staff adjustments for the FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget
rendered the addition of one (1) Librarian position; and a
reallocation of one-half (.50) Library Assistant I and one-half (.50)
Library Assistant III to add one (1) Supervising Librarian.
The Library hopes not to consume its budgeted FY 2011-2012
Fund Balance; however, if unsuccessful, the Library would have
used Fund Balance to maintain operations over the past two years
and has budgeted Fund Balance use in FY 2012-13. They realize
this approach is unsustainable and is in the process of developing
an interim and long-term strategic plan to meet County Fiscal
Guidelines in having a structural balanced budget where Fund

Balance is not used to maintain operations. The strategic plan
includes an organizational restructuring with a focus on service
level and financial sustainability, as well as Fund Balance growth
and a positive cash balance.
Budget Impacts
Vacant positions are funded through the use of fund balance.
The new San Lucas Branch is scheduled for construction during FY
2012-13. The potential impact the facility may have on the
operational budget and any contingent construction issues.

During FY 2011-13, the Library will continue to meet the Board of
Supervisors Strategic Initiatives and Key Objectives through
meeting the following goals:
Continue to celebrate the Library's centennial in FY 2012-13 with
special programs and events throughout the County.
Complete the Library's strategic plan and organizational
restructure. Components will include a salary study, staff
retention, hiring standards, and service and fiscal sustainability.
Continue the planning and construction of the new San Lucas
Branch and explore alternatives for replacing the currently closed
Parkfield Branch.
Continue the Navigating a New World program and explore
alternatives for expanding the Family Place program to other
branches.
Re-evaluate and revamp bookmobile services for improved and
more efficient service delivery.
Re-evaluate and revamp Library-by-Mail services for improved and
more efficient service delivery.
Work with the cities of Gonzales and Seaside in their pursuit of
new library buildings.
Review and revamp the County Library website.
Pending Issues
The planning and reconstruction of the new San Lucas Branch,
which is scheduled to start in FY 2012-13, there is a need to source
funding to integrate a Sheriff Substation and green building
elements.
The Parkfield Branch library is currently closed and needs a new
facility. Determining the cost for a new facility and a funding source
is necessary.
Both these facilities will place additional pressure on the structural
integrity of the Library operations budget.

The Recommended Budget for the Department totals $529,361 in
appropriations, financed by $117,344 in program revenue and
$412,017 in General Fund Contribution (GFC). GFC was decreased
by $42,694 representing a 9.4% reduction. Due to the substantial
increase in Workers' Compensation, Coopertive Extension was at
risk of losing several vehicles from its fleet, temporary help
services, and various supply accounts needed for operation. Three
augmentation requests were submitted and one budget change
proposal for sevices and supplies was approved for $51,298. The
other two requests for restoration of two Farm Advisor Assistant
III positions were not approved.
Budget Impacts
Because the additional Farm Advisor Assistant III positions were
not authorized, new grants will be restricted. The addition of two
Farm Advisor Assistant III positions would have increased
agricultural productivity and jobs; provided evaluations needed for
new agricultural technology start-up businesses; better positioned
Cooperative Extension to acquire a new UC-paid advisor; and
restored the nutrition programs.

Promote the economic sustainability of the County's economic
base from the agricultural industry by conducting research to solve
current pest problems. Provide the latest research information on
new invasive species and work with appropriate groups and
agencies to prevent local outbreaks. Provide diagnostic services
that lead to the discovery of new diseases that can be stopped
before they spread. Develop economic data that promotes good
business decisions. Provide anti-bioterrorism diagnostic services
for the agricultural industry. Maintain and enhance the resources
of the region by conducting food safety (E. coli) research for local
growing conditions.
Entomology Research Program: Develop information on the
biology and ecology of insect pests and devise management
strategies. Develop naturally resistant lettuce and spinach crops.
Continue work on the integrated Lygus bug insecticide resistance
management program in strawberries. Evaluate novel insecticides
with reduced risk for control of insect pests in lettuce.
Plant Pathology Research Program: Investigate ways to reduce
survival of E. coli on post-harvest crop residues in the soil. Study
the biology and host range of damaging soil borne pathogens
(Macrophomina, Fusarium) and seek ways for growers to control
them. Investigate and characterize new diseases of parsley and
fennel. Seek and identify new races of spinach downy mildew, as
well as identify new, resistant cultivars of spinach for growers to
use. Monitor, collect, and characterize the new viruses that are
affecting crops in Monterey County.
Irrigation and Water Quality Research Program: Develop and
calibrate online irrigation and nitrogen management tool for cool
season vegetables and berries. Conduct trials identifying lettuce
varieties tolerant to low water and low nitrogen conditions.
Evaluate the use of denitrification bioreactors for reducing nitrate
concentrations in the tile drainage water. Evaluate the use of
organic materials for sequestering pesticides in irrigation run-off.
Vegetable and Weed Science Research Program: Develop
information on the efficient nitrogen fertilization of cool season
vegetables to assist growers comply with the new restrictions on
the use of fertilizer by the Regional Water Quality Control Board.
Develop an effective last season weed control system for cool and
warm season vegetables to reduce weeding costs and safeguard
yield. Evaluate the effectiveness of winter crop management
systems to reduce nitrate leaching.
Evaluate an effective system for reducing the nitrate content of tile
drain water that flows to the Marine Sanctuary.
Viticulture Research Program: Evaluate the sustainability of
increased mechanization of coastal vineyards to improve
profitability. Evaluate monitoring tools for the early detection of
powdery mildew in coastal vineyards. Evaluate grape rootstocks
and control practices to reduce the impact of nematode pests in
vineyards. Improve the awareness of local grape growers to assist
in the early detection of invasive insect pests of coastal vineyards.
Improve the quality of life for the County's youth, seniors and
families by training adult volunteers to work directly with youth.
Provide opportunities for youth to become engaged in positive,
research-based activities and develop responsibility and leadership
through community service. Train Master Gardener volunteers
who conduct community enhancement service projects.
Maintain and enhance the natural resources of the County by:
Providing information through classes, workshops, newsletters,
personal consultations and web-site that leads to the use of softer
or less chemicals for pest control or effective alternatives to
chemical controls. Provide farmers and policy makers unbiased,
research-based information regarding water usage. Extend
information to farmers about practices that can lead to decreased
nitrogen leaching and cleaner water runoff. Develop alternatives to
pesticides that might degrade water quality or air quality.

The Recommended Budget for the Department totals $13,649,412
in appropriations, financed by $11,344,379 in program revenue,
$1,574,692 in General Fund Contribution (GFC) and $730,341 in
other fund balances. GFC was decreased by $92,206 representing a
5.5% reduction.
Significant areas of appropriation reductions are $379,690 in
salaries and benefits driven by the deletion of two positions. A
reduction of $1,555,000 in capital expenditures related to successful
implementation of prior year projects. Areas of increased
appropriations are Services and Supplies of $547,107 and Other
Charges of $ 403,470 which reflect an expected increase in park
activities associated with a recovery of our local economy. Other
Financing Sources is reduced by $1,189,750 due to reduced
transfers for capital improvements, while Charges for Services
show a $305,690 reduction.
The Recommended Budget includes a reduction of two Full-Time
Equivalent (FTE) positions; one Office Assistant II (filled) and one
Associate Personnel Analyst (vacant).
Budget Impacts
In order to meet the Recommended GFC target for FY 2012-13 this
budget includes a reduction of two Full-Time Equivalent (FTE)
positions. GFC is reduced by $92,206 from prior year. Reduction of
these positions will require staffing adjustments and may impact
the departments ability to respond to employee and customer
requests.

In FY 2012-13 the Department will strive to maintain a best in class
facility within available resources.
Desired outcome: to provide a customer experience that increases
park attendance and quality of life in Monterey County.
Conversion to internet based, on-line reservation system to
increase customer service offerings and exposure to the Park's
amenities.
In FY 2012-13 the Department will work to create measurable
indicators to quantify and communicate the impact our Parks have
on quality of life and the local economy.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 Recommended Budget for the
Monterey County Water Resources Agency (MCWRA) programs is
$22,443,016. Anticipated revenues of $21,236,227 and use of fund
balances will provide a statutorily balanced budget.
Salaries and Benefits decreased by $954,121, an approximately 15.5
% decrease from the FY 2011 -12 Adopted Budget. The decrease
was primarily due to a combination of eliminating and defunding
vacant positions.
Services and Supplies decreased by $10,949,863, an approximately
38% decrease from the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget. The primary
driver for the decrease was a budgeting change from historically
how MCWRA budget its fund balance. The fund balance is no
longer rolled into an expense line.
Revenue decreased by $1,638,370, an approximately 7.2% decrease
from the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget. The primary drivers for the
decrease in revenue is receiving less grants, reflected in
Intergovernmental Revenues an approximately 80.7% decrease and
other sources of funds, an approximately 78.5% decrease.
Though MCWRA budget is statutorily balanced, the budget fails to
meet the County of Monterey financial guideline of a structurally
balanced budget. A structurally balanced budget matches total
ongoing expenditures to the annual estimated revenues, rendering
an ongoing sustainable budget. MCWRA recognizes over the
interim period, failure to have a structural balanced budget is not
sustainable. They are working on interim and long-term strategic
plans to meet County Fiscal Guidelines where fund balance is not
used to sustain ongoing operations. The strategic plan will
consider organizational restructuring with a focus on service level
and financial sustainability, as well as fund balance growth and
positive cash balances.

Staff adjustments for the FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget
rendered the following positions eliminated: one (1) Deputy
General Manager; two (2) Associate Water Resources Hydrologists;
one (1) Associate Water Resources Biologist; one (1) Water
Resource Property Specialist; and three (3) Water Resources
Technicians.
Budget Impacts
FY 2012-13 Nacimiento and San Antonio Lakes Fuel Spill Clean-up
Project costs are not included in the budget, but are considered
neutral based on defined costs and reimbursement sources under
consideration.
Any reimbursements realized for the Regional Desalination Project
costs due the MCWRA will have a positive impact on the budget.
The successful conclusion of negotiations and implementation of
the Nacimiento Hydroelectric Plant rate increase by November
2012 or it may have a negative impact on the budget.

Complete and implement the Power Purchase Agreement on the
output of the Hydroelectric Plant. New rates implementation is to
be effect by November 1, 2012.
Develop funding options for the flood control zones where
assessment fees are static.
Develop and implement Performance Measurements focused on
providing economy, efficiency and effectiveness in services
provided to the customer base. Measures are to reflect the Board
of Supervisors Strategic Initiatives and Objectives; MCWRA
Board; and stakeholders key areas of concerns. Economy is the
acquisition of resources in the appropriate quantity and quantity at
the lowest cost consistent with quantity and quality requirements.
Efficiency is achieved by utilizing the smallest amount of resources
as expressed in terms of cost per unit of service provided (output).
Effectiveness is based on the achievement (level of service) of a
predetermined goal or objective for a program or service
(outcome).
Collaborate with appropriate departments in the provision of the
annual costs, estimated completion timeline and fund sourcing for
the Nacimiento and San Antonio Lakes Fuel Spill Clean-up Project.
Final determination of MCWRA project cost obligation, fund
sourcing and project timeline for completion of the Pajaro Levee
Bench Excavation Project.
Develop appropriate funding mechanisms for mandated fish and
flow monitoring programs required by agreement with the
National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration Fisheries.
Develop appropriate funding for the North Monterey County
Comprehensive Water Supply Solution.
Implement an impact fee for Fund 122, Reclamation Ditch; and
urban water supplies.
Development of an interim and long-term strategic plan to render
MCWRA structurally balanced, where expenditures are matched
with estimated revenue. MCWRA structure focus is to meet
County Financial Guidelines and ongoing operations are
sustainable and not reliant on fund balance and one-time source of
funds.
Pending Issues
The FY 2012-13 Pajaro Levee Bench Excavation Project is not
included in the budget pending final grant award determination. It
is a cost share project with the County of Santa Cruz, with an
estimated project cost of $8,000,000-$10,000,000. The $4,000,000
due from MCWRA is partially offset by a $2,300,000 Proposition
50 Integrated Regional Water Management Plan (IRWMP) award
to the Pajaro River Watershed. Santa Cruz County submitted an
application for a Proposition 84 grant, where MCWRA share
would be $1,500,000; rendering a best case impact of $200,000.
The project has two phases and completion is estimated in FY
2013-14.Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 expenditures are budgeted based on FY
2011-12 activities through December 2011 and annualized for the
twelve month fiscal year at zero base expenses. To appropriately
reflect expected future expenditures, annualized amounts are
normalized by excluding one-time events. Recommended
Expenditures for FY 2012-13 are budgeted at $196,673,437,a
$1,830,572 decrease compared to the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget;
representing an approximately 1% decrease.
Salaries and Employee Benefits are budgeted at $106,138,224, an
increase of $692,625 over the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget, which
represents an approximately 0.7% increase. Increases were realized
in Regular Employee Salary; Overtime and the Employee
Assistance Program. The primary drivers for the regular employee
salary increase are: salary step increases and insurance cost,
operating a 24 hour pharmacy program, re-opening of the Diabetes
Ed. Department, increasing the Family Practice Residency
Program, increasing quality assurance resources, electronic health
records implementation, a new Hematology/Oncology Program,
and other support positions. Additionally, to fill critical specialties
and expand services, there will be an increase in employed and
contracted physicians.
Services and Supplies increased by $5,862,425 from the FY 2011-12
Adopted Budget, which represents an approximately 10.8%
increase. The main drivers for the increase in Services and
Supplies: Other Professional and Special Services; Miscellaneous
Supplies; Utilities; Minor Equipment; and Accounting and
Auditing. The increases were partially offset by a decrease in
Property Insurance. Cost Plan Charges of $3,197,970 are captured
in Professional and Special Services. The charges are a reduction
by approximately $1,254,786. The savings is carried to offset any
potential costs associated with approval of the proposed affiliation
between Salinas Valley Memorial Hospital and NMC. The increase
in Miscellaneous Supplies is associated with inflationary
pharmaceutical and supply cost, as well as volume increase in
patient care.
Capital Assets will decrease by $8,428,858, from the FY 2011-12
Adopted Budget, an approximately 28% decrease. The building and
improvement budget of $12,173,951 represents projects the Board
of Supervisors Capital Improvement Committee has prioritized
and the Budget Committee approved funding. Equipment and
Information Technology respective capital budgets, which basically
share equally a $9,268,520 budget, are approved through the
Adopted Budget process.
FY 2012-13 NMC Recommended Budget revenue is budgeted at
$183,891,989, a $9,094,177 decrease at 5% compared to the FY
2011-12 Adopted Budget. The main driver to the decrease is FY
2011-12 Adopted Budget had a debt issuance of $15,000,000.
Operational revenue is budgeted at $142,773,989, a $6,018,823
increase, which represents a 4% increase. Health Fees represented
$5,837,672 of the increase at 4%. The increase is due to a reduction
in the un-insured payor mix, and a mid-year fee increase in FY
2011-12.
Intergovernmental Revenue is budgeted at $41,118,000, an
$113,000 decrease, which represents a 0.3% decrease or essentially
flat growth.
Fund Balance use is budgeted at $12,781,448, a $7,263,605 increase
over the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget, a 132% increase. The main
driver for the increase is Capital Projects. NMC hopes not to
consume its Fund balance and looks to seek other funding sources
to fund Capital Projects.
Staff adjustments were made during FY 2011-12 by reallocating
one (1) Administrative Secretary to one (1) Administrative
Secretary-Confidential; added one (1) Hospital Maintenance
Mechanic; added one (1) Management Analyst I; added one (1)
Health Information Management Coder II; and reallocated by
deleting one (1) Social Worker V; and adding one (1) Dietitian.
Staff adjustments for the FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget
rendered the following additions: one (1) Management Analyst III;
one (1) Outpatient Services Manager; one (1) Rehabilitative
Services Manager; one and four tenths (1.40) Pharmacy Technician;
two and two tenths (2.20) Nursing Assistant; one (1) Orthopedic
Technician; two (2) Medical Assistant; eight tenths (0.80) Dietitian;
two (2) Licensed Vocational Nurse; twelve and four tenths (12.40)
Staff Nurse II; one (1) Clinic Nurse; one (1) Admin Nurse/House
Supervisor; two (2) Hospital Maintenance Mechanic; one and eight
tenths (1.80) Office Assistant III: one (1) Principal Office Assistant;
and one (1) Senior Patient Service Representative.
Staff adjustments for the FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget
rendered the following deletions: two and six tenths (2.60) Staff
Nurse III; (1) Utilization Management Coordinator; one (1)
Resident Physician IIII; one and seven tenths (1.70) Contract
Physician; one (1) Medical Social Services Supervisor; one (1)
warehouse worker; one and one tenth (1.10) Office Assistant II; one
(1) Medical Unit Clerk; six tenths (0.60) Patient Services
Representative II; and one (1) Patient Account Representative II .
Budget Impacts
The Salinas Valley Memorial Hospital affiliation restructures and
implementation costs may have a negative impact on the budget.
The Blue Cross contract and contracting rates with the
Correctional Training Facility-Soledad Prison (CTF) revenue
considerations may have a negative impact on the budget.
The Low Income Health Plan (LIHP) named ViaCare,
implementation and fiscal considerations may have a positive
impact on the budget.
Achieve quality, service and growth targets across key clinical
service lines focusing on core clinical strengths and utilizing
available hospital capacity.
If selected as a SVMH affiliation finalist, complete the NMC and
SVMH consolidation process for organizational structure,
operations and assets.
Substantially complete Building 400 ambulatory care space plan
build out.
Achieve noted improvement in The Joint Commission core
measures compliance.
Improve PRC patient satisfaction survey score where the
population measured, 70% provides an excellent score.
Expand medicine service line with the addition of oncology
services.
Implement physician practice management system.
Implement new nurse call system.
Secure the second phase of funding for the five-year capital plan.
Pending Issues
The U.S. Supreme Court decision and its affect on the Federal 2010
Patient Protection and Accountable Care Act; its affect on the
California Section 1115 Medicaid Waiver; and subsequent affect on
the County Low Income Health Plan, Via Care.
Strategy selection, implementation and whether or not it is an
effective, measured through revenue sustainability, response to the
January 2012 Anthem/Blue Cross Contract termination.