The Recommended Budget for the County Administrative Office
(CAO) is $53,935,039, a net increase of $1,043,639, or 2%.
Increases were realized as follows: $1,672,763 in salaries and
employee benefits, $8,820,154 in services and supplies, $1,639,671
in capital assets, and $612,949 in appropriations for contingencies.
The main driver of the increases is the addition of Fleet Services to
the CAO. Decreases were realized in other charges in the amount
of $7,988,123, and other financing uses in the amount $3,713,775.
The addition of Fleet Services was the primary driver for the
decrease in other charges and the reduction of medical care
services for the decrease in other financing uses.
The reduction in medical care services reflects California electing
to implement a State run Medicaid expansion afforded by the
Affordable Care Act. The State anticipates counties' costs and
responsibilities in providing health care services for the indigent
population will decrease because most of the indigent population
are eligible for coverage through Medi-Cal or the Health Insurance
Exchange.
Recommended General Fund revenues are $183,703,838, an
increase of $2,690,163, or 1%. The increase is due to the following
increases: $5,325,792 in tax revenue, $395,618 in licenses, permits,
and franchises, $141,101 in revenue from use of money and
property, $456,594 in charges for services, and $553,363 in other
financing sources. The increases were offset by significant
decreases of $4,015,921 in intergovernmental revenue and
$166,384 in miscellaneous revenue.
The reduction in intergovernmental revenue is a reflection of
Assembly Bill 85 (AB 85) that provides a mechanism for the State
to redirect State Health Realignment funding (1991 State Health
Realignment) to fund social service programs. AB 85 set forth a
specific formula-based approach for the redirected funds.
Budget Impacts
The CAO's Recommended FY 2014-15 Budget includes the
elimination of 1.0 vacant Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) Senior
Secretary position in the Intergovernmental and Legislative Affairs
Division. The addition of Fleet Services units resulted in an
addition of 1.0 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) Finance Manager II in
the Administration Division and the transfer of 19 positions from
Fleet Services.CAO DEPARTMENTAL: The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget
for the CAO's Departmental Division is $6,229,149, an increase of
$740,684, or 13%. This budget reflects increases in both
expenditures and revenue, which were primarily driven by the
addition of Fleet Services to the CAO. The new unit, Office of
Community Engagement & Strategic Advocacy (OCESA) did not
have a budgetary impact. The funds for the Unit were sourced
from the Administration and Finance unit.
ADMINISTRATION & FINANCE: The FY 2014-15
Recommended Budget for the Administration & Finance Division
is $1,151,601, an expenditure decrease of $412,691, or 26%. The
decreases experienced in this Unit were driven by using the Unit as
the funding source for the OCESA Division. The addition of Fleet
Services resulted in the addition of 1.0 Full Time Equivalent (FTE)
Finance Manager II.
BUDGET & ANALYSIS: The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget
for the Budget & Analysis Division is $1,060,952, an expenditure
decrease of $47,820 or 4%. The decrease was realized through
decreases in Workers' Compensation Insurance and services &
supplies.
CONTRACTS/PURCHASING: The FY 2014-15 Recommended
Budget for the Contracts/Purchasing Unit is $987,947, an
expenditure increase of $200,000 or 25%. The increase is based on
a FY 2013-14 Board of Supervisors directive to implement
improvements in the countywide contract process and the resultant
budget modification. The increase and response to the directive
included the addition of 1.0 FTE Management Analyst III.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AND LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS: The
FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for the Intergovernmental and
Legislative Affairs (IGLA) Division is $1,063,183, an expenditure
decrease of $55,621, or 5%. The decrease is due to the deletion of a
1.0 FTE vacant Senior Secretary position.
OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES (OES): The Recommended
Budget for the Office of Emergency Services is $912,817 and
reflects the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget with a minimal increase of
$4,167. Essentially operations are status-quo.
OFFICE OF COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT AND STRATEGIC
ADVOCACY: The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for the
Office of Community Engagement & Strategic Advocacy (OCESA)
is $559,342. The budget for this operation was previously budgeted
within the Administration & Finance Unit.
FLEET ADMINISTRATION: The Recommended FY 2014-15
Budget is for Fleet Management is $5,287,741. Due to inter/intrafund
reimbursements and the fuel sales revenues realized through
the Monterey County Office of Education, the net budget is
$319,803. Fleet Administration provides services to entities within
the government and as such, the budget is totally derived from the
services rendered. It operates on a full cost recovery basis and does
not receive any General Fund Contribution (GFC). This unit was
formerly a Resource Management Agency-Public Works
Department unit.
SHUTTLE SERVICES: FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for
Shuttle Services is $163,351, a decrease of $25,000, or 13%. The
reduction is based on reducing overtime through better alignment
of service with demand and recognizing revenue received through
agreements with other government entities. The combination
results in the General Fund Contribution remaining the same at
$138,351. This unit was formerly a Resource Management Agency-
Public Works Department unit.
VEHICLE REPLACEMENT PROGRAM: The Recommended
Budget for the Vehicle Replacement Program is where vehicle
purchases are based on the estimated monthly vehicle lease
payments made by respective County departments to replace their
vehicles once they have reached their useful life. The monthly
payment is calculated based on the useful life of the vehicle. The
amount budgeted for vehicle purchases in FY 2014-15 is
$1,250,707. The revenue of $53,362 is estimated proceeds from
vehicles sold at auction. The staff associated with this Unit, are
budgeted in Fleet Administration (Unit 8451). The unit previously
was under the Resource Management Agency-Public Works
Department.
Budget Impacts
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AND LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS (IGLA):
Eliminated 1.0 FTE vacant Senior Secretary positon.
OFFICE OF COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT AND STRATEGIC
ADVOCACY: In Fiscal Year 2013-14, the Board approved an
amendment to a contract for the completion of the Integrated Gang
Violence Prevention Strategic extending the contract to June 2014
and providing additional funding. The plan may not be completed
by the expiration of the contract and funding will no longer be
available in FY 2014-15. OCESA requested an $43,210
augmentation to have funding in case there was a need to extend
the contract date. OCESA is working hard to ensure the plan is
completed this Fiscal Year.ADMINISTRATION & FINANCE/BUDGET & ANALYSIS:
Update, develop, and recommend fiscal policies to assure the
financial stability of the County.
Collaborate with departments to produce periodic financial reports
and annual Three-year Financial Forecasts for the Board of
Supervisors.
Develop and recommend for Board of Supervisors' consideration,
principles and strategies for development of the FY 2015-16
Recommended Budget.
Provide continuous improvement in the Fiscal Year Recommended
Budget Book to provide greater transparency and user-friendliness.
Implement the successful integration of Fleet Services with the
CAO.
CONTRACTS/PURCHASING: Complete collaborative work with
County departments to improve the countywide contracts/
purchasing process.
Continue to develop performance measures that track major
workload indicators and level of service performance to help
manage and communicate overall performance.
Continue to improve outreach in the area of green procurement, in
accordance with the County's climate-friendly purchasing policy.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL & LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS: Direct
preparation and implementation of the County's FY 2014-15
legislative principles, priorities, and platform.
Provide legislative analysis and coordinate advocacy services in
support of County legislative priorities and critical County
initiatives.
Direct development and continue implementation of the County's
performance management program.
Facilitate and coordinate joint efforts among the County and other
jurisdictions/agencies to secure funding to implement County
priority initiatives.
OFFICE OF COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT & STRATEGIC
ADVOCACY: Complete the development of an integrated gang
violence prevention action plan in response to the Monterey
County Gang Violence Prevention Strategic Plan.
Implement the integrated gang violence prevention action plan in
developing short and long term goals and establishing measurable
outcomes and objectives, which includes serious and sustained
collaboration among stakeholders and significant involvement by
the public at large.CONTRIBUTIONS - PROPOSITION 172: The County
contributes a portion of its Public Safety Sales Tax (Proposition
172) revenue to fire protection service providers in unincorporated
areas of the County. The disbursement model for Proposition 172
as of FY 2011-12, is the sharing of the full 9.13% of Proposition 172
revenues for the most recently audited fiscal year with the
Association. Under this formula, the Association's share of
Proposition 172 revenues will increase by $129,191 to $2,607,735 in
FY 2014-15.
CONTRIBUTIONS - OTHER AGENCIES: The FY 2014-15
Recommended Budget is $486,881 and reflects payment of fees and
dues to other government agencies, such as the Monterey Bay
Unified Air Pollution Control District and the Association of

Monterey Bay Area Governments (please see the unit narrative for
a complete list of agencies funded by this program).
TRIAL COURTS: The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for
expenditures is $9,025,615 which is the same level as FY 2013-14.
CONTINGENCIES: The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for
General Fund Contingencies totals $5,407,307, an increase of
$612,949 from the previous year. This funding level complies with
the Board of Supervisors' policy (adopted in January 2005),
establishing the General Fund Contingencies appropriation at 1%
of estimated General Fund revenues.
COUNTY MEMBERSHIPS: The FY 2014-15 Recommended
Budget of $222,329 is a $173,870 increase from the prior year. The
budgeted total is sufficient for the County's current membership
costs for the California State Association of Counties and the
National Association of Counties (please see the unit narrative for a
complete list of memberships funded by this unit).
MEDICAL CARE SERVICES: Due to an accounting change,
effective FY 2012-13, this unit appropriates Vehicle License Fee
Realignment revenue to the Health and Social Services
departments, and the County's portion of the Sales Tax Revenue
match for health and mental health services. Effective July 1, 2012,
the Mental Health match will be administered in Fund 023-
Behavioral Health; and the Health and Social Services department
monies will be administered in Fund 025-Realignment/ Vehicle
License Fees. As of January 1, 2014, Assembly Bill 85 as modified by
Senate Bill 98 (AB85) reduces California Counties' health
realignment funds by an average of 60% (Please see detail at the
Unit level). Therefore, the Recommended appropriations for this
unit are $8,334,327 reflecting a decrease of $3,595,691 from the
previous Fiscal Year.
OTHER FINANCING USES: This unit provides operating
transfers to various County programs including the County's Public
Improvement Corporation (PIC) Debt Service Fund (Fund 251) to
finance public facility improvements and the Monterey County
Next Generation (NGEN) Operational Area Emergency
Communications System. It also provides contributions for the
Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA) program, the Fort Ord
Reuse Authority (FORA) annual membership fees, Redevelopment
& Housing's pollution and liability insurance costs for the East
Garrison Redevelopment project, operation of the Prunedale
Senior Center, Audit expenses, contracted publishing services for
the annual Recommended Budget book, and transfers in support of
the following County departments and programs: County Library,
Parks, Law Library, and the Public Works/Road Fund chip seal
paving program, Carmel Lagoon sandbar emergency response
work and capital transfers for Jail Project. The FY 2014-15
Recommended Budget increases appropriations in this unit by
$2,758,957 (15%), to $20,580,517.
OTHER GENERAL EXPENDITURES: Recommended
expenditures in this unit for FY 2014-15 are $67,500 which is the
same level as FY 2013-14.
NON-PROGRAM REVENUE: This unit includes all non-program
revenues that are not directly associated with operating
departments. Non-program revenues are discretionary funds.
Primary sources of non-program revenues including property
taxes, sales taxes, transient occupancy taxes (TOT) also referred to
as hotel taxes, interest earnings, property transfer taxes, utility
franchises, interest on short-term investments for cash flow
purposes, open space subventions, discretionary State and Federal
aid, property tax administrative cost recoveries, and the sale of
fixed assets. A portion of Vehicle License Fee (VLF) revenue for
programs that were realigned under State/local program
realignment, and tobacco settlement funds, are also budgeted in
this unit. The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for Non-
Program Revenue totals $174,190,643. This total represents an
increase of $1,434,960 over the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget,
primarily related to estimated growth in revenue from property
taxes.
HOMELAND SECURITY GRANT PROGRAM: The FY 2014-15
Recommended Budget for the Homeland Security Grant, Fund 024
is $973,679 in appropriations and $973,679 in revenue. There is no
budgeted General Fund Contribution for this unit.
Budget Impacts
NON-PROGRAM REVENUE: The FY 2014-15 Recommended
Budget for Non-Program Revenue reflects the potential impact of
the State's adoption of AB 85, effective January 1, 2014. As a result
of this legislation the State proposes to retain 51% of the County's
previous levels of revenue from Vehicle License Fees (VLF), related
to Public Health Realignment. This action potentially impacts VLF
revenues in the last half of FY 2013-14, with an estimated year-end
revenue shortfall of $2.2 million. The FY 2014-15 estimated impact
is $4.6 million. The State will notify the County annually regarding
the amount of County VLF revenue to be withheld, up to 51%. As
of this writing, the State's determination for FY 2013-14 and FY
2014-15 has not been received.The Recommended Budget for FY 2014-15 is $12,729,208. This
includes the transfer of 1.0 FTE Principal Legal Analyst from
County Counsel to the Human Resources Department (HRD) as a
Human Resources Program Manager.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget provides the resources necessary to
maintain FY 2013-14 service levels in most departmental
functional areas. Three vacant positions (1-Associate Personnel
Analyst, 1-Management Analyst III, and 1-Accounting Technician)
were deleted from the FY 2014-15 budget, and three Learning and
Organizational Development poistions were added for a net
increase of one FTE.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2014-15 Recommended Budget for the
Economic Development Department (EDD) is $21,496,135. FY
2014-15 anticipated revenues are $17,747,776. The decrease in
budgeted expenditures is primarily due to the completion of the
Pajaro Park and Merritt Street projects in FY 2013-14. General
Fund Contribution of $2,658,965 and the use of $1,089,394 of Fund
Balance provide a statutorily balanced budget.
Other Charges are $5,353,208, a $1,991,177 increase over the FY
2013-14 Adopted Budget or an approximate 37% increase. This is
primarily due to an increase of $1,011,792 for the Fort Ord
Retirement Obligation which is based on the Redevelopment
Obligation Payment Schedule (ROPS) to cover administrative costs
as well as potential claim settlements in Fiscal Year 2014-15.
Additional factors for the overall increase in the Other Charges
category include a slight increase to the Development Set-Aside
Agreements per the increase in Transient Occupancy Tax as well as
a change to where/how the Department budgeted the Silver Star,
AB109 and Workforce Solutions program funds. In FY 2013-14
Silver Star, AB109 and Workforce Solutions program funds were
budgeted to offset/credit expenditures, however due to grant
requirements these funds will be budgeted as revenue in FY 2014-
15 instead of offsetting total expenditures.
Revenue is $17,747,776, a reduction of $1,200,989 and an
approximate 6% decrease from the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget.
Anticipated Loan Repayment revenue decreased for FY2014-15
due to a slow down in loan activity resulting from the closing of the
Neighborhood Stabilization Project (NSP) 1, NSP3 and HOME
grants in FY 2013-14. There was also a reduction in revenue for
the Pajaro/Castroville Retirement Obligation due to a slow down in
activity as the Pajaro Park and Merritt Street projects were both
completed.
The Economic Development Department (EDD) includes three
primary divisions; Economic Development, Housing and
Community Development, and Redevelopment Successor Agency
& Housing Successor Agency activities:ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT is represented by the Workforce
Investment Board (WIB) Fund 021-Unit 8396; Development Set
Aside Fund 001-Unit 8043; Cluster Loans Fund 001-Unit 8042;
Office of Employment Training Fund 007-Unit 8427; and the
Revolving Loan Program Fund 011-Unit 8044.
EDD's strategic plan for economic development is based on input
from more than 150 key stakeholders and the Economic
Development Committee, who identified four pillars or "economic
base" industry groups and four new economic opportunity areas:
Agri-technology, "Blue Economy" research and development, Ecorecreation
and wellness, and Edu-tourism integrated with and
including Small Business.
HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT is represented
in Community Development Grants and Reuse Fund 13-Unit 8199
and 8200; and Inclusionary Housing Fund 009-Unit 8208.
The Community Development Grants and Reuse Fund include two
grants which were awarded during FY 2012-13: HUD Direct
Entitlement of the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG
program funds for the Urban County consisting of Monterey
County, Del Rey Oaks and the City of Gonzales); and a State CDBG
grant for 1) Camphora Workforce Housing and 2) a Planning and
Technical Assistance Grant to determine the feasibility of a new
regional flower distribution center.
The Inclusionary Housing Fund includes revenues for inclusionary
housing. Revenues declined during the past several years because
of the slowdown in private housing development in the
unincorporated area, along with a policy shift towards requiring
developers to construct Inclusionary Housing Units onsite instead
of paying fees. Despite the decrease in revenues, there is a
continuing need for ongoing monitoring of existing Units,
processing of owner requests to refinance or resell their
Inclusionary Homes, and review of new development projects for
compliance with the Inclusionary Ordinance.
Annual monitoring of HOME, Inclusionary Housing and RDA
Affordable Housing Units continues daily as does assistance with
the refinance and resale of Inclusionary Units.
REDEVELOPMENT SUCCESSOR AGENCY AND HOUSING
SUCCESSOR AGENCY replaces the former Redevelopment
Agency (RDA). The RDA was a planning and financing entity
formed to eliminate blight and revitalize deteriorated areas within
designated Redevelopment Project Areas. The Agency received
property tax increment in three Project Areas established under
California Redevelopment Law. RDAs were eliminated through a
State Dissolution Act in February of 2012.
The Capital and Housing Set-Aside funds that were held by the
RDA are now held by the County as Successor Agency/Housing
Successor Agency. The funds held by the County as Successor
Agency include funding to complete enforceable obligations that
were in effect at the time the RDA was eliminated. The use of
funds in these units is subject to Oversight Board approval. The
Recommended Budget reflects the funds that are expected to be
available to meet existing obligations and pass through to other
taxing entities.
Funds generated from the former Castroville/Pajaro and Boronda
Successor Agencies will be used for monitoring other affordable
housing in the Project Areas to ensure the units remain available
for low and very low-income households and developing and/or
assisting other affordable housing in the County. The only housing
property owned by the County is the existing Kents Court
Affordable Housing project located in Pajaro. Cash flow from
operations for the development will be used in support of
affordable housing efforts as well.
RDA originally had four (4) project areas established: Castroville/
Pajaro; Boronda; Fort Ord and East Garrison. These project areas
have an obligation of Debt Service, Capital Project and Housing
Fund. With the Dissolution Act, Debt Service funds became Trust
and Obligation Retirement funds and Redevelopment Capital
Projects became Redevelopment Successor Agencies.
The Castroville/Pajaro Redevelopment Successor Agency
completed the Pajaro Neighborhood Park project and also
completed a project for pedestrian and traffic safety improvements
to Merritt Street in Castroville during FY 2013-14.
The Boronda Redevelopment Successor Agency no longer has
pending project activity. The goal of the remaining undeveloped
property contained in the former Boronda Redevelopment Area is
to annex it into the City of Salinas during the Fiscal Year 2014-15
for future development with industrial and job generating uses.
The Fort Ord Redevelopment Successor Agency and the East
Garrison Redevelopment Successor Agency are committed through
a Development and Disposition Agreement (DDA) and various
reimbursement contracts with the developer of the East Garrison
portion of Fort Ord. In addition, under State law, 35% of net
property taxes and 50% of lease income are payable to the Fort Ord
Reuse Authority. The budget recognizes payments to FORA and
repayment of a loan from the Housing Fund. The remaining
appropriations are to be used for the East Garrison project,
including the historic district, community facilities, and other
project implementation requirements in accordance with the DDA.
The former Fort Ord and East Garrison Housing Successor
Agencies have ongoing uncertainty with respect to current and
future property taxes. Revenues received will be used to meet the
Agency's obligation to provide funds to support affordable housing
opportunities located in the East Garrison development.
Once the financial commitments of the RDA are met, remaining
funds will be distributed to taxing entities within the project areas.
Budget Impacts
Business Retention and Expansion and Business Attraction efforts,
as outlined in the Strategic Plan, are hampered without assigned
staff and resources to implement the Strategic Plan as envision by
the Economic Opportunity Committee.
Due to the lack of funding available to successfully fund annual
memberships that foster business relationships with certain key
non-profit organizations such as the Society of Office and
Industrial Realtors, Site Selection Network, Coronet Global and
our area's local Chambers and government organizations such as
the Small Business Development Centers, the level of
organizational collaboration diminishes which affects Business
Retention and Expansion.Participate in the City of Salinas/Civic Center Downtown
Revitalization Plan.
Develop a countywide economic development strategy including
specific action items for Monterey County to support and facilitate
opportunity in the following economic pillars: Agriculture;
Tourism; Research, Education and Technology; and Small Business.
Support the workforce strategy that creates paths of economic
opportunity for residents.
Align with strategic partners, public and private, in order to
strengthen economic development efforts.
Evaluate return on investment of County funds expended on
economic development efforts.
Create a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the
County and cities to lead business retention, expansion and
attraction.
Develop an implementation plan for a multi-department
countywide economic development strategy.
Develop and promote Monterey County as a destination for ecorecreation
and wellness.
Support a diversified collective impact model to work toward
"cradle to career" model that is integrated into the countywide
development strategy.
Support the Central Coast Broadband Consortium for broadband
service throughout Monterey County in order to support business
expansion and attraction.
Develop, in collaboration with the County Information Technology
Dept. (ITD) and Resource Management Agency Public Works
Division, a Broadband Policy and trenching procedure to expand
conduit and fiber resources in the County.
Encourage and increase revenue generating events at County Parks.
Continue affordable housing efforts.
Pending Issues
The Department continues to work with the State who conducted
an audit of the Office of Employment and Training (OET)
programs that received American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
(ARRA) funds and found significant findings that may result in the
County having to reimburse the State for funds spent that did not
meet the eligibility requirements. The Department is working
towards a full resolution of the findings.
Since the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency, The Economic
Development Department (EDD) has also lost redevelopment
funding which contributed significantly to covering operating costs
in previous years. It may be necessary for the Board to perform an
annual review of the department going forward to revisit the
purposes and successes of both the Housing Program and the
Economic Development Program. This will ensure that sufficient
resources are allocated to EDD so it may complete its mission and
support efforts which ensure that the residents are being served as
described in the Strategic Initiative.The Recommended Budget for the Equal Opportunity Office totals
$747,050 in appropriations and General Fund Contributions (GFC).
The Equal Opportunity Office budget remained status quo from
Fiscal Year 2013-14.
The Recommended Budget includes the costs associated with
required online training for the Prevention of Sexual Harassment
for all employees. The Recommended Budget also includes the
cost for consulting services related to the update of the County's
Equal Opportunity Plan.
Budget Impacts
The Equal Opportunity Office is facing a 6% increase in costs
associated with internal charges (i.e. General Liability, I.T., ERP, and
Building Rent). The increase significantly impacts the
department's budget as it is already operating on a constrained
budget that is required to provide mandated trainings, conduct
investigations and costs associated with the annual update of the
County's Equal Opportunity Plan.
Despite the budget impacts, the Equal Opportunity Office will
continue to meet its obligations.The U.S. Department of Labor has made changes to Section 503 of
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Section 4212 of the Vietnam Era
Veteran's Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974 to improve hiring
and employment of veterans and for people with disabilities. The
Equal Opportunity Office will update the County's Equal
Opportunity Plan to comply with the rules. In addition, the Equal
Opportunity Office will work closely with the County Counsel
Office, Human Resources Department, and County Administrative
Office to ensure proper implementation of the law.
The Equal Opportunity Office will continue to collaborate with the
Human Resources Department and departments to recruit, hire
and retain qualified women and minorities in accordance with the
County's Equal Opportunity Plan.
The Equal Opportunity Office will continue to work with the
Sheriff's Office to ensure that inmates of the Monterey County Jail
have access to a fair and accessible grievance process.
The Equal Opportunity Office will continue to work with
departments to ensure their employees are in compliance with the
Prevention of Sexual Harassment training as it is being reported as
a performance measure in the Managing for Results program. The
Equal Opportunity Office will also provide training on ADA,
Diversity and Preventing Bullying in the Workplace.
The Equal Opportunity Office will work with the Resource
Management Agency and County Counsel to update the County's
ADA Transition Plan in accordance with the Department of Justice
rules and regulations.
The Equal Opportunity Office will work with employees to resolve
discrimination complaints at the lowest level possible to decrease
the number of formal complaints. It will continue to process,
address and investigate complaints of discrimination, harassment
and retaliation as mandated by State and Federal laws and County
Policy.The Recommended Budget for the Auditor-Controller totals
$5,056,561 in appropriations, $396,613 in estimated revenue and a
General Fund Contribution of $4,659,948 which represents a status
quo budget from FY 2013-14.
Budget Impacts
The Auditor-Controller requested an augmentation for 1.0 FTE
Finance Systems Manager to provide oversight of the Megabyte Tax
System, provide oversight of the SymPro Debt-Investment systems,
maintain system security tables, serve as the Office's Information
Security Officer(ISO), attend ISO meetings at Information
Technology Department (ITD), provide review and input regarding
ITD policies and conduct financial audits for system integrity and
forensic audits for documentation and resolution of accounting
fund control issues.
The Auditor-Controller also requested an augmentation of 1.0 FTE
Auditor-Controller Analyst I for the following activities relating to
Internal Service Funds: Ensure operational activity tracking
structure is in place; Incorporate appropriately in billing rates;
Monitor subsidiary/detail accounting structure maintained at
individual capital asset level to track/offset depreciation charge and
discontinuing the charge when fully depreciated; Monitor collected
depreciation charge to be made available for expense when asset is
replaced or removed; Monitor and remove capital replacement
charge f rom indirect cost allocation (A-87) for g rant
reimbursement; and Consolidate assets and liabilities within the
Governmental Activities column.
Pending Issues
The Office of the Auditor-Controller previously had a budgeted
Finance Systems Manager and a Chief Deputy for Systems.
However, due to budget reductions in the past four fiscal years, the
Office relinquished both positions. A retired Finance Systems
Manager had assisted the Department on a temporary basis, but is
no longer able to assist. Required tasks have been distributed to
others in the Office, but it has not proven effective. The
Department is not participating in its responsibility of the
Megabyte Tax system and SymPro Debt-Investment systems.
If an Internal Service Fund for the Information Systems
Department and an Enterprise Fund for the Water Resources
Agency is required, a 1.0 FTE Auditor-Controller Analyst I will be
needed.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2014-15 Recommended Budget to support the
functions of the Treasurer-Tax Collector is $6,951,670, with
anticipated revenues of $5,560,983 bringing the net county cost to
$1,390,687.
Expenditures for salaries and benefits include a decrease of
$63,620. These savings were offset by increased employee
healthcare costs, internal service department cost increases, and
fewer position vacancies. Services and supplies were increased by
$42,209. Estimated revenue is projected to decrease by $4,109. The
recommended departmental budget meets the County
Administrative Office's identified status quo General Fund
Contribution (GFC) with the reduction of .25 position.
Budget Impacts
The Treasurer Tax Collector (TTC) department will be able to
maintain current service levels and deliver exceptional services
despite significant increase in costs. The department will meet this
challenge by continuing to realign the use of internal and external
service providers, streamlining processes, and capitalizing on the
use of technological innovations. Extensive work was performed in
analyzing the activities of personnel and realigning the duties of
staff for maximum effectiveness. Prices for contractual services
purchased were reviewed, and whenever necessary the volume of
ser vice s consumed were r educed to match projected
appropriations. Performance measures were designed to measure,
monitor and report the output and outcome of departmental
programs.In cooperation with the Auditor-Controller and Assessor-Clerk
Recorder, the Treasurer-Tax Collector will upgrade the Property
Tax System server, and tape backup system.
Continue to increase efficiencies by improving automated
processes both intra-departmentally and with external
stakeholders. Continue the implementation of a succession plan
that identifies critical functions, improves process documentation
and encourages staff to seek educational and professional
development training.
Continue managing the implementation of new banking and credit
card service contracts. This implementation will create a strategic
redundancy in banking operations, reduce the cost of banking
services, and increase the efficiency and security of operations.
Develop a County-wide banking and credit card use policy, and
coordinate the movement and centralization of all banking and
credit card services within the Office of the Treasurer-Tax
Collector.
Update the comprehensive disaster recovery plan for the Treasurer-
Tax Collector.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2014-15 Recommended Budget for the
Assessor-County Clerk-Recorder's Office includes total
appropriations of $7,339,900 representing a 3.3% increase from the
FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget.
Appropriations for Salaries and Benefits are increased by $79,786
(1.4%). Services and Supplies have decreased by $19,986 (1.5%).
Revenues are estimated at $3,725,892, an increase of $220,000
(6.3%) from FY 2013-14.
The FY 2014-15 General Fund Contribution of $3,614,008 an
increase of $13,058 from the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget provides resources to maintain FY
2014-15 service levels in the Assessor-County Clerk-Recorder's
Office.
The combined efforts of the staff in the County of Monterey
Assessor's Office for FY 2013-14 produced an assessment roll of
approximately $50.3 billion, generating over $500 million for local
governmental agencies and schools. A total of 160,000 secured,
unsecured, and supplemental tax bills were generated in FY 2013-
14. The County's share of property tax revenues for FY 2013-14
was $121 million accounting for 69.3% of the overall discretionary
revenue.
In FY 2013-14, the Assessor's Office had over 30,000 residential
and commercial properties with reduced values under the
provisions of Proposition 8 due to declines in market value. Sales
activity and new construction continued to improve (albeit slowly)
and assessment appeals are also still at higher than normal levels.
Workload in the office of the Assessor continues to increase as
appeals and Prop 8 reviews require greater analysis.
The remainder of the Assessor's workload and the basis for the
majority of increases of assessed valuations are the reassessment of
properties changing ownership either as a result of a sale or interfamily
transfer; the reassessment of new construction; and the
analysis of annual Business Property Statements.
From FY 1999-00 to FY 2007-08 assessed valuations in Monterey
County increased by an average of 8% per year. Property values,
however, leveled off in FY 2008-09 and in FY 2009-10, the local Tax

Roll declined for the first time in the history of the County of
Monterey. The Assessor's Office will again review the value of all
residential properties in the County of Monterey and will also
conduct an extensive review of commercial properties with current
base year values. It is estimated that 20,000 properties will receive
Prop 8 reductions this year, a decline of over 10,000. Assessment
Appeals although still at a higher than normal level declined
significantly in FY 2013-14. The Assessor's Office will review all
Prop 8 reductions on an annual basis until base year values have
been restored.The Assessor's primary goal for FY 2014-15 will be to continue to
provide the highest level of public service. The Assessor is an
elected position sworn to abide by the laws of the California State
Constitution. The Assessor will ensure that all taxpayers and
property owners are treated fairly, equally and with respect. The
Assessor's Office is also the repository for a wealth of propertyrelated
information including, but not limited to, assessor's parcel
maps and property characteristics. Through technological
advances the Assessor's Office continues to make this information
more readily available to the public while also respecting property
owner's privacy rights.
Additional FY 2014-15 Goals for the Assessor's Office include the
following:
Review the assessed valuation of all residential and a large portion
of commercial and industrial properties in the County of Monterey.
In conjunction with the Information Technology Department,
other County of Monterey departments and local governmental
agencies, continue to develop a GIS collaborative effort resulting in
a product that will be beneficial to government agencies and the
public at large.
Complete the conversion of the Megabyte Property Management to
the .NET platform.
Upgrade departmental application servers and software.
Implement a discovery program looking for unpermitted
construction through the use of GIS aerial imagery.
Complete a reorganization study of all office/clerical positions in
the Assessor and County Clerk-Recorder's offices and implement
cross training between all three departments with the goal of
establishing efficiencies, career opportunities and to assist in
succession planning.The Recommended Budget for the Office of the County Counsel is
$33,170,386, an increase of $5,822,715 from the prior year Adopted
Budget, primarily the result of increased benefit costs and an
increase in services and supplies due to General Fund Department
fee increases (primarily those associated with increased general
liabi li t y cost s ) . Additionall y, intra- fund depar tment
reimbursements for associated legal services rendered in the
amount of $1,317,000 were conver ted to General Fund
Contribution (GFC).
Budget Impacts
The Office of the County Counsel's FY 2014-15 Recommended
Budget provides funding to maintain FY 2013-14 service levels.
During FY 2013-14, the Office had a net staffing increase of zero
positions. However, for the FY 2014-15 budget, the Department
transferred one position to the Human Resources Department
(centralization of Human Resources functions), bringing the Office
of the County Counsel's staffing level to a total of 42. In January
2014, the Department made an acting appointment of an
administrative secretary to underfill a Management Analyst (MA)
II position as a MA I to provide support to the Grand Jury while
continuing to provide department head administrative support
with minimal budgetary impact.
The FY 2014-15 Baseline Budget inter and intra-fund
reimbursement and revenue were formulated with consideration
for the increase in filled attorney positions and billable hour trends.
The County Counsel's Office did not request rate increases for legal
services rendered, as no additional positions were requested and
increase in overhead cost was determined to be minimal.
Additionally, the County Administrative Office, in collaboration
with County Counsel, converted General Fund billable
departments to General Fund Contribution in the amount of
$1,317,000 for the FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget.The Recommended Budget for the County Counsel department is
$4,086,386, an increase of $1,150,007 from the prior year Adopted
Budget due mainly from a $1,317,000 conversion from intra-fund
revenues to General Fund Contribution (GFC). Reflected in this
year's budget is the deletion of one Principle Legal Analyst position,
which will be transferred during the FY 2014-15 Budget process to
the Human Resources Department, as part of its centralization of
County Human Resources support functions to the County.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget provides funding to maintain FY 2013-
14 service levels. During FY 2013-14, the Office had a net staffing
increase of zero positions. However, for the FY 2014-15 budget,
the Department transferred one position to the Human Resources
Department (centralization of Human Resources functions),
bringing the Office of the County Counsel's staffing level to a total
of 42.In preparation of the FY 2014-15 Budget, the County Counsel's
Office did not request rate increases for legal services rendered, as
no additional positions were requested and the increase in
overhead costs was determined to be minimal. Services are also
billed to outside agencies.
The Baseline Budget inter and intra-fund reimbursement and
revenue projections for FY 2014-15 were formulated with
consideration for the increase in filled attorney positions and
billable hour trends. Additionally, the County Administrative
Office, in collaboration with County Counsel, converted General
Fund billable departments from intra-fund to General Fund
Contribution in the amount of $1,317,000 for the FY 2014-15
Recommended Budget.
The Recommended Budget approves these projections, as well as
funding of salaries and benefits for all existing positions and service
and supply requests, thus reinforcing the ability of County Counsel
to meet its goal of providing timely, quality legal services to outside
agencies and departments of the County, as well as its obligation to
service Board of Supervisors' goals.
In FY 2012-13, the Office of the County Counsel assumed
responsibility for liaison and administrative support of the Grand
Jury. Recognizing the vast needs of the Grand Jury, as well as the
need for support to manage the additional project needs of its
growing department, the Office requested and was allocated one
MA II position, to be funded 60% by Grand Jury unit 8030 and 40%
by County Counsel unit 8057. The Department is actively seeking
permanent staffing of this MAII position, and has temporarily
appointed an administrative secretary to that of an Acting
Management Analyst I (underfilling the Management Analyst II
position) to assist in providing appropriate and sufficient support
to the Grand Jury and continue department head administrative
support, with minimal budgetary impact.Appropriations for County Counsel are recommended by the
County Administrative Office (CAO) at $4,086,386, an increase of
$1,150,007 from the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget. Recommended
unit expenditures total $7,479,627. The conversion of intra-fund
departments to General Fund Contribution in the amount of
$1,317,000 decreases the estimated revenues and reimbursements
to $2,634,833, and increase General Fund Contributions.
Budget Impacts
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget provides funding to
maintain FY 2013-14 service levels. During FY 2013-14, the Office
had a net staffing increase of zero positions.
In preparation of the FY 2014-15 Budget, the County Counsel's
Office was able to absorb fee increases from other General Fund
Departments primarily through salary savings. Additionally, the
Office did not request rate increases for legal services rendered, as
no additional positions were requested and increase in overhead
cost was determined to be minimal. The Baseline Budget inter and
intra-fund reimbursement and revenue projections for FY 2014-15
were formulated with consideration for the increase in filled
attorney positions and billable hour trends.
In FY 2012-13, the Office of the County Counsel assumed
responsibility for liaison and administrative support of the Grand
Jury. Recognizing the vast needs of the Grand Jury, as well as the
need for additional support to manage the additional project needs
of its growing Department, the Office of the County Counsel
requested the allocation of one MA II position, to be funded 60%
by Grand Jury unit 8030 and 40% by County Counsel unit 8057 via
an augmentation in the FY 2013-14 Budget process. The Office is
actively seeking permanent staffing of this position. In the interim,
the Administrative Secretary position has been reallocated to an
acting MAI position to assist in providing appropriate and
sufficient support to the Grand Jury, as well as other administrative
analytical duties to the Office.
Additionally, one Principle Legal Analyst position will be
transferred during the FY 2014-15 Budget process to the Human
Resources Department, as part of its centralization of County
Human Resources support functions.
The Recommended Budget approves these projections, as well as
funding of salaries and benefits for all existing positions and service
and supply requests, thus reinforcing the ability of County Counsel
to meet its goal of providing timely, quality legal services to outside
agencies and departments of the County, as well as its obligation to
service Board of Supervisors' goals.Effectively advise and represent the County's legal interests.
Provide timely, responsive, and competent legal advice to all
representatives in order to enable them to effectively carry out their
functions and achieve their goals.
Defend County land use, General Plan and other actions in the
event of legal challenge and prosecute code enforcement violations.
Successfully manage and conclude tort claims and litigation in a
fair manner, which respects both the rights of claimants and
litigants and provides fiscal accountability to the public.
Resolve cases early, as appropriate, to reduce County costs.
Provide timely invoices to clients in order to maximize increased
revenue and Intrafund and Interfund reimbursements in order to
balance the Department's budget.
Maintain the professional and technical competence of all
employees through appropriate continuing education, modern
technology, and electronic case management and assignment tools,
in order to provide innovative solutions to legal problems.
Assist in continuing transformation of Natividad Medical Center
within the dynamic healthcare environment, such as industry
affiliations.
Assist in the implementation of the General Plan adoption, as
directed by the Board of Supervisors.

The GFC allocation allows the Department to continue to meet the
service needs of the public, County departments special districts,
as well as public agencies, while providing the highest levels of
customer service possible.

Budget Year Goals are discussed at the Unit level (Assessment
Appeals Board and Clerk of the Board).
Pending Issues
Allocation of funds for the cost of repairs and replacement of the
equipment in the Board Chambers (e.g. projectors, monitors and
recording equipment), will reduce the impact of unanticipated
charges to the COB's budget.
Allocation of funds for the preservation and digitalization of
historic Board of Supervisors minute books will ensure our
Department fulfills our mandates for records management and will
also assure these records will be available to the County and public
now and in the future.

Recommended appropriations for the Elections Department are
$4,141.012, a decrease of $748,531 from the Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-
14 Adopted Budget, based upon one scheduled gubernatorial
general election occurring in November 2014. Charges for services
are decreased by $848,481 while salaries and benefit costs
increased $99,950. Revenue decreased by $372,500 for a total of
$882,500 in Revenue for the FY 2014-15. General Fund
Contribution is $3,258,512, a decrease of $376,031 from the FY
2013-14 Adopted Budget.Ongoing goals that relate to redesigning the Department's bilingual
services program area and associated materials; improving the
content of and access to the Department's procedures leading to
increased transparency and public education remain ongoing goals
for the Department, in addition to continuing to find opportunities
for efficiencies and cost savings for the conduct of elections while
still meeting legal mandates.
Launching of the redesigned Department's website to include
updated technology features and useful information and tools for
voters and poll workers, as well as conduct a countywide
assessment of all polling place facilities, altering locations in order
to improve the levels of accessibility.
Monitor State legislation that is in line with the Board's Legislative
Priorities such as those that permit jurisdictions in California,
including counties, to conduct all-mail ballot elections. Continue to
organize and meet with a public observer panel and improve upon
the Department's transparency and public education activities.
Members of the panel are focused on increasing voter
participation, especially in identified target areas of Salinas and
South County.
Pending Issues
SPECIAL ELECTIONS
The potential for the Governor to call a statewide special election
to occur within the remaining budget year or next remains
unknown. Under existing law, elections conducted on behalf of the
State are not reimbursable.
VOTECAL PROJECT
The VoteCal project is a Help American Vote Act (HAVA)
mandated and funded project. Upon completion in June of 2016, it
will provide a single, official database of voter registration
information, connecting to State agencies and all 58 county
elections offices to improve the voter registration process. The
Department has completed the initial connectivity upgrades
necessary for the implementation, and the staff is participating in
informational and feedback sessions with the Secretary of State and
the project vendors as required. These project will have significant
impact for all program areas of the Elections Department.
HELP AMERICA VOTE ACT FUNDS - DEADLINE EXTENDED
The Department is conscious of the December 31, 2015 deadline to
spend federal funding granted to Monterey County under HAVA.
Currently, the remaining funds are in two categories and can be
spent on voting technology and items related to VoteCal, the state's
current version of the statewide registration database. Remaining
funds are estimated at approximately $326,096. The Department
continues to review new voting systems to replace our current
aging system. Due to limited grant funding available, several
possible options have been suggested, including lease arrangements
or additional equipment that would complement the County's
existing accessible voting technology required under HAVA.
DEPARTMENT FACILITY
The Elections Department signed a five-year lease agreement for
the current facility, ending in 2015. In coordination with Public
Works and other applicable departments, the discussions of
appropriate sites for the construction of a 24,000 square foot
facility continue. The current building of 12,000 square feet is
leased at an annual cost of $280,000, with additional overflow space
rented at an annual cost of $12,000. Confidential and valuable
materials are moved between locations as needed during an
election cycle, reducing the Department's ability to improve
efficient operations. Consolidating the Department's locations to
one building should reduce cost and improve efficiency while
decreasing the vulnerability of the County's election supplies
through a single secure site location.

The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget provides $16,002,684 in
appropriations for Emergency Communications dispatch services
and NGEN Project expenditures. Financing includes $14,665,758 in
program revenue and General Fund Contributions (GFC) of
$1,336,926.
The Department is continuing to administer the NGEN capital
project. The County's share of the NGEN project extension costs
total $313,418 for FY 2014-15. The remaining $661,582 of first year
project extension cost is shared among all other NGEN users
including the participating agencies. County departments using
the NGEN system (Sheriff, Probation, District Attorney, Parks,
Public Works, Animal Control, and Office of Emergency Services)
budget their share of costs within their respective operating
budgets.

Review opportunities for cost savings resulting from the
installation of a new 911 Telephone System. As a result of this
system, the Department anticipates improvements in productivity
and statistical reporting abilities.
Evaluate existing services to ensure services provided match the
services in the 911 Service Agreement and identify any services
that can be reduced without impact to public safety, especially
using features of the new 911 telephone system.
Expand training for dispatch staff and continue to provide training
to staff on new radio and telephone technologies.
Maximize reimbursement from State grants and programs as well
as other opportunities such as reimbursements for services
provided at special events.
Complete installation of a new Cassidian phone system and
training of staff on the new system.
Replace failing dispatch furniture to meet ergonomic requirements.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2014-15 Recommended Budget includes
appropriations of $19,530,082, and reimbursements of $18,516,937,
resulting in net expenditures of $1,013,145. Estimated revenues are
$1,013,145, providing a balanced budget without any General Fund
Contribution.
The $191,015 decrease in appropriations was a net result of a
decrease in salaries and benefits of $165,794, a decrease in services
and supplies of $971,936, an increase in capital assets of $1,377,846,
and an increase in Inter / Intra reimbursements of $431,131.
The salary and benefits decrease are due to various benefit
adjustments. The service and supply decrease is mainly due to the
organizational structure change within ITD. Through FY 2013-14,
ITD had three separate Appropriation Units, which resulted in
inter-appropriation unit charges. With ITD becoming a single
Appropriation Unit in FY 2014-15, these inter-appropriation unit
charges no longer apply. There is a large increase in capital asset
expenditure; as ITD is beginning its first phase of infrastructure
replacement after a decade hiatus. This also is what accounts for
the increase in Inter / Intra reimbursements.
The Information Technology Department (ITD) remains a zero
General Fund Contribution department where the Department's
budget is solely based on the revenue generated through the
services rendered to its clients. The FY 2014-15 Recommended
Budget change from the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget reduced total
appropriations by approximately $191,015.
Budget Impacts
ITD has completed the first phase of a reorganization. Total staff
count remains unchanged.
FY 2014-15 reflects $1,220,845 in ITD infrastructure replacement
expenditures that will be funded via pass through charges to ITD
customers. These do not include ITD Facility projects submitted
to Capital Improvement Committee (CIC).
The Auditor's Office have worked with ITD to increase reporting
capabilities within the County Advantage system at both cost
center and ITD organizational structures levels. This combined
with ITDs implementation of a new service management tool, will
provide support documentation towards future fiscal impacts.

Engage with telecom consultant to assist with independent review
and examination of records and activities to assess the compliance
of telecom service providers with telecommunication contracts and
State and Federal Tariffs. This project will be initiated as a joint
effort with the County Administrative Office and will require
participation from and all County Departments to ensure that
telecom charges are accurate and reflect the services that are
required to support operations.FISCAL: Work with Auditors to ensure proper tracking of all ITD
transactions by Cost Center and ITD organizational structure in
the County system of record. Complete set up of new billing
structure in ITD Data Warehouse. Work with ServiceNow to set up
all asset tracking. Work with Auditor-Controller's office to set up
new funds for ISF (or equivalent). Track all ITD infrastructure
replacement expenditures.
HUMAN RESOURCES: Collaborate with IT Management to
ensure performance evaluation completion metrics improve to the
goal of 75%.
APPLICATIONS: Plans to implement SharePoint 2013 countywide,
while focusing on the workflow functionality that is a key feature in
this release level. Applications further plans to establish a standard
for Business Intelligence and analytical software as well as focus on
mobile application development including the use of responsive
design.
Web Services will propagate a standardized view of the entire
County website utilizing the functionality of the content
management system to provide a consistent look throughout all
website pages. Provide additional e-government services through
the website including additional online service payment.
GIS Services will conduct the Second Annual GIS Showcase
focusing on additional department uses of GIS. Exploit additional
online GIS services available to the County through current
licensing capabilities. Establish GIS as a self-supporting cost.
FINANCIAL SYSTEMS: Need to prepare the ERP system
environments for the end of life of Windows Server and Active
Directory 2003, and maintain 100% on time disbursements and
100% four hour resolution time of system availability issues. Also
ERP hardware/software needs to be refreshed, and the ERP system
environment needs to be upgraded to utilize virtualized
technology. Team needs to maintain 100% on time completion of
deliverables for systems and application support services for the
integration of the upgraded ERP with other County applications
and the applications of the County's business partners.SERVICE DESK: Enhance service delivery to ITD customers
through the successful implementation of ServiceNow's suite of IT
Service Management tools. Transform IT Service Desk by building
a tiered support structure capable of providing first call resolution
(FCR). Objective for FY 2014-15 is FCR rate of at least 20% for
incoming service requests.
DESKTOP MANAGEMENT: Successfully processed 2,521
Incidents and 6,061 Work Orders in keeping desktop and client
applications connected and functional.The Recommended Budget for the Office totals $22,533,565,
financed by $13,231,183 in program revenue and $9,302,382 in
General Fund Contributions (GFC). The Recommended Budget
represents an increase in appropriations of $1,773,924, financed by
$1,548,600 in revenues and $225,324 in GFCs. Included in the
Recommended Budget is the addition of $1,007,300 in revenues
and appropriations previously budgeted in an external bank
account for the witness relocation program and other sensitive
accounts. The Recommended Budget also includes $225,324 in
additional GFCs to support the retention of three filled positions,
including two felony deputy district attorneys and one investigator
position. Due to countywide cost pressures, the Office would not
have been able to retain these positions without the additional
GFCs.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget includes a reduction of a vacant
computer forensic investigator position that will negatively impact
operations support for the Office. Reductions in general
operational expenses may also become an issue, but the Office will
make every effort to manage within these reduced levels. The
Office continues to seek additional funding from both Federal and
State sources.Collaborate with other State and local agencies to devise new
approaches to disrupting gang violence. The damage that gang
violence inf licts on the County's residents requires law
enforcement to keep searching for a coordinated approach to this
most pressing problem in our community.
Increase in-house training. To the extent in-house training can
meet both mandatory and necessary training of attorneys,
investigators and support staff, it will be a far less expensive
alternative.
Implementation of the new Case Management System in
September 2013 has presented both unique challenges to our staff,
as well as the opportunity to revise the way we do business. This
new system will increase productivity for our staff, the services
provided to local law enforcement and, ultimately, to enhance
public safety.
Pending Issues
CJIS/SUSTAIN: The criminal justice agencies continue to explore
all options that will allow an electronic interface to share
information for a more efficient and cost effective operation.
County justice agencies continue to maintain the current Criminal
Justice Information System (CJIS) on the County's mainframe. The
current system is obsolete and is no longer adequate.
RELOCATION: We continue to be housed in modular units in
both Salinas & Marina, and in office facilities at the Monterey
Courthouse. The court has recently delayed the process of
constructing new South County facilities. When completed, the
County will need to meet this challenge by providing offices for the
DA's use as close to the new courthouse as possible. The District
Attorney has been located in modular units for approximately 11
years. The issue of appropriate office space for the District
Attorneys Office continues to remain one of our most pressing
issues.
PAST SERVICE LEVEL REDUCTIONS - IMPACT ON PUBLIC
SAFETY:
Despite the improving budget situation for the State over recent
months, the complexity and severity of budget issues throughout
the State remain a significant risk to the funding of District
Attorney programs and raise a cloud of uncertainty around the
potential negative impact on our community.
REALIGNMENT: The implementation of AB 109 in October 2011,
shifting state prisoners to local authorities, has led to a profound
change in how the criminal justice system and the public safety
agencies protect the community. The elimination of parole and the
return of State prison inmates to local authorities for management
will be challenging for the entire County. The long-term impact on
the District Attorney's Office remains uncertain.The Department of Child Support Services Recommended Budget
includes appropriations of $10,909,036, an increase of $214,986
from the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget. As required by legislation,
effective January 1, 2000, this budget has been submitted to the
State for approval. The negative General Fund Contributions
reflected in the Fiscal Summary above is for administrative support
activities charged to the program through the Countywide Cost
Allocation Plan (COWCAP).
Budget Impacts
The State Department of Child Support Services continues to hold
the allocation of funds at a basic level as what was received twelve
years ago. This flat allocation of funding has resulted in the loss of
57 allocated positions since FY 2002-03. Depending on any
additional cost of living increases or other changes to State
allocations, the Department could continue to see erosion of
staffing. The Department continues to review opportunities for
cost savings and sharing of services with other county local child
support agencies. This will allow the Department to maintain its
core Federal and State mandated services. Providing Child Support
Services to individuals that are current recipients or are border-line
recipients of services from other agencies avoids costs to those
agencies and to taxpayers. The Department continues to offset
costs to the County General Fund by the recovery of the County
share related to those receiving TANF cash grant funds. The
Department, with a caseload of 16,814 children, distributed over
$40,065,616 in 2013, which represents needed money that helps
families reach and maintain self-sufficiency.Continue to deliver our core services and at the same time improve
in all Federal/State performance measures.
Continue to provide quality services to our customers and be a
leader in the use of best practices and innovation, so that families
and children are receiving the optimal amount of child support and
health insurance coverage.
Continue to have a pro-active outreach program with emphasis on
collaboration and sharing of services so that we optimize our
mandated services in the most efficient manner and continue to be
a leader within the State of California Child Support Program.
Leverage technology to increase effectiveness and efficiency.
Lower energy costs by our continued education of staff regarding
the importance of conserving energy.
Develop and retain employees by providing ongoing professional
development courses including utilizing the County's "Learning
Development Network."

The Recommended Budget is $9,669,702 and includes $487,572 in
revenues and $9,182,130 in General Fund Contributions (GFC).
The Recommended Budget includes an increase in appropriations
of $100,759, financed by $85,316 in additional revenues and
$15,443 in additional GFCs. The additional GFCs are
recommended to support the Department's share of costs related
to the upgrade of the County's Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
System.
Budget Impacts
The Department will experience a number of countywide cost
pressures in FY 2014-15 that will further strain its ability to
maintain current service levels. These cost pressures include wage
increases authorized by employee bargaining agreements, higher
general liability program costs, and higher information technology
charges. In addition, the Recommended Budget may not provide
sufficient funding for potential payouts of employee leave balances
upon separation or potential costs related to trial expenses, legal
research reference tools, and timely replacement of computers and
office furniture.Criminal Justice Realignment continues to challenge both the PD
and the ADO Offices.
The Public Defender's Office continues to occupy Modular
Building #4 several years longer than expected. The structure has
been in need of many critical space improvements.
Policy Considerations
The Department continues to seek funding for additional staffing
in support of the indigent defense function in Monterey County.
The Department reports that caseloads at any one time regularly
exceed the limits set by applicable professional standards and is in
the process of completing a study of caseloads and staffing to

demonstrate this point. The Department further reports that the
number of cases that have gone to hearing and or trial has grown
and there have been increases in the severity of cases.
In addition, County budget constraints have required reductions in
funding available for trial related services, which include: experts,
witness fees, interpretations, and transcriptions. Expert services
such as forensic tests, crime scene investigations, laboratory tests,
psychological evaluations, DNA analysis, gunshot residue and
ballistic examinations, and accident reconstruction are required to
prepare cases for trial and/or potential disposition apart from
providing the services of attorneys and investigators. Case law
mandates that competent counsel includes the right to necessary
ancillary services.The Recommended Budget for the Sheriff 's Office includes
$89,791,577 in total appropriations. This represents an increase of
$3,581,170 over the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget. Revenue is
estimated at $41,211,315, a $2,350,975 increase. The recommended
General Fund Contribution (GFC) totals $48,580,262, or an
increase of $1,230,195 compared to FY 2013-14. The increase in
appropriations and revenues is primarily related to the State's
Public Safety Realignment, AB 109 and 118; operating transfers
between funds; and approximately $1.8 million in recommended
augmentations.
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget includes $1,803,369 in
augmentations to avoid reductions in staff by funding cost
increases for various support functions. To accomplish this, the
Recommended Budget includes augmentations for increased costs
in the general liability insurance program, building use allowance
allocation for the Capital Improvement Program, data processing
and internal communication charges as well as support for inmate
hospital charges. The Recommended Budget also includes funding
from AB 109 for a temporary modular-type classroom to provide
increased space for the provision of various inmate programs in the
jail aimed at helping inmates become successful members of
society and reducing recidivism.
The Recommended Budget includes a total of 442.5 positions,
representing an increase of two positions over the FY 2013-14
Adopted Budget. The two positions were added during the current
year and supported by AB 109 funds. One position is for managing
research, development and implementation of evidence-based
programs for realigned offenders while the other position will serve
as an ombudsman for the provision of mandated or expanded
medical and mental health services.
Budget Impacts
Although the FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget does not include
cuts in General Fund Contribution, increases in costs such as
higher general liability program costs, employee salaries and
benefits, and facility maintenance continue to put budgetary
pressure on the Sheriff 's Office and limit the Department's

flexibility in assigning resources to rapidly changing service
requirements. The Recommended Budget does not include
funding to fully cover these cost increases , which total
approximately $3.9 million. The ability of the Sheriff's Office to
address staffing shortages in the jail as well as much needed
program and facilities upgrades will be impacted by these cost
drivers.
In addition, resource constraints will affect the Department's ability
to make operational changes to address the impacts in the County
Jail from the recent enactment of State Realignment through AB
109. The evolving nature of these and other programs requires the
Sheriff 's Office to have the flexibility to allocate resources to
ef fectively manage and support these programs. The
Recommended Budget limits such flexibility.
During FY 2014-15 the Sheriff 's Office will continue to explore
increased funding from other sources such as the Affordable Care
Act, Capital Improvement Program and grants to address some of
the inmate medical costs as well as long-deferred equipment and
facility needs that are critical to the continued provision of public
safety services. The Department has expressed intent to request
additional action in FY 2014-15 to address staffing, overtime costs,
facility repairs and improvements, and expanded inmate
programming.

Administration Bureau goals for FY 2014-15 include: finalizing the
implementation of the new Kronos timekeeping/scheduling
system; based on the results of an audit of the Civil Division and the
analysis of various classifications within the organization, propose a
reorganization to provide the most efficient and cost effective
organizational structure of the management and administrative
staff; develop improved processes and strategies for more efficient
and effective maintenance and repair of Department facilities.
Enforcement Operations Bureau goals for FY 2014-15 include:
create a more tactical, collaborative and intelligence driven
approach to reducing gang violence, drug trafficking and property
crimes within the LEOC structure and its partnerships, and in the
patrol and investigative units.
Custody Operations Bureau goals for FY 2014-15 include: ensure
that the number and types of inmates in the County Jail as a result
of AB 109 is effectively managed for both inmate and employee
safety through contracting with other facilities to house some of
our inmates; finalize the environmental impact report for the AB
900 jail expansion project, and begin construction of a new facility;
continue to seek funding alternatives for a medical and mental
health housing unit for inmates; seek to purchase and site portable
building(s) that will provide two classrooms for inmate programs
(supported by AB 109 funds); expand educational, life skills and
vocational programs and revise the inmate grievance practices.
Pending Issues
The Enforcement Operations Bureau recently made great effort to
recruit and train additional deputies. However, the Department
states that funding is sufficient only to provide slightly above the
minimal level of service to the unincorporated area due to ongoing
staffing needs. The Department continues to seek additional
staffing to reduce response times and improve the timeliness of
backup. The Department also continues to seek additional funding
and staffing to provide concentrated and specialized enforcement
or investigative activities to respond to crime trends within the
communities it serves.
Although the Monterey County Jail is already operating
significantly over capacity, two issues are creating additional
pressures on this facility. Both the Federal Court ruling and State
Realignment legislation have resulted in increased numbers of
inmates housed in the jail. Given the current overcrowded
condition, any increase in inmates requires the release of other
inmates until the construction of new facilities can occur. The
County has begun to address these issues through award of the AB
900 funds, application to the SB 1022 program, and the contract
with Alameda County. Additionally, the Department will continue
to implement strategies to address staffing needs, provision of
medical services, and facility improvements that will result in
additional expenditures for County Jail operations.
Sheriff-Coroner 379 County of Monterey Recommended Budget FY 2014-15
Sheriff-Coroner
Custody Operations has a fleet of three buses used to transport
inmates to court and to other penal institutions. The oldest bus
was built in 1984, and the others in 1988 and 1991. In FY 2012-13,
one of those buses was replaced with a new bus with funds from
the Vehicle Replacement Fund. Because the buses are law
enforcement equipped and operated, they are exempt from diesel
particulate emissions standards. However, in 2014, State emission
reduction goals require 100% compliance and will apply to the
inmate transportation buses on January 1, 2015. The two
remaining buses will need to be replaced, limited to no more than
1,000 miles per year and/or taken off the road.The Recommended Budget for the Department totals $58,258,003,
financed by $40,722,955 in program revenue and $17,535,048 in
General Fund Contributions (GFC). In comparison to the FY 2013-
14 Adopted Budget, the Recommended Budget includes an
increase in appropriations of $3,578,831, financed by $2,764,299 in
revenues and $814,522 in additional GFCs.
Increases in revenues and appropriations are directly related to
Public Safety Realignment (AB 109), which realigned responsibility
for supervising lower level adult offenders from the State to local
jurisdictions. These realigned responsibilities continue to increase
Department revenues and expenditures from year to year. The
Department is also experiencing countywide cost pressures, such
as growth in costs related to employee bargaining agreements and
the general liability program. As a result of these pressures, the
cost of existing staffing and services next fiscal year would exceed
available financing by an estimated $1,816,138 and, without
additional financing, would result in the loss of 17 positions (eight
filled and nine vacant). The additional $814,522 in GFCs supports
the retention of the eight filled positions in the juvenile evening
reporting center, juvenile hall echo unit, and juvenile probation
victim assistance program. However, resources are not available to
retain the remaining nine vacant positions allocated to the
Department's juvenile community work program, juvenile hall, and
day reporting center.
The Recommended Budget includes a total of 291.0 positions, with
a loss of 9.0 positions, currently vacant, from the FY 2013-14
Adopted Budget. One position was added in FY 2013-14 to directly
support the State's Public Safety Realignment program in data
collection.
The Recommended Budget of $58,258,003 continues to reflect two
fund sources: the Local Realignment Fund 022 budget of
$17,702,611 and General Fund 001 budget of $40,555,392. Per
State legislation, the Fund 022 Recommended Budget is a pass
through fund for receipt of State realignment funds and Probation
is reimbursed from Fund 022 for State program costs incurred
during the year.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget deletes 9.0 vacant positions in response
to various cost pressures, including higher salary and benefits costs

under current bargaining agreements and higher County
infrastructure costs. This reduction in authorized positions will
result in a series of adverse impacts on staffing, service levels and
programs which, while not mandated, have been identified as
essential services to the community.
A reduction of 2.0 Probation Officer II positions in Juvenile
Alternative Programs area will reduce the Department's ability to
participate in and support the Silver Star Resource Center (SSRC),
thereby diminishing the services provided to youth and parents.
A reduction of 1.0 Probation Officer II in the Juvenile Intake
Services unit will overburden the remaining court services officers
managing informal probation activities. Re-assigning these duties
will create a delay for an officer to contact the minor and parents to
ensure juvenile accountability for his/her crime. Juvenile Intake
Services is a legislatively mandated function.
A reduction of 1.0 Probation Officer II in the Family Violence unit
and another 1.0 Probation Officer II in Juvenile Field Services will
limit services to families in need of family violence intervention and
to juveniles in need of juvenile intervention and prevention services
in the community.
A reduction of 1.0 Senior Juvenile Institution Officer and 1.0
Juvenile Institution Officer II in the Community Service Work
Program will affect diversion services for first time offenders and
loss of resources available for community beautification projects.
A reduction of 1.0 Senior Juvenile Institution Officer will impact
the staff/resident minimum ratios that are mandated by the State.
A reduction of 1.0 Probation Aide in the Rancho Cielo program will
drastically reduce transportation for youth and impact their
participation in the intervention and prevention program services
at Rancho Cielo. Furthermore, this position is a component of the
infrastructure and support services contributing to the success of
the Rancho Cielo Day Reporting Center program.
The Department experienced various expenditure increases, as
well as new costs compared to the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget.
Cost increases include $1,512,831 for salaries and benefits related
to negotiated bargaining agreements, employee step advances, and
higher employee health care cost. General liability program costs
increased an additional $95,356. New costs for the FY 2014-15
include $97,205 for the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) System
upgrade and $70,618 for information technology capital
infrastructure replacement. In addition, there was a net loss of
$45,684 in revenue due to reduced State program funding. The net
result of these costs and revenue loss is a $1,816,138 increase in
baseline budget funding requirements for FY 2014-15.
The Recommended Budget does not include funding for potential
increases in various expenditures related to staffing and benefits
that have been historically higher than the FY 2013-14 approved
budget , such as payment s for workers' compensation,
unemployment, evening and night differentials, bilingual and
educational stipends, and on-call staff supporting the Juvenile Hall
and Youth Center.

The Probation Department is dedicated to achieving and
maintaining the following goals:
Continue to participate in the process of constructing a new, more
functional juvenile detention facility.
Improve the quality of life for youth, seniors and families by
preventing and reducing the frequency, severity, and impact of
criminal and delinquent behavior among adults and juveniles who
come within the jurisdiction of the Probation Department
(ongoing).
Enhance public safety programs throughout Monterey Couny
through collaboration and cooperation with other departments and
agencies and by the development of new and innovative methods to
address the issues of public safety (ongoing).
Expand services to the young adult population and address specific
needs, e.g. mental health, substance abuse and vocational training
(ongoing).
Continue to enhance the collection of probation fees in
collaboration with the Treasurer's Revenue Division.
Continue to serve as the lead agency to maintain core functions
and expand the Silver Star Resource Center, as a "one stop"
program for gang prevention and intervention (ongoing).Continue to serve as the lead agency for the Juvenile Justice Crime
Prevention Act (JJCPA) programs (ongoing).
Continue to serve as the lead agency for the Community
Correction Partnership, and for the implementation of the
Community Correction Plan focusing on evidence-based probation
supervision strategies and programs (ongoing).
Continue to enhance data collection capabilities in the Case
Management System (CMS) to track, monitor and report data on
its juvenile and adult populations, and to analyze and evaluate the
success of programs and program participation. Develop new data
requirements for realigned adult and juvenile populations.
Participate in data sharing efforts as required by law, such as the
State's Supervised Release File (SRF) and Smart Justice initiatives.
Pending Issues
In December 2013, the United States Health and Human Services
Department completed a Federal review and found California
Department of Social Services out of compliance regarding the
State Cost Allocation Plan for the Federal Title IV-E program. The
statewide impact will affect Federal claiming for the reimbursement
of pre-placement juvenile case management and services to
Probation Departments. For Monterey County Probation, initial
estimates project a reduction of Federal Title IV-E revenue by
approximately 7.7% or $300,000 annually in FY 2014-15.
The realignment of public safety responsibilities to counties under
AB 109, implemented on October 1, 2011, continues to create
major operational changes in the Adult Division's operations. The
realignment significantly increases Probation's span of control on
"non-non-non" (non-serious, non-violent, non-sex offenses, and
without any prior conviction) adult offenders, as well as offenders
released to local authority under Post Release Community
Supervision (PRCS) status. While Probation Departments continue
to plan and adjust for this significant change, funding allocated at
the State level was formalized through Senate Bill 1020 approved in
July 2012. This affected how State funds are distributed to the local
County level.
The operational and financial impact of the State-mandated Static-
99R assessment for adult sex offenders continues to be evaluated.
Further, the cost of Global Positioning System monitoring for highrisk
sex offenders while on probation continues to be absorbed by
the Department.
The 2014-15 Juvenile Accountability Block Grant (JABG) continues
to be reduced each year, with a 25% reduction projected for next
year. New data collection requirements continue to be initiated.
This appears to be a trend in data requirements presented by both
State and Federal entities.
The Department is incurring additional costs for mandated core
training required by Title 15 for part-time and temporary Juvenile
Institutions Officers. Increasing mandated Standards and Training
for Corrections (STC) costs challenge the Department's ability to
cover all training expenses.
Due to the implementation of Proposition 21, juveniles facing adult
court proceedings continue to generate additional costs associated
with extended detention in Juvenile Hall. Depending on the
number of arrests and the court processes, the Department's
budget is constrained to absorb these increased costs in FY 2014-
15.
The annual Department of Juvenile Justice (DJJ) placement rate was
established in July 2012 at $24,000 per juvenile. This placement
cost will continue to impact costs next fiscal year, based on the
amount of youth in State custody and their commitment time.
Reductions in funding at the State and local level could impact
Probation's ability to fulfill its mandates and provide missioncritical
services to the community. The Recommended Budget and
its allocated positions constitute a thoughtful and conservative use
of available resources to fulfill mandated responsibilities and
sustain current operations in a scaled-back manner. Based on
economic trends, the flexibility of the Department to fulfill its
obligations could be challenged. The Department is committed to
do everything possible to contribute to public safety and protection
of the community in spite of the fiscal challenges that have
accumulated in recent years . Resources included in the
Recommended Budget may be barely sufficient to maintain the
necessary level of services, particularly in consideration of the
increase in its span of control for adult and juvenile offenders. The
Department will carefully and responsibly monitor expenses, and,
if necessary, request additional appropriations.

The Recommended Budget for the Department totals $9,726,703 in
appropriations, financed by $6,662,018 in program revenue and
$3,064,685 in General Fund Contribution (GFC).
Budget Impacts
Decreased resources for agricultural programs will impact the
Department's service delivery; however, the Department will
redirect, through reprioritization, existing resources to increase
efficiencies and, to the extent possible, minimize these impacts.

Budget Year Goals
Promote and protect agriculture, the environment, and public
welfare, and assure consumer and business confidence in the
marketplace through uniform enforcement of laws and regulations.
Pending Issues
The expected reductions in Federal funding may present budgetary
challenges in FY 2014-15. The Department continues to support
State and Federal activities, especially as related to facilitation of
commerce. The Department currently issues approximately 7,000
Phytosantary Certificates annually for shipments related to Light
Brown Apple Moth (LBAM) quarantines and over 20,000 total
Phytosantary Certificates.
The Department will work with the California Department of Food
& Agriculture (CDFA) to continue detection efforts for the
European Grape Vine Moth and a citrus pest, the Asian Citrus
Psyllid. Quarantines for the LBAM are impacting trade with
Canada and Mexico and will require dedication of resources to
maintain these markets. The status of funding to cover the costs
associated with these programs is uncertain. Reduction in funding
levels could significantly impact these efforts and may require local
resources to protect the County's agricultural from these and other
pests.
There is a continuing focus on local use of fumigants, and
implementation of significant new use requirements.

The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for the Resource
Management Agency (RMA) totals $75,386,840 in appropriations
financed by $55,148,881 in program revenue, $14,188,877 in
General Fund Contributions (GFC) and $6,049,082 in other fund
balances.
The preliminary budget direction to County departments included
an assumption that GFC funding would remain flat, not to exceed
totals approved for FY 2013-14. Lacking other available funding
sources, RMA's FY 2014-15 baseline budget request included
reduction of four existing positions in Planning, holding several
critical positions vacant, a 50% reduction to Security Guard
services at the Government Center, and a 50% reduction in
Janitorial Services for all shared-use facilities.
The Agency's total FY 2014-15 GFC reflects an increase of
$1,031,161 over prior year. This total includes a General Fund
augmentation of $343,190 to restore funding for three of the four
positions in RMA-Planning, and $194,971 to provide for new
estimated cost increases for utility charges for shared-use facilities
and the County Jail. Additionally, $493,000 for expenditures
related to storm water monitoring and environmental services
administered by staff in the RMA-Public Works Roads & Bridges
Fund 002, Unit 8195 was budgeted as a reimbursement out of the
County Administrative Office (CAO) Other Financing Uses Unit
8038 in FY 2013-14. The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget
establishes a new RMA Environmental Services Unit 8444 that
includes the funding previously budgeted in the CAO's
departmental budget.
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget includes organizational
changes to more clearly reflect activities and funding for road and
bridge maintenance, development services, litter, construction and
traffic. These changes include consolidation of all capital projects
staff under a single organizational structure for both vertical and
horizontal construction.
Effective in FY 2014-15 three positions are recommended to assist
in management and oversight improvements in the Real Property
unit, supported through funding from Building Lease Allocation
charges assessed to all departments beginning in FY 2013-14.
Funding is allocated to establish a new management system for real
property, including ongoing documentation of occupied space and
square footage per department and division within County shared
facilities. Documentation improvements and departmental
occupancy details will also facilitate accurate annual allocation
distributions for property insurance and the Building Lease
Allowance.
Specific details regarding individual functional area budgets for the
Agency are provided within division level narratives.
Budget Impacts
The Agency continues to experience significant increases in nondiscretionary
costs, including: negotiated pay and earned annual
step increases, flexible benefit costs, general liability insurance,
property insurance, new annual charges for Information
Technology Department (ITD) Capital Improvements and
Enterprise Resource Project (ERP) Upgrades, and Building Lease
Allocation charges passed on to departments beginning in FY
2013-14.
To cover increased costs within the limits of the CAO's preliminary
baseline GFC level, the Agency had to make substantial reductions
in existing levels of service. To restore service levels, augmentation
requests for "base level maintenance" included the following:
The County's General Liability Insurance charges distributed to
departments by Risk Management (Risk) continue to increase for
the RMA. Due to recently revised methodology by Risk that
designates RMA-Planning as the responsible party for costs related
to land use litigation, charges to the RMA in FY 2014-15 reflect an
additional 88% increase over FY 2013-14. The net increase in
General Liability costs to RMA for FY 2014-15 is $1.1 million. Of
this total, 72% or $788,309 impacts the Agency's General Fund
Units. As a non-discretionary expense outside of the control of
RMA, this cost represents a significant reduction to the Agency's
capacity to maintain service levels.
Increased General Liability costs place particular hardship on
RMA-Planning's ability to meet service demands. RMA-Planning
requested $467,004 to restore three filled positions and one vacant
position unfunded in the baseline budget request due to the
General Liability cost increase. The CAO's Recommended Budget
includes $343,190 in additional funding to restore the three filled
positions. The vacant position approved by the Board of
Supervisors as an "Allocation to be Determined" in FY 2013-14 to
fulfill mandated County Historian requirements in RMA-Planning
remains unfunded in FY 2014-15.
An augmentation of $210,000 for the Facilities Administration unit
was requested to maintain Janitorial and Security services at FY
2013-14 levels. Due to new General Liability Insurance charges in
that unit, the baseline budget request included a 50% cut in
Security Guard services at the Government Center and a 50%
reduction in Janitorial services for all shared-use facilities.
Requeste d funding is not included in the FY 2014-15
Recommended Budget.
The General Liability Insurance increases continue to negatively
impact the Road Fund (Fund 002). FY 2014-15 charges, totaling
$982,887, have almost doubled over the past two budget years.
Increased charges for General Liability reduce available funding
that would otherwise be used for maintaining County owned roads
and bridges. An augmentation request of $358,000 for increased
costs could not be granted in the Recommended Budget.
Augmentation requests to fund new and/or expanded mandates
total $2.24 million. Critical funding requests include $480,000 to
cover increased costs for Storm Water permitting, monitoring,
testing, and reporting, and increased road sweeping requirements,
$215,000 for new responsibilities related to land management and
maintenance of former Fort Ord properties, $14,000 for State
imposed increases to landfill permit fees for 12 closed landfill sites,
$484,985 to complete the General Plan technical support contract
approved by the Board through June 30, 2015, $745,000 for Long
Range Planning work including the Housing Element, Airport
Comprehensive Plan, Carmel Lagoon protection, Carmel River
Causeway commitments, and the Salinas Valley Water Basin Study,
and $180,000 to fund long range planning consultant expertise for
the Local Coastal Program Update. No budget augmentation
requests for costs related to these mandates are funded in the FY
2014-15 Recommended Budget.
Workload and types of services are expected to grow due to
increased regulations and more permit demands as the economy
strengthens. It is anticipated that increased demand will compound
the already existing heavy workload on staff, potentially impacting
timelines and increasing the demand for plan check and
inspections in the upcoming year.
Data on County roads and bridge project requirements reflect the
need to focus efforts on obtaining revenue for maintenance
funding. Limited funding reduces the ability of existing staff to
keep up with preventative maintenance needs. As requests for
service increase (corrective maintenance), the ability of staff to be
responsive and meet targets will decrease.
Responsibilities for Successor Agency and the Oversight Board for
Redevelopment dissolution falls within the Economic Development
Department, but RMA has been tasked to assume the management
oversight for land use and property management activities. Early in
FY 2014-15 RMA will be reviewing changes in staffing needs to
appropriately manage the East Garrison development and general
Fort Ord matters, as well as implementation of the Long Range
Property Management Plan.
More than $4 million in energy efficiency measures was identified
during the energy audits performed as part of Department of
Energy's Energy and Efficiencies Community Block Grant
(EECBG), offset by $1 million in grant funding. The Agency will be
Resource Management Agency 441 County of Monterey Recommended Budget FY 2014-15
Resource Management Agency
working to identify potential funding to pursue the additional
energy efficiency opportunities as part of the County's Municipal
Climate Action Plan (MCAP) to achieve mandated greenhouse gas
reductions by 15% from 2005 levels by 2020.
Policy Considerations
Environmental Services - Storm Water Run-off and Treatment
Requirements: $480,000.
Mandate requirements and potential impacts if not funded:
The RMA is responsible for additional and expanding State
mandates for implementation of requirements through the
National Pollutants Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) related
to the Federal "Clean Water Act." RMA-Environmental Services
developed a County program in response to the Central Coast
Regional Water Quality Control Board's September 2012 adoption
of Storm Water Treatment requirements for new development and
redevelopment projects with greater than 2,500 square feet of
impervious surface. Additional FY 2014-15 funding was requested
to provide $160,000 for the Monterey Regional Storm Water
Management Program (MRSWMP) fees, and $120,000 for costs of
required water sampling and laboratory analysis.
State law requires removal of mud and debris from obstructing the
safety devices in the travel lane and physical obstructions within
roadways. As part of its scope of services, RMA-Public Works
provides road maintenance, including cleaning, for all County
roads. The County's NPDES Permit from the State Water Quality
Control Board regulates storm water discharges from storm drain
systems. The County's Phase II Small Municipal Separate Storm
Sewer System (MS4) General Permit mandates the sweeping of all
County roads within its Permitted Area two times per year, and the
inspection and cleaning of all storm drain systems. On July 1, 2013,
new General Permit requirements became effective that increased
the County's Permitted Area from 20 to 75 square miles. The total
length of County-maintained roads increased from 225 to 324
miles. A FY 2014-15 budget augmentation of $200,000 was
requested for street sweeping operations in compliance with
expanded requirements.
During FY 2012-13 Monterey County received a notice of violation
(NOV) for not fully meeting its Permit requirements. Funding will
ensure compliance with the Federal NPDES "Clean Water Act" and
mitigate potential fines and sanctions against the County. Funding
would also allow the County to perform occasional cleaning of bike
lanes on Blanco Road between Davis Road (Salinas) and
Reservation Road (Marina), to avoid unsafe conditions that may be
created by mud and debris.
Failure to appropriately respond to the new storm water
regulations will place the County in non-compliance of its Permit.
The California State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) is
authorized to levy fines for non-compliance at a rate of up to
$10,000 per day per occurrence. As an example of fines that have
previously been assessed, the City of Grover Beach in San Luis
Obispo County was assessed a $35,000 penalty by the Central
Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board as an Administrative
Civil Liability Complaint. The City's maximum liability for noncompliance
of its Municipal Permit was $20.3 million.
Additionally, non-compliance issues pose a more significant threat
through the potential for third-party lawsuits, as authorized under
the Clean Water Act. In such an incident, the City of Malibu
settled a $104 million suit with two environmental groups for a
total of $6.6 million in legal fees and mitigation projects. This
lawsuit was filed in 2008 to encourage the City to better implement
pollution controls for storm water runoff and discharges near
public beaches and the adjacent Area of Special Biological
Significance (ASBS).
County Service Area 75 (CSA 75): $200,000.
CSA 75 provides sanitary sewer services. The CSA has
experienced operational issues and system failures requiring
emergency response over the past three years. Related
expenditures continue to exceed revenue receipts, and have fully
exhausted the CSA's fund balance. The County's Urban
Community Development Block Grant has provided some fiscal
relief for necessary repairs in FY 2013-14, but it is anticipated that
the CSA will continue to experience operational issues until such
time that funding for a full plant replacement is available. The
requested funding will assist with maintaining CSA operations and
maintenance requirements through FY 2014-15.
Facilities Administration General Liability Insurance Charge:
$210,000.
FY 2014-15 General Liability Insurance charges include $210,000 to
the Facilities Administration Unit based on litigation issues and
decisions outside the control of the RMA. To cover this expense,
the Recommended Budget includes a 50% cut in Security Guard
services at the Government Center and a 50% reduction in
Janitorial services for all shared-use facilities. The Agency requests
special consideration of the Board to restore these critical services
to FY 2013-14 levels.
Request for Policy Guidance:
Due to changes in methodology for distribution of General Liability
charges, the General Liability "Recoverable" charges allocated to
RMA-Planning are increasing by 115%, from $404,976 in FY 2013-
14 to $869,532 in FY 2014-15. This cost reflects an increase of 437%
in just the past two budget years. Lacking cost recovery through
service fees or increased contribution from the General Fund, these
levels of cost escalation seriously threaten the Agency's ability to
provide services. The forecast for General Liability "Recoverable"
expenditures projects an additional countywide increase of 16.6%
in FY 2015-16, followed by anticipated growth of 5% in FY 2016-17.
The Agency seeks policy guidance for the following:
1) The decision by Risk Management to delegate RMA-Planning as
the primary area of responsibility for all "land use" litigation;
2) In an effort to maintain existing service levels in future budget
years, the Agency also requests policy guidance relative to methods
for cost recovery through service fees and/or GFC offset.The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for RMA Administration
Unit 8222 includes $4,119,231 in Salaries and Benefits and
$712,213 in Services and Supplies, offset by $4,019,638 from Intra/
Inter Fund Transfers for internal services. Remaining expenditures
are covered by a General Fund Contribution (GFC) of $834,949.
Significant changes from prior year include costs related to Boardapproved
employee-group salaries and benefits changes in FY
2013-14 and FY 2014-15, earned step increases, and increased
costs for service fees and non-discretionary charges in Services and
Supplies. Additional growth in this budget reflects the transfer of
the Electronic Document Management System (EDMS) function,
including a Land Use Technician and one Office Assistant II, from
Building Services to RMA Administration under the Information
Services Unit. The increase in services and supplies is partially
attributable to increases in charges from other County
organizations, such as Risk Management (General Liability,
Property Insurance), Service Departments (ITD, ERP, Courier and
Mail), and reimbursing the staff costs for the project management
of the San Lucas Water Project.
INTERAGENCY PROJECTS: Manage special handling projects
including difficult development applications, complex property
negotiations, and significant capital project issues. Projects that
continue to require the involvement of the RMA include: Carmel
River/Lagoon; Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA);
Renewable energy initiatives/projects; Board committees
(Alternative Energy and Environment, Fort Ord, Capital
Improvement, Budget, Legislative); Airport Land Use Commission;
City of Salinas Government Center and Downtown area; Long
Range Planning work program; Significant projects including: Jail
Housing Addition, new Juvenile Hall, East-West Wing, Ferrini
Ranch, Paraiso Springs, Rancho Canada Village. RMA participates
(with County Parks) on multiple groups developing regional trail
and open space planning documents.
RMA was directed to evaluate the land use fee structures (affecting
all land use agencies) and permit process coordination. The Permit
Coordinator will serve in an Ombudsman role when issues arise
and act as a liaison to Economic Development. RMA is creating a
Program Manager position to assist with implementation of a Long
Range Property Management Plan as well as developing a trail plan
in Fort Ord (FORHA) and habitat management that include Fort
Ord as well as other undeveloped County lands (Real Property,
County Parks).
RMA INTERDEPARTMENTAL FISCAL INITIATIVES: Continue
to improve interagency coordination regarding estimating,
budgeting and collecting fees for services such as Development
Applications, Appeals, Community Services Areas/Districts,
Capital projects, etc. Coordinate traffic impacts fees with TAMC
and the regional fee update. Examine opportunities for collection
of fees for unfunded mandates and General Plan policies
(development impacts, Capital Improvement and Financing Plan,
etc.). Enhance agency efforts to identify, seek and obtain public
and private grants. Complete work funded under a Coastal
Implementation Assistance Program (CIAP) grant.
EMPLOYEE DEVELOPMENT: Complete the biannual Equal
Opportunity Office (EOO) Harassment Prevention Training and
RMA County Policy Refresher Training by Public Works -
Administration, Traffic and Engineering; RMA Finance, IT and
Administration, and Planning Services employees. Complete
Annual ITD Security Awareness Training by all RMA staff.
STAFFING: Continue to work with the RMA units in the timely
delivery of recruitment and selection processes including updating
the class specifications with continued emphasis on outreach to
resources that promote diversity in hiring the best qualified
candidates. Conduct classification studies to support
organizational changes and needs. Continue to gather data and
make recommendations for improvement as turnover trends and
systemic problems are identified. Evaluate RMA organization and
operations to realize greater efficiency with more centralized
functions of service (internal and external). Improving the permit
process includes consolidating the public counter and handling
Resource Management Agency 451 County of Monterey Recommended Budget FY 2014-15
Resource Management Agency
more services over-the-counter. This will require adding plan
checkers to reduce outside plan check services. Assist with
management of the Successor Agency and Fort Ord.
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS: Continue to provide assistance to
supervisors and managers in performance management issues and
the completion of performance appraisals. Develop and provide
training on performance management and advising on courses of
corrective actions. Develop policies and best practices and educate
staff to achieve consistency and conformance across the RMA.
Continue assistance to employees and managers in addressing
ADA related matters. Increase efforts to educate employees about
the resources available to them for career advancement
opportunities within the RMA and other County departments.
PERSONNEL AND BENEFITS: The Personnel Transaction and
Benefits group shall continue the high standard of timely and errorfree
processing of personnel transactions. Continue effective and
timely employee support and communication for protected leave
rights and benefit procedures or changes during the open
enrollment period and throughout the year.
PAYROLL TRANSACTIONS: Maintain high standard of
efficiency and accuracy with regards to payroll transaction
processing for RMA and EDD. Complete the implementation of the
CAMWORKS interface project for all units within the RMA.
Continue to develop and provide training for new and existing
employees for the Employee Self Service System and WinCAMS
system as it relates to payroll. Update and educate employees on
County pay related information through communications such as
email, staff meetings and the RMA Newsletter. Further develop
and streamline time management procedures that conform to the
automated systems. Develop and deliver additional training for
employees, supervisors and managers for timecard responsibilities,
including timecard review and completion.
EMPLOYEE HEALTH AND SAFETY: The RMA is committed to
protecting the safety and health of each employee. To assure
success, the RMA will continue to use the Injury and Illness
Prevention Program as the foundation for the development,
implementation and updating of safety and health programs and
plans. The program encompasses the following items: Identifying
roles and responsibilities, providing workplace safety practices,
conducting safety and health inspections to find and eliminate
unsafe working conditions or health hazards, investigating
workplace accidents promptly and thoroughly to find the cause and
to make corrections to prevent future losses, continue to provide
relevant safety and health training to all employees.
CONTRACTS ADMINISTRATION: Continue to efficiently alter
existing RMA Contracts Administration Database to effectively
monitor all of the RMA Professional Services Agreements (PSA)
and other Agreements, including the expiration date and approved
not to exceed amount. Continue to support and coordinate with
RMA Project Managers and RMA Finance Staff to appropriately
monitor PSAs and other Agreement terms and funding. Update
and educate RMA Staff on the process of initiating or amending an
Agreement through communications such as email, staff meetings
and/or the RMA Newsletter. Continue staff cross-training and
expand knowledge by attending and obtaining certification of
County's Contracts Academy.
INFORMATION SERVICES: Goals and priorities for FY 2014-15
include the completion of the WinCAMS and Advantage payroll
interface, increased utilization of the WinCAMS application for
Facilities Management, upgrade Traffic Counter hardware and
software, implement the interface between the permitting system,
Accela, and the County's electronic document management system
(EDMS), transfer of the EDMS/Scanning section of the Building
Services Division into the RMA Information Services section.
Upgrade the permit counter ticketing system (Qmatic). Continue
the personal computer (PC) and Microsoft Office upgrade for the
remaining one-third of RMA computers, as part of a three-year PC
replacement cycle plan. Work with both RMA and EDD (excluding
OET) on identifying IT needs for the current budget year as well as
upcoming budget years. Implement a computer refresh program
within EDD. Continue to update and improve the RMA websites;
completion of the system infrastructure setup for the newly created
Environmental Services division of the RMA. Finalize new GIS
Zoning Layer. Explore asset management programs that interface
with existing database programs (Accela or WinCAMS).
FINANCE: Close fiscal year for RMA General Fund units within
the Board approved General Fund Contribution. Continue to
provide administrative support to the Successor Agency of the
Redevelopment Agency of the County of Monterey and the
Economic Development Department with support on the ROPS
and East Garrison project. Complete the timecard Interface
processing from WinCAMS to Advantage. Continue to adhere to
all County, State, and Federal financial rules and regulations. Act as
the liaison between the County and external Auditors by providing
requested information in a timely and accurate manner. Continue
to pass audits with no material findings. Continue to participate in
the Agency's many areas of process improvement including the
RMA Grants Group, Performance Measures and the Operational
Plan. Cross-train general accounting staff in the areas of accounts
payable, accounts receivable and Advantage to WinCAMS
Interface processes and reconciliations and the JOC processes and
procedures. Provide department specific Excel training for
accounting staff. Continue to perform monthly Capital Projects
contract reconciliations to ensure project managers are working
within the Board approved agreements and contract amounts.
Increase staff skills and knowledge by encouraging staff to take
classes provided by the County.
Continue to provide administrative support to EDD to include:
accounting, finance, contracts management, payroll, personnel
transactions, Workers' Compensation, safety, and information
systems.Remain on schedule with General Plan Implementation work
program (assumes continuation of funding for contractor in FY
2014-15), while increasing the public outreach component,
utilizing existing staffing levels. Update Title 21 to reflect new
requirements related to the General Plan, changes in State law, and
to provide streamlined processes.
Evaluate the review process for increased efficiencies. Eliminate
backlog of old, inactive files by adopting an ordinance and updating
records utilizing the electronic database.
Develop a system for scanning and tracking historic permit files
that can easily implement the records retention schedule once
adopted. Adopt a Record Retention Policy and Schedule and
initiate scanning of historic files and documents.
Work with the public and Board of Supervisors to establish a fully
electronic condition compliance tracking system utilizing the
Accela system. Institute an electronic submittal process for permit
applications through the web-based Accela Automation system.
Improve public information and outreach through updated
brochures and website information. Provide permit-specific
applications and checklists to facilitate direct submittal of
discretionary applications.The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for RMA Environmental
Services Unit 8444 totals $1,488,500, including $976,247 in Salaries
and Benefits. Staffing includes one Senior Water Resources
Hydrologist, one Water Resources Hydrologist, one Management
Analyst I, two Civil Engineers, and three Water Resources
Technician positions.
Services and Supplies total $512,253, and provide for NPDES and
ASBS permit fees, charges from service departments, Risk
Management allocations, computer hardware, software, and other

minor expenses and operating costs. Funding sources include GFC
of $545,211 and $943,289 in estimated revenues from permits and
inspection services, and $100,000 from State Aid for the San Lucas
Water Project grant that is being managed by Environmental
Services. The GFC includes $493,000 budgeted in FY 2013-14 in
the County Administrative Office - Other Financing Uses Unit as a
reimbursement for related services previously provided out of the
RMA-Public Works Road Fund 002.Create a new operational unit within the RMA to implement and
manage the County's Permit-related requirements and to provide a
resource to other County departments on storm water issues. A
new budget unit was created with a new fee schedule, independent
of Public Works beginning FY 2014-15. New internal procedures
have been developed and implemented for the review and
inspection of development projects with storm water, grading, and
erosion control components.
Provide grant administration and project management assistance
for several projects located on the lower Carmel River, including:
(1) the Lower Carmel River Floodplain Restoration and
Environmental Enhancement Project, (2) the Carmel Lagoon
Ecosystem Protection Barrier and Scenic Road Protection
Structure Projects, and (3) County Service Area 50 - Lower Carmel
River Flood Control Project.
Participate in the development review process to ensure
compliance with the Construction Site Storm Water Runoff
Control Program and Post-Construction Storm Water
Management Program elements. Review discretionary permits,
ministerial permits, and environmental documents to ensure
compliance with grading, erosion control, and storm water
management regulations. Grading and erosion control plan
reviews will be conducted in-house to decrease consulting services
for outside plan review that were previously contracted through
RMA - Building Services.
Conduct construction site inspections to ensure code compliance.
It is estimated that staff will complete approximately 1,400
construction site inspections in FY 2014-15.
Ensure compliance with all NPDES program elements. Complete
all Phase II NPDES Municipal General Permit Year-2 requirements,
including:
Develop a Draft Compliance Plan for Areas of Special Biological
Significance (ASBS).
Prepare an updated Storm Water Management Ordinance for
adoption.
Develop and implement a comprehensive storm water public
education and outreach program.
Ensure adequate training of all staff implementing the construction
site storm water runoff control program.
Develop a biennial employee training program for appropriate
employees involved in implementing the pollution prevention and
good housekeeping practices.
Involve the public in the development and implementation of
activities related to the program.
Create and maintain an up-to-date and accurate outfall map.
Maintain an inventory of all industrial/commercial facilities/
sources within Monterey County's jurisdiction that could discharge
pollutants in storm water to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (MS4).
Sample any outfalls that are flowing or ponding more than 72 hours
after the last rain event.
Develop written procedures for conducting investigations into the
source of all non-storm water discharges suspected to be illicit
discharges.
Develop and implement procedures for inspecting public and
private construction projects and conducting enforcement if
necessary.
Develop and maintain an inventory of County-owned or operated
facilities that are a threat to water quality.
Develop and submit a map of the area within the permit boundary
identifying the inventoried Permittee-owned or operated facilities.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2014-15 Recommended Budget includes
appropriations of $170,883,479, an increase of $8,245,671 from the
FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget. The Recommended Budget is
financed by $159,492,261 in revenues, $7,641,392 in prior year fund
balance, and $3,749,824 in General Fund Contribution (GFC). The
FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget includes five (5.0 FTE)
additional Clinic Services positions, one (1.0 FTE) additional Public
Guardian position, one (1.0 FTE) additional Public Health position,
and 18.5 additional Behavioral Health positions in preparation for
expansion of programs to meet community needs wholly funded by
outside funding sources.
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget also includes creation of a
new budget unit for Health Department Administration budget
(HEA014-8438), consolidation of all Animal Services budget units
(HEA001-8067,8068, 8069, 8071, and 8072) into one budget unit
(HEA001-8442), and creation of five new units for Clinic Services
due to expansion of satellite clinics and creation of customer
service center and quality assurance unit (HEA007-8446, 8447,
8448, 8449, and 8450).
Budget Impacts
CLINIC SERVICES: As of January 1, 2014, the Affordable Care Act
was projected to bring 27,000 people onto Medi-Cal, and an
additional 27,000 people would be eligible to purchase health
insurance through the State Health Insurance Exchange program,
Covered California. About 15,000 of the anticipated number of
people enrolled in Medi-Cal in prior fiscal year with remaining
enrolling in current fiscal year and approximately 1,500 people
enrolled in health insurance products through the Covered
California program by March 31, 2014. The Bureau continues to
work with other safety net providers to provide additional primary
care capacity for these newly insured patients.The Bureau will undergo an extensive remodel of the Seaside
Family Health Center during this year to increase capacity,
renovate the building and improve handicapped accessibility and
parking. The opening of the expanded Laurel Family Practice Clinic
and the Bridge to Care Clinic in Building 400, Floor Three on the
Natividad Medical Center campus is scheduled for Winter 2014. In
addition, the Department will continue to explore more cost
effective means of providing services to the safety net in the County
which may include further integration of specialty care providers
within general family practice clinical settings.Implement the of Strategic Plan (2011-15) to achieve health
outcomes for Monterey County residents focusing on development
of policies that promote healthy behaviors.
Develop a Health Department Workforce Development Plan to
'grow your own' for each Bureau in partnership with local
educational institutions.
Develop a Health Department quality improvement plan and
establish or maintain ongoing quality improvement processes in
each Bureau.
Commence process for reviewing and updating Health Department
Strategic Plan for 2016-2020.
Improve redesigned bilingual Health Department website to ensure
immediate access to current information by the public.
Pending Issues
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH: There are several areas of concern
for the Environmental Health Bureau in the immediate future
resulting from past and pending Federal and State legislation. An
update to Public Pool regulations will require a review of the
existing inspection system and standardization of training for staff
when completed. Local ordinances regarding single use carry-out
plastic bags, landfill development zones and illegal dumping are
being drafted, updated and/or reviewed and will require new
systems for public education, tracking and enforcement if passed.
Stricter state regulations per AB 885 for Onsite Wastewater
Treatment Systems (OWTS) could mandate significant changes to
our current OWTS program, as well as to certain Drinking Water
Protection Services program procedures. Efforts to assist water
system operators in addressing nitrate contamination in water
systems serving Disadvantaged Communities within Monterey
County are ongoing. The impact of implementing the County
General Plan (GPU) 2010 will continue to involve a significant
amount of staff time to create and update ordinances and
implement GPU policy; the fiscal impacts are as yet unknown and
may be significant.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES (EMS): Due to ongoing
discussions at state level to utilize the Maddy Fund as a source of
revenue for the state budget deficit, there may be a loss of revenue
to the EMS Agency in the amount of approximately $229,000 and a
loss to local hospitals and Emergency Department Physician
groups of $933,750. In addition, the Emergency Medical Care
Committee may recommend changes to the EMS system that may
impact EMS expenditures. The EMCC may recommend changes to
the EMS system that may impact EMS expenditures.
CLINIC SERVICES/PUBLIC HEALTH: With the Affordable Care
Act, counties will continue to be responsible for providing public
health services and health services to indigent adults without
private or public health care insurance coverage. This is especially
important in Monterey County where 13.5% of our population is
undocumented and we have a large percentage of working poor.
Based on recent reports, Monterey County has a high percentage of
persons who do not qualify for either Medicaid or subsidized
health insurance due to documentation status.
California Senator Lara introduced SB 1005 Health Care for All Act
last fiscal year to provide health care coverage to California's
remaining uninsured by expanding Medi-Cal and creating a new
health exchange where the undocumented can purchase coverage
funded with State funds. Fiscal impacts are as yet are unknown.
Policy Considerations
PUBLIC HEALTH: The Department recommends a transfer of the
amount previously allocated for Children's Medical Services (CMS)
to use for other public health programs that will prevent disease
and promote health in children countywide.
The Board of Supervisors identified Early Childhood Development
as critical to the economic and social success of the County.
Through the County's FY 2013-14 Legislative Platform and Budget
Hearing process, the Early Childhood Development Initiative
(ECDI) was identified as a priority. For FY 2014-15, the
Department recommends utilizing the Children's Medical Services
(CMS) portion of Social Services Realignment to fund this
Initiative and other Early Childhood Development activities
including: expansion of the Health Department's Maternal, Child,
and Adolescent Health programs. The Health department
proposes utilizing Social Services Realignment only after the
financial obligation for CMS's California Children's Services (CCS)
is met.
Pursuant to 1991-92 State and Local Realignment legislation, the
transfer of unspent CMS Realignment dollars from the Social
Services Realignment account to the Health Realignment account
is permissible. Per statute, the County may transfer up to 10
percent of any account's annual allocation through a public
hearing. The adoption of the annual budget would constitute such
a public hearing.The Recommended Budget for the Department totals $218,257,268
in appropriations, financed by $210,437,243 in program revenue,
and $7,820,025 in General Fund Contribution (GFC). This
represents an increased appropriation of $5,843,714, increased
estimated revenues of $6,031,503, and a decrease of General Fund
Contribution of $187,789 from the FY2013-14 Adopted Budget.
Staff adjustments were made during FY 2013-14, where 2 positions
were added for CalWORKS family stabilization component and 30
positions were added for program needs identified after final State
budget action was taken. The additional funding allocation
included several programs, such as, CalWORKS, CalFresh, Medi-
Cal, IHSS and CWS. The FY 2014-15 recommendation includes an
increase in the entitlement program costs and the elimination of 12
positions (9 filled, 3 vacant). The estimated costs of each division
are as follows:
SOCIAL SERVICES OPERATIONS & ADMINISTRATION: This
component, budgeted for in Unit 8262 and 8425, includes
Community Benefits, Family & Children Services, Aging & Adult
Services, CalWORKs Employment Services, Human Resources,
and Administrative Services. The recommendation includes
appropriations of $105,885,279, revenues of $106,755,383, and a
negative General Fund Contribution of $870,104 which is a
decrease of $1,487,009 in appropriations, a decrease of $339,975 in
revenues, and a decrease of $1,147,034 to the General Fund
Contribution from the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget.
Significant impacts to the unit include increased County share of
cost due to the CalFresh Match Waiver ending June 30, 2014,
increased costs in Enterprise Resource Planning /Information
Technology Department infrastructure, staff salary increases, and
the recommendation to eliminate $429,442 in Child Welfare and
Child Abuse Prevention contracts and twelve positions of which
nine are filled and three are vacant consisting of: one Adult Social
Worker Supervisor, one Adult Protective Services Social Worker V,
two SSI Social Worker III for Aging and Adult Services; one Child
Welfare Social Worker Supervisor, five Child Welfare Social
Worker V, and one Management Analyst III for Family and
Children Services; and one Systems Security Management Analyst
II for Administrative Services. The other significant change is a decrease in revenues of sales tax
realignment which was redirected to increases in entitlement
programs, specifically Out of Home Care.
ENTITLEMENT PROGRAMS: Entitlement Programs, budgeted
in Units 8252, 8253, 8254, 8255, and 8425 include CalWORKs,
General Assistance, In-Home Supportive Services, and Out-of-
Home Care. The recommended budget includes appropriations of
$108,106,622, revenues of $100,233,004, and General Fund
Contribution of $7,873,618. This is an increase of $7,506,140 in
appropriations, an increase of $6,512,395 in revenues, and an
increase of $993,745 in the General Fund Contribution from the FY
2013-14 Adopted Budget.
The significant change in appropriations, revenues, and General
Fund Contributions is due to a 5% Cost of Living Adjustment
(COLA) in CalWORKs cash aid, 3.5% increase in the mandated In-
Home Supportive Services Maintenance of Effort (MOE), and a
2.98% COLA on all Foster Care and Adoption Assistance
programs.
OTHER COMMUNITY PROGRAMS: This division includes
Community Action Partnership, IHSS Public Authority, Area
Agency on Aging, and Other Community Programs. The
Recommended Budget is appropriations of $3,486,615, revenues of
$3,018,276, and General Fund Contributions of $468,339 which is a
decrease of $176,800 in appropriations and revenue, with no
change in the General Fund Contributions from the FY 2013-14
Adopted Budget.
The significant change to Other Community Programs is there will
no longer be a fiscal agent to meet client's needs under the AB109
Initiative.
MILITARY AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS OFFICE: The
recommendation of appropriations is $778,752, revenues of
$430,580, and General Fund Contribution of $348,172 which is an
increase of $1,383 in appropriations, an increase to revenue of
$35,883, and a decrease of $34,500 to General Fund Contributions
from the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget.
The significant change to Military and Veterans' Affairs is a
decrease of $30,000 in appropriations and General Fund
Contributions for the Veterans' Drop-In Center in Unit 8260. The
remaining reduction in GFC of $4,500 was due to a policy decision
by the County Administration to move County Counsel/Legal costs
to the County Wide Cost Allocation Plan (COWCAP).
Budget Impacts
CHILD WELFARE SERVICES: Reductions in Child Protective
Services staffing will result in caseload increases for the remaining
workforce and more difficulty in meeting mandated timeframes for
assessing child safety in response to reports of child maltreatment.
Services delivery for children and families involved in the foster
care system will also be more challenged, including less capacity to
monitor the well being of children in foster care, supervise birth
families in efforts to meet requirements for reunifying with their
children, and support for childrens' success navigating foster care
(assuring appropriate educational services and overseeing
placement).
Reductions in a Supervisor support position will eliminate ability to
conduct regular reviews of case documentation as part of the
Department's Child Welfare Quality Assurance program. Without
this case review component, the Quality Assurance program will be
more geared to monitoring overall outcome measures, but will not
be able to focus in on quality review for individual casework and
documentation.
Reductions in a Management Analyst support position will reduce
capacity to implement child welfare policy and procedure
modifications to stay current with State and Federal regulatory
changes and local practice improvements. As the Department
strives to backfill the most pressing elements of lost child welfare
policy capacity, it would redirect staffing currently used to support
the Director's Office in responding to the new Managing for
Results efforts and strategic initiative milestones. DSS
participation in these efforts would not be possible without
undermining capacity to support our Child Welfare program.
Reductions in community-based service contracts will severely
reduce community- based child abuse prevention and family
strengthening work. Elimination of funding for the Family Ties
program would take away the support network that the
Department developed in partnership with the Kinship Center to
assist relative caregivers, most of whom are not engaged in Child
Welfare or Foster Care. Family Ties provides families caring for the
children of relatives (primarily grandparents) with peer support,
access to counseling, access to legal services, and case management
geared towards preventing the need for formal Child Welfare
involvement. Without this support, it is likely that relative
caregivers would face more difficulty meeting their family's needs
and that Foster Care costs will climb in future years. Reduction of
funding for Pathways to Safety will decrease capacity to refer
families to early intervention services designed to address child
abuse and neglect before issues reach the crisis point where
removal of the children from the family becomes necessary for
safety. Pathways to Safety provides for community services when
reports of child abuse and neglect are received by the Department,
but the safety issues involved are not to a level of risk that would
require court intervention and placement in foster care. Without
this support it is likely that relative caregivers would face more
difficulty meeting their family's needs and that Foster Care costs
will climb in future years.
ADULT PROTECTIVE SERVICES: Reductions in Adult Protective
Services staffing and supervision will increase the caseloads for the
remaining workforce. Currently, protective services for frail
seniors and individuals with disability are under-resourced. These
reductions will restrict the ability to respond to only the most
challenged allegations of elder abuse, neglect and exploitation.
This leaves vulnerable adults at risk of physical abuse, neglect, or
financial abuse/exploitation.
Reductions in SSI Advocacy will reduce costs in the budget year by
eliminating support for disabled individuals on General Assistance
as they pursue eligibility for Federal Supplemental Security Income
(SSI) benefits. In future years it is likely that fewer disabled
individuals will be successful in transitioning off of General
Assistance and onto SSI thereby increasing County costs for the
General Assistance program in future years.
INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY: Elimination of
Management Analyst support for the security of the Department's
information systems will impact the ability to expand resources to
monitor the security and the integrity of the computer networks
and automated systems used to manage services and deliver public
assistance benefits. In the past year, the Department experienced a
substantial data breach that required working closely with State

control agencies, to inform over 145,000 individuals regarding the
potential breach of their personal information. In the aftermath of
that event, it was determined that it would be prudent to
strengthen the internal capacity for monitoring the security of our
information systems. Additionally, with the implementation of
California's Healthcare Eligibility Enrollment & Retention
(CalHEERS), new risks emerge for unauthorized use of our
eligibility systems. This position was being designed to work on
program integrity and fraud prevention as well as overall system
security. DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES (DSS): Collaborate with
public safety and health partners to reduce youth violence and to
implement the Community Corrections Partnership plan. Work
with the Health Department's Behavioral Health Bureau to increase
therapeutic resources for foster children, youth at risk for out of
home placement and their families. Additionally, the Department
will continue active participation in the County Welfare Directors
Association of California (CWDA) and the American Public
Human Services Association (APHSA) to advocate for increased
regulatory flexibility and funding to meet the needs locally of lowincome
families, individuals, vulnerable children, frail seniors and
individuals living with a disability.
COMMUNITY BENEFITS: Continue work to maximize
enrollment in expanded Medi-Cal eligibility under the Affordable
Care Act. This work includes: outreach to increase customer
access to health insurance through Medi-Cal and nutrition
assistance through CalFresh; continued development of the
business process changes begun with implementation of the CB
CARE Center and the Covered California Regional Call Center; and
recruiting, hiring and training additional eligibility staff to manage
the increased workload. At the same time the Department will
continue implementing the many legislatively driven changes and
protocols in CalFresh, CalWORKs, and Medi-Cal that occur
annually.
FAMILY AND CHILDREN SERVICES: The Department is
working to complete its five year System Improvement Plan (SIP) in
Child Welfare. This plan is an important component of the Child
Welfare Quality Improvement System for Family and Children
Services. Additionally, Family and Children Services will work with
Children's Behavioral Health to secure the intensive mental health
services required under the Katie A settlement agreement for our
Foster Youth and families.
CALWORKS EMPLOYMENT SERVICES: The Department is
working towards increasing the Federally defined work
participation rate (WPR). Key elements of this effort include:
continued expansion of the wage subsidy program for job ready
CalWORKs welfare-to-work participants who cannot find work on
the open market; re-engagement services to customers who were
deferred from participating in work activities in prior years due to
State budget reductions; full implementation of the Family
Stabilization component of the CalWORKs welfare-to-work
program which will provide intensive case management services
and expanded support t o fami l ies in deep c r i s i s ; and
implementation of the Work Incentives Nutrition Supplement
(WINS) in partnership with Community Benefits.
AGING AND ADULT SERVICES: The Department has been
working internally and with community stakeholders to build an
Adult and Disability Resources Center that can support frail seniors
and individuals with disability in navigating the health and social
supports necessary to sustain healthy independence.
Pending Issues
CALWORKS FAMILY STABILIZATION: The funding for Family
Stabilization is expected to increase in FY 2014-15, the level of
increase will not be know until the conclusion of the State Budget
process. While implementation of the Family Stabilization
program is underway using existing funds, it is anticipated that
more funding will be made available for supportive services such as
housing assistance, legal services and short-term crisis assistance.
The ability to include legal and housing services as well as more
intensive behavioral health and domestic violence services, will
assist in better outcomes for recipients in search of work and self
sufficiency.CHILD WELFARE SERVICES (CWS): The California Bureau of
State Audits recently released a report that contained serious
concerns about the CWS Program based on visits to Butte, Orange
and San Francisco counties. The Department anticipates that the
concerns raised in the audit will be discussed at great length with
advocacy groups, the Legislature, the California Department of
Social Services (CDSS) and counties (represented by CSAC and
CWDA). A few examples of the concerns include: incomplete
information related to initial family contact including risk factor
analysis; background checks on temporary caregivers not always
completed; development of a credible safety plan missing for
children who remain in a home that presented a safety threat; and
frequent lack of documented supervisory review. While the
Department is proud of our quality assistance system and the
outcomes of our child welfare system in general, many of the
specific process and documentation findings by the Bureau of State
Audits also occur in our County. This audit comes after a recent
Blue Ribbon Commission report in Los Angeles County that was
highly critical of the Department. DSS anticipates that the
additional attention to this program will likely increase the
workload on Social Workers at a time when the workforce has been
reduced.
HOMELESS SERVICES: The number of homeless adults and
families continues to be a community concern. Ongoing efforts to
address this issue continue, however, currently there are no
additional Monterey County funding options. A new partnership
was established between the City of Salinas and the County of
Monterey that created a "warming shelter" for homeless adults
during the winter inclement weather season. Funding to repeat this
effort in FY 2014-15 is requested as an augmentation.
MEDI-CAL /ACA: Implementation and enrollment activities of
the Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA) is completed for this first
year. There were major challenges in this effort due to delayed
implementation of required automation interfaces and deficiencies
in the interface when it was finally put in place. As of April 2014,
the Department has over 15,000 pending applications' final
eligibility work on these applications has been made difficult and
inefficient due to the interface problems with the statewide
CALHEERS system. The Department looks forward to ongoing
improvements in this necessary automated system.
MATCH WAIVER: The CalFresh Match Waiver that began during
the economic downturn is scheduled to sunset at the end of FY
2013-14. Under the match waiver, instead of paying the 15% match
requirement for the program, counties were able to use surplus
State CalFresh funding instead of county matching funds. Efforts
are underway by CWDA, CSAC and counties to advocate for
phased elimination of the match waiver over a five year period.
While no action has been taken by the Legislature at this time,
counties are hopeful that some length of phase in prevails instead
of the complete elimination in FY 2014-15. The existing funding
mechanism currently saves $920,000 in County funds.
IN HOME SUPPORTIVE SERVICES (IHSS): While this program
has a County Maintenance of Effort (MOE), the financing
mechanism includes an annual 3.5 percent increase to the MOE.
The County cost impact in the FY 2014-15 budget is increased by
$334,642. The IHSS program has had numerous changes in the past
few years to contain costs during the budget crisis. The statewide
Case Management Information Payroll System (CMIPS) was
replaced in November 2013. With this new web-based system,
Social Workers will be able to access information from the field
with mobile technology solutions that will be implemented in the
budget year. Staff has also implemented an online provider
enrollment system which allows individuals interested in becoming
providers to apply from a computer and is also undertaking a
document imaging project to convert the IHSS consumer and
provider files to imaged files.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2014-15 County Library Recommended
Budget appropriations increased by $375,416, an approximately
4.6% increase over the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget.
Salaries and Benefits increased by $346,508, an approximately 6.6%
increase over FY 2013-14.
MCFL is implementing position changes based on a salary study
completed last year.
Temporary help services decreased by $11,000, an approximately
5.2% decrease over FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget.
The County Library continues to actively seek alternative and
diversified sources of funding to supplement its budget in order to
fill the ongoing gap between fiscal resources and community needs.
Majority of the County Library's budget goes to paying staff
salaries, maintaining multiple locations, and shared county costs.
The library staffing levels are tight, but the funds available for
books, computers and other library materials are very limited. The
County Library collaborates with various Friends of the Library
groups and the Foundation for Monterey County Free Libraries on
fundraising events, grant applications, book sales and various
outreach efforts to increase their funding contributions.
The FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget Revenue is projected to
increase over the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget. This is due to
increases occurring in Property Tax Revenue, as well as a projected
refund from the Redevelopment Property Tax Trust Fund.
Budget Impacts
The recommended budget provides for maintaining Library
Services at basic levels for the 2014-2015 fiscal year.
Demand for library services remain high because the prolonged
economic challenges and because of lack of alternative resources in
many of the communities MCFL serves. The majority of MCFL's
budget goes toward maintaining multiple locations and for staff
salaries; resources for the purchase of books, computers and other
library materials remain limited.Intermittent vacancies have helped the library meet its balanced
budget goals. The temporary closure of two branches, though
having a negative effect on MCFL's ability to provide service, has
contributed to narrowing the budget gap. However, continued
deferred maintenance contributed to the temporary closure of
these two branches, and have caused concern about basic condition
of several of the library facilities.
MCFL continues to seek ways to minimize the imbalance between
revenues and the increased expenditures while simply maintaining
service levels. The change in Redevelopment Agency (RDA)
property tax impacts have resulted in a slight increase in the
property tax income for the Library and in 2013-2014 MCFL is
cautiously restarted the process of exploring new projects and
ideas.
Demand for library services remain at high levels partly because of
ongoing economic and educational challenges in many of the areas
served, and the lack of alternate cultural resources, but also
because of the high quality services that MCFL provides.During FY 2014-15, MCFL will address the Board of Supervisors'
Strategic Initiatives through pursuing the following goals:
Continue to implement the 2013-2016 MCFL Strategic Plan with a
focus on equity of services, efficiency, sustainability, and
responding to community needs, including reevaluating programs
and services, seeking diversified and stable funding sources.
Continue progress on clearing the new San Lucas library site and
commence construction of the new building.
Work with the City of Seaside on improving the library building,
seek options for replacing the currently closed Parkfield Library,
and investigate long term options for the Carmel Valley. expanding
the Family Place program to other branches.
Follow up on recommendations in the facilities evaluations reports
and continue to seek options for improving library facilities to
respond to community and library service needs.
Explore options for replacing the North County bookmobile.
Continue to grow computer, online and digital resources.
Continue to grop programs for youth and adults including cultural/
arts programs, afterschool homework programs, conversational
English programs, etc.
Pending Issues
Planning and reconstruction of the new San Lucas branch library is
underway.
The Parkfield branch library is currently closed and a new facility is
needed to adequately serve this remote and isolated community.
MCFL will be exploring options for replacing this building and
providing service to this remote community which has very limited
alternatives for library or other services.The Recommended Budget for the department totals $544,044 in
appropriations, financed by $131,735 in program revenue and
$412,309 in General Fund Contribution (GFC).
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget provides for basic maintenace of
services at basic levels for FY 2013-2014.Promote the economic sustainability of the County's economic
base from the agricultural industry by conducting research to solve
current pest problems. Provide diagnostic services that lead to the
discovery of new diseases that can be stopped before they spread.
Provide anti-bioterrorism diagnostic services for the agricultural
industry. Maintain and enhance the resources of the region by
conducting food safety (E. coli) research for local growing
conditions.
ENOTOMOLOGY RESEARCH PROGRAM: Research on biology
and management of cabbage maggot, thrips, garden symphylan,
springtails and bagrada bug will continue.
PLANT PATHOLOGY RESEARCH PROGRAM: Continue to
investigate and study the two new strawberry diseases that are now
in Monterey County. Continue surveying, detecting, and
identifying the races of spinach downy mildew. Complete the study
on the causes of root rot disease of spinach. Continue to provide
diagnostic services to all components of the agricultural industry.
IRRIGATION AND WATER QUALITY RESEARCH PROGRAM:
Increase assistance to growers to improve irrigation and nitrogen
use efficiency. Establish a new CIMIS weather station near
Soledad. Assist growers in implementing practices to improve
water quality, such as vegetated ditches and denitrification
bioreactors. Continue trials on assessing the fertilizer value of
backgrounds levels of nitrate in ground water. Continue trials
evaluating methods to reduce chlorpyrifos pesticide in irrigation
run-off.
VEGETABLE AND WEED SCIENCE RESEARCH PROGRAM:
Develop information on the depth to which various vegetables
extract nitrate from the soil profile and use this information in

designing fertilization programs. Evaluate efficient nitrogen
fertilization of cool season vegetables to assist growers comply with
the new restrictions on the use of fertilizer by the Regional Water
Quality Control Board. Research new technology for thinning and
weeding lettuce to help make crop production more efficient and
economical. Develop an effective late season weed control system
for cool and warm season vegetables to reduce weeding costs and
safeguard yield.
VITICULTURE RESEARCH PROGRAM: Continue long-term
studies evaluating cultivar clonal selections and rootstocks for their
performance under local conditions. Continue studies to measure
the effects of plant material and cultural practices to promote the
early development and productivity of newly established vineyards.
Continue to evaluate the potential of both endemic and invasive
pest issues in becoming production problems for coastal vineyards
Improve the quality of life for the County's youth, seniors and
families by training adult volunteers to work directly with youth.
Provide opportunities for youth to become engaged in positive,
research-based activities and develop responsibility and leadership
through community service. Train Master Gardener volunteers
who conduct community enhancement service projects.
Maintain and enhance the natural resources of the County by:
Providing information through classes, workshops, newsletters,
personal consultations and web-site that leads to the use of softer
or less chemicals for pest control or effective alternatives to
chemical controls. Provide farmers and policy makers unbiased,
research-based information. Develop alternatives to pesticides that
might degrade water quality or air quality.The Recommended Budget for the Department totals $8,960,825 in
appropriations financed by $7,313,823 in program revenue,
$1,624,938 in General Fund Contributions (GFC) and $22,064 in
other fund balance. The GFC remained at status quo to the
previous year's FY 2013-14 Budget.
As in prior years, a transfer in the amount of $711,240 from the
General Fund was made to Parks Resorts (Enterprise Fund) to
offset the cost of annual debt services. In addition, a second
transfer of $946,904 from the General Fund to Parks Resorts
(Enterprise Fund) is also included in the Recommended Budget
with $624,140 to be used for operations and $322,764 for the salary
& benefits costs of 14 positions for three months.
The Department is facing significant challenges in both the
General Fund and Enterprise Fund units. Both have increased cost
for the following: General Liability Insurance, Workers
Compensation Insurance, salary increases, Information
Technology Department Capital Improvements, and ERP
Upgrades.
In addition, the Parks Resorts (Enterprise Fund) is being
substantially impacted by the extreme drought currently taking
place in the State of California. The low water levels at both Lake
Nacimiento and Lake San Antonio have forced revenue projections
for FY 2014-15 to drop by 53% from FY 2013-14 projections. A
reduction in visitation is anticipated and is already being
experienced because of the low water levels.
Parks (General Fund) reached the GFC target by eliminating one
filled position, reducing marketing and funding for buildings &
maintenance. The Recommended Budget for the Parks Resorts
(Enterprise Fund) was limited to the amount of projected revenue
and includes the elimination of 14 filled positions and reduced
funding for buildings & maintenance. A total of 23 augmentation
requests totaling $1,765,474 were submitted to mainly restore all
the positions and provide for buildings & maintenance needs and
marketing.The Parks (General Fund) Recommended Budget reflects the
elimination of one filled Historic & Cultural Affairs Manager
position which will reduce the level of service in the management
of Monterey County's historic preservation programs and
collection of artifacts.
The Parks Resorts (Enterprise Fund) Recommended Budget
includes the elimination of the following 14 filled positions which
are currently funded for only three months in FY 2014-15: 1.0 FTE
Park Building & Grounds Worker II position, 1.0 FTE Parks Ranger
II position, 3.0 FTE's Parks Ranger III positions, 2.0 FTE's Park
Ranger Supervisor positions, 1.0 FTE Park Ranger Manager
position, 1.0 FTE Senior Account Clerk position, 1.0 FTE Service
Aide III position, 1.0 FTE Park Utility & Water System Specialist
position, 1.0 FTE Office Assistant II position, 1.0 FTE Mechanic II
position, and 1.0 FTE Deputy Chief Ranger position. The staffing
level in the Recommended Budget allows for the operation of Lake
Nacimiento and caretaker status at Lake San Antonio which has no
water for recreational purposes.
In addition, funding for marketing has been reduced and minimal
funding for buildings & maintenance needs throughout the County
parks system have been budgeted.
Prior Year Accomplishments
Accomplishments are discussed at the fund levels and/or individual
unit levels.
Budget Year Goals
Goals are discussed at the fund levels and/or individual unit levels.
Pending Issues
Many of the Park's facilities and Park's assets have outlived their
useful life. The cost to repair or upgrade facilities continues to rise
as maintenance continues to be deferred rather than being
addressed as the needs become apparent. Deferred maintenance
has caused years of compounded facility issues and unforeseen
expenses including emergency repairs leading to the depletion of
budget appropriations otherwise slated for annual operations and
scheduled maintenance. Crucial needs and safety compliance
requirements do not have a dedicated funding source and continue
to be paid from the Park's operating budget. Overtime, the quality
of services has declined as the facilities are exhibiting the results of
continued use and lack of maintenance.The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for the Parks (General
Fund) units totals $4,597,524 in appropriations financed by
$2,972,586 in program revenue and $1,624,938 in General Fund
Contributions (GFC). The GFC remained status quo from the
previous fiscal year.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget for Fiscal Year 2014-15, includes the
elimination of a filled Historic & Cultural Affairs Manager positon
due to increase cost in salaries, Workers' Compensation, and
General Liability Insurance.Develop a Parks Department Strategic Plan.
Create new goals and objectives with measurable indicators to
measure performance and show statistical data for future
management decision making.
Review Parks Department organizational structure.
Accelerate revenue generation by developing realistic and
sustainable goals and objectives as well as external marketing
programs.
Identify stable funding sources.
Pursue long term solutions to address deferred maintenance needs
throughout the Monterey County Parks system.
Review issues related to public accesss fee collection.
Complete the replacment of classroom building in the paddock and
the shower building at Turn 10 campground at Laguna Seca.
Develop modernized business tools that assist in developing and
improving sustainable operations models.
Assess all current Parks contracts and agreements in order to
develop best management practices and improve staff contract
compliance practices.
Identify new strategies to spotlight and market the day-use &
camping opportunities within the General Fund Parks.
Complete the full conversion of an internet based online
reservation system.
Begin vetting the installation and implementation of Automated
Pay Stations throughout the North County Parks facilities.
Update internal Monterey County Parks Department Policies and
Procedures manuals and maintain them on a computerized data
base for immediate access to staff.
Maintain standards and continue to implement improvements that
provide customer service throughout the Parks System. This will

ensure that the County values are incorporated in all aspects of the
Department policies, procedures and employee training.
Continue collaboration with other County departments and
outside agencies to explore and build on public/private, public/
public, and public/non-profit partnerships.
Pending Issues
Internal cost drivers allocated across all Monterey County
departments leading to budget constraints and reduced levels of
service.
Maintenance and operational issues associated with new property
acquisition at Fort Ord.
Adhering to the current use permit and noise restrictions while
maximizing revenue and visitation at Laguna Seca.
Need for funding of major maintenance and infrastructure
improvements needed throughout the Parks system.
Maintaining historical and cultural management programs through
the Parks Department.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2014-15 Recommended Budget for the
Monterey County Water Resources Agency (MCWRA) programs is
$22,970,688. Anticipated revenues are $20,609,989 and the use of
$2,360,699 in fund balance will provide a statutorily balanced
budget. Budgeted unassigned fund balances at 6/30/2015 are
anticipated to be $10,748,079.
Salaries and Benefits decreased by $3,126 from the FY 2013-14
Adopted Budget. The decrease is due to reducing four positions
offset by salary increases, termination costs, and potential
reclassifications.
Services and Supplies increased by $803,976, a 4.8% increase from
the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget. This is primarily due to an
increase in County General Liability charge of $498,367, higher
consultant costs relating to the 11043 Permit Revocation
agreement, Salinas River EIR and permitting costs, and Monterey
Regional Water Pollution Control Agency costs relating to the
Castroville Seawater Intrusion Project, Salinas Valley Reclamation
Project, and Salinas River Diversion Facility. These increases have
been partially offset by reduction in the fish monitoring consultant
and other consultant savings.
Capital Assets decreased by $2,080,291 from the FY 2013-14
Adopted Budget. The Pajaro Bench Excavation Project Phase II
budgeted in FY 2013-14 accounts for $2,100,000 of the decrease.
Other Financing Uses increased by $450,000 from the FY 2013-14
Adopted Budget due to a transfer of funds from the Hydroelectric
Stabilization reserve in Fund 111 to Funds 113, 114 and 115 due to
low drought related hydroelectric sales.
Revenue decreased by $2,665,278, an approximately 11.5% decrease
from the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget. The primary driver for

decreased revenue are grants related to the Pajaro Bench
Excavation Project in FY 2013-14 $2,195,378, other decrease in
grant revenue $145,000, lower water delivery revenue $390,091 and
lower hydroelectric sales of $888,000 due to drought conditions.
This decrease is partially offset by cost of living adjustments of 2.4%
on most assessments of $113,175, business interruption insurance
relating to the hydroelectric plant shut down $300,000, and the
$450,000 transfer of funds from the Fund 111 Hydroelectric
Stabilization reserve.
Though MCWRA budget is statutorily balanced, the budget fails to
meet the County of Monterey financial guideline of a structurally
balanced budget. A structurally balanced budget matches total
ongoing expenditures to the annual ongoing revenues by individual
fund, rendering an ongoing sustainable budget. MCWRA
recognizes that a transition period will be required to achieve a
structural balanced budget. The Agency is working on interim and
long-term strategic plans to meet County Fiscal Guidelines where
fund balances are not used to sustain ongoing operations. The
strategic plan will consider organizational restructuring with a
focus on service level and financial sustainability, as well as fund
balance growth and positive cash balances.
Staff positions for the FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget are
recommended at 51 positions.
Budget Impacts
Continuing drought conditions will have a negative impact in FY
2014-15 Budget revenue.
There is only $200,000 for legal costs relating to contesting the
Water Rights Permit 11043 revocation in the FY 2014-15 Budget;
no expenditures for future project costs beyond July 2014.
There is no expenditure in the FY 2014-15 Budget for the Long-
Term Salinas River Channel Maintenance Program.
There is no expenditure in the FY 2014-15 Budget for the purchase
of Water Rights to the Blanco Drain.
Prior Year Accomplishments
Completed the Hydroelectric Plant repairs and are in the final
stages to receive insurance reimbursement.
Negotiated a Power Purchase Agreement on the output of the
Hydroelectric Plant. The negotiations seek to maximize the
revenue source through competitive rates.
Negotiated a settlement with California American Water to be
reimbursed for Regional Water Project costs incurred by the
Agency. Settlement still requires regulatory appoval.
Completed the Phase II of the Pajaro Bench Excavation Project in
conjunction with Santa Cruz County.
Finalized an Electric Power Sale Agreement.
Budget Year Goals
Develop and implement a strategy to obtain consensus for COLA
increases on assessment rates for Zones of Benefit.
Develop a strategy to move forward with a Salinas River Channel
Maintenance Program.
Resolve water rights and audit issues with the Monterey Regional
Water Pollution Control Authority (PCA) including expansion of
the Castroville Seawater Intrusion Project (CSIP).
Develop a strategic plan for resolving reservoir real property issues.
Establish a sustainable funding source or alternative requirement
for Salinas Valley Water Project fish monitoring.
Development of an interim and long-term strategic plan to render
MCWRA structurally balanced, where expenditures are matched
with estimated revenue. MCWRA's focus is to meet County
Financial Guidelines with ongoing operations that are sustainable
and not reliant on fund balance and one-time funds.

Fiscal Year (FY) 2014-15 expenses are budgeted based on FY 2013-
14 activities through December 2013, annualized for the twelve
month fiscal year. To appropriately reflect expected future
expenditures, annualized amounts are normalized by excluding
one-time events and adjusting for new anticipated expenses.
Expenditures for FY 2014-15 are budgeted at $210,842,146, a
$21,114,060 increase over the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget, which
is approximately an 11.1% increase.
Salaries and Employee Benefits are budgeted at $120,067,261, an
increase of $16,601,437 over the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget,
which represents an approximately 16% increase. The main
reasons for the increases are: step rate increases for several
bargaining groups, insurance costs, new positions for the Trauma
Level II designation, an expanding Family Practice Residency
Program, expanding quality assurance resources, electronic health
records implementation, support positions, specialties and
expanded services, primarily due to the Trauma Level II
designation, and an increase in employed and contracted
physicians.
Services and Supplies increased by $5,835,988 compared to the FY
2013-14 Adopted Budget, which represents an approximately 10%
increase. The main drivers for the increases are: healthcare IT
systems maintenance and licensing, rising pharmaceutical drug
costs, healthcare reform compliance cost, the trauma program, and
increasing utilities cost.
Capital Assets will decrease by $1,519,616 compared to the FY
2013-14 Adopted Budget to $17,540,967, an approximately 8%
decrease. The Building and Improvement budget of $2,695,000
represents projects the Board of Supervisors (BOS) Capital
Improvement Committee supported and prioritized; the BOS
Budget Committee supported funding; and projects approved by
the full BOS. The Equipment budget is $14,845,967 and is
comprised of Other Equipment ($2,375,500), Medical Equipment
($1,637,217) and Information Technology ($10,833,250).

FY 2014-15 NMC Recommended Budget revenue is $194,281,614,
a $21,744,607 increase of approximately 12.6% compared to the FY
2013-14 Adopted Budget. Fees and Services are budgeted at
$159,499,614 a $24,712,747 increase of approximately 18.3%
compared to the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget. The increase is due
to Medicaid expansion through Covered California, new enrollees
in MediCal Managed Care, reimbursement rate increases from
Central Coast Alliance for Health (CCAH), and revenue from
trauma services to be introduced January 1, 2015.
Intergovernmental Revenues is budgeted at $34,782,000, a
$2,967,867 decrease at approximately 8%, compared to the FY
2013-14 Adopted Budget. The majority of the decrease,
$2,000,000, is due to reduction in the Medi-Cal Disproportionate
Share Program (DSH), which is a supplemental payment program
designed to provide additional funding to hospitals that serve a
disproportionate number of Medi-Cal and low-income/charity
patients. The reduction is primarily due to the Affordable Care
Act, which provides affordable insurance health benefit coverage
through various channels.
Fund Balance use is budgeted at $16,560,532, a $630,547 decrease
compared to the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget, an approximately
3.7% decrease. The main driver for the decrease is a slightly higher
revenue growth over expenditure growth, which includes a
significant decrease in Capital Projects for Building and
Improvements. NMC may modify their capital project budget
during FY 2014-15, which may result in a higher use of Fund
Balance, if other funding sources are not available.
Staff adjustments were made during FY 2013-14 to prepare for
Trauma services. The following Full time Equivalent (FTE)
positions were added: 1.0 Nursing Services Division Manager; 1.0
Administrative Services Assistant; 5.0 Nurse Practitioner III; 38.8
Staff Nurse II; 1.0 Staff Nurse III; 3.0 Case Management Nurse; 5.6
Surgical Technician; 1.4 Central Sterile Technician; 2.8 Hospital
Environment Services Aide; 1.2 Clinical Laboratory Assistant; 7.0
Radiologic Technologist; 1.0 Office Assistant III; and 1.0 Medical
Unit Clerk.
Budget Impacts
The Trauma Level II program implementation is January 1, 2015
and associated fiscal considerations with the Trauma Level II
program.
The realized fiscal impact of the population transition from
uninsured to Covered California in tandem with National
Healthcare Reform and its reshaping of the delivery of care, where
there is access to healthcare insurance for those who could not
previously afford health coverage.

Improve quality outcomes and increase patient satisfaction.
Increase physician integration and alignment.
Seek strategic partnerships or affiliations to achieve sustainability.
Improve staff recruitment/retention.
Attain financial stability.
Obtain support and approval to fund capital needs.
Obtain support and approval to develop new services, programs
and products for the community.
Receive final designation and fully implement Level II Trauma
Center in Monterey County.
Establish new clinical services: Acute neurosurgical care and
interventional angiography.
Successfully implement the fifth year of the DSRIP five year plans,
tying Federal funding to quality, and patient satisfaction outcomes.
Achieve 100% compliance on The Joint Commission quality of care
core measures.
Reduce inpatient mortality 30-day unplanned readmission and
infection rates through the implementation of process
improvements based on best practices.
Improve the Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare
Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) patient satisfaction results.
Continue to enhance Language Access Service to ensure that all
limited English Proficiency patients have access to qualified
medical interpreter services.
Achieve growth goals in terms of volume and revenues of key
clinical services.
Develop an integrated health care system between NMC, the
Health Department Clinics, and other community providers
through public and private partnerships.
Continue discussions with employers, payers, and other providers
for the development of new arrangements for healthcare services
for their employees and dependents.
Open new Family Medicine Residency Clinic on the third floor of
Building 400.
Obtain support and approval to implement plans for new primary
care physician office space in the Creek bridge area.
Obtain support and approval to implement and complete the Acute
Rehabilitation Unit remodel.
Obtain support and approval to finalize ambulatory space plans for
the first floor of Building 400.
Complete the Medical/Surgical Unit remodel.
Implement and complete the Hospital Wayfinding Signage System
project.
Establish and achieve Productive Full Time Equivalents (FTEs) per
adjusted occupied beds productivity goals.
Obtain support and approval to select ambulatory care electronic
medical record (EMR) system.
Obtain support and approval to Install Meditech Operating Room
(OR) module.
Select Health Information Exchange (HIE) governance model
between participating hospitals and providers.
Continue discussions with potential providers for an affiliation.
Obtain support and approval to install a new anesthesia software
system.
Pending Issues
Impact of the 2010 Federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act (PPACA), commonly called the Affordable Care Act (ACA).
Impact of the PPACA on the Bridge to Reform California Section
1115 Medicaid Waiver.
Development of Integrated Healthcare Delivery Systems.
Participation in new health plan risk contracting arrangements.