Conduct a strategic planning session with the
Board of Supervisors to identify and establish
County priorities.
• Complete sale of Water Street property.
• Complete rezoning and entitlement process for
Old Sonoma Road campus.
Update the guidelines for use of Affordable
Housing Fund monies and set priorities for use
of monies available.
• Complete bathroom remodel at Calistoga
Farmworker Center.
• Continue work to identify long-term funding to
sustain the operation of the farmworker centers.
Complete the process to convert from an
Interagency Merit System (IMS) to an Approved
Local Merit System (ALMS), and consolidate all
County employees under the County’s
personnel rules and regulations.
• Move to Online Open Enrollment in PeopleSoft,
allowing employees to make Benefit selections
electronically, and ultimately eliminating the
current paper based process.
• Reevaluate and enhance the County’s Wellness
Program to support the “Live Healthy Napa
County” initiative, including conducting an RFP
to include additional gyms in the existing
program.
• Review and evaluate the County’s Performance
Evaluation form.
• Revise FMLA process and policy, and add a
new maternity/paternity leave informational
session.
• Complete negotiations with the Napa County
Deputy Sheriff’s Association for the contract that
expires in October 2016.
• Conduct negotiations with the Napa County
Public Employees, Public Service Employee
Unit for the contract that expires in June 2017.
Create and implement a revised Management
Academy that is in alignment with our tiered
progressive leadership model that works in
synergy with the Academies already developed.
• Partner with ITS, County PIO and Webmaster to
enhance our current County intranet site and
establish a more robust and user-friendly
training and organizational development site
within Chardonnay.
• Develop RFQ to secure a cadre of
training/organizational development consultants
with expertise in specific areas such as
healthcare, law enforcement, etc. that
department heads can access as needed
Continue to implement the After Action
Improvement Plan items related to the 2014
South Napa Earthquake and the Valley Fire.
• Continue earthquake recovery operations
including working with County staff to submit the
necessary documentation to FEMA to obtain the
maximum reimbursement for County
infrastructure damages from the earthquake.
This also includes pursuing appeals with FEMA
for projects declared ineligible for
reimbursement.
• Reorganize implementation of Phase II of the
County’s Disaster Recovery Plan.*
• Continue with the coordination of the Countywide
Emergency Operations Plan update with the
Cities of American Canyon, Calistoga, Napa, St.
Helena and the Town of Yountville and the
County which will avoid duplication of effort by
various jurisdictions. *
• Review regional disaster response plans for
annex to the updated Emergency Operations
Plan (EOP).
• Develop and implement a multi-year training and
exercise plan for County emergency response
staff and other local jurisdictions.*
• Complete the opening of the fully operational
“warm” EOC located at the Sheriff’s Office.
Go live with the Corrections module of the
County’s criminal justice management
information system in summer 2016 and begin
building the module for the Juvenile system.
• Implement the new expense management
application countywide.
• Continue with the development and
implementation of an improved privacy and
security system for the County, including the
Health and Human Services Agency.
• Continue upgrading additional radio sites.
• Complete installation of equipment in second
data center for critical County IT and business
operations.
• Continue work on updating records retention
schedules to eventually have a schedule for all
County departments that is approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
• Archivist to review current setup and provide
gap analysis and best practices for improving
Records Center.
Continue to qualify for Certificates of Excellence
from State Controller’s Office and the Government
Finance Officers Association for the County’s
financial reporting and Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report (CAFR) for FY 2015-16. This
includes the implementation of all new GASB
pronouncements issued during the year.
? With Information Technology Services, fully
implement the PeopleSoft Travel & Expense
Module county-wide.
? With Information Technology Services, fully
implement automated approval workflow and
document imaging across all ERP modules,
eliminating duplicate entry and multiple paper
copies of documents
? Develop a grant compliance policy and procedural
manual to ensure comprehensive compliance and
a more integrated team approach beginning from
the application process through to the close out
and audit of the grant (continued from prior year
due to staffing limitations).
? Create audit procedures for monitoring grants and
the various assessments created by special
districts (continued from prior year due to staffing
limitations).
Continue enabling County departments to accept
credit cards and debit cards as payment for fees
and services, as they are needed and/or
requested.
• Finalize award of General Banking Services
Request for Proposal (RFP).
• Continue expanding the public’s ability to review
tax and treasury data online.
155
Continue to expand the public’s ability to review
data online and reduce the need to call or visit in
person.
• Continue to provide assessment value notices
on the County’s website for the January 1st,
2016 lien date.
• Continue to review properties in decline in value
status for restoration of base year values.
• Communicate restoration of Prop 8 values to the
public through news releases and local media.
• Continue automation of valuation procedures
and conversion of records to scanned images.
Continue to survey all polling places and Voter
Assistance Centers for feedback on operational
improvements for future elections.
• Improve vote by mail and polling place
experience for voters by implementing
suggestions from survey respondents.
• Prepare for and conduct a successful November
8, 2016 General Election.
• Continue to provide all election materials to
voters in both Spanish and English, including
voter information access through the division’s
website.
• Continue to provide timely interim election
results.
• Increase yield of eligible voters who register to
vote.
• Continue with enhanced outreach to Spanish
language community prior to November General
Election.
• 100% registration of eligible Spanish Language
voters in Napa County.
Continue adding State Agencies (Franchise Tax
Board and State Board of Equalization) to
CeRTNA G2G electronic recording.
• Continue adding submitters to CeRTNA ERDS
electronic recording via Agents.
• Complete implementation of the Fictitious
Business Names (FBN) Index online. This is a
continuation of last year’s goal due to vendor
rescheduling.
• Complete system sharing of vital records with
Public Health.
Continue to provide essential litigation and
advisory support to PBES in increasing Code
Enforcement activities and effectiveness, and in
developing comprehensive Policies &
Procedures that will guide enforcement staff.
• Continue to provide legal services to assist with
the financing and construction of new jail.
• Continue to assist County departments in
working with FEMA and County insurers on
earthquake cost recovery.
• Continue to support development of a
comprehensive County-wide privacy and security
system.
• Continue to provide vital legal support to County
staff and the Board in the ongoing process of
working with the City of Napa and the developer
on the Napa Pipe project .
• Continue to provide legal advice and support to
the Board and to PBES planning staff in their
process of refining and implementing certain
goals, procedures and policies developed and
recommended by the Agricultural Protection
Advisory Committee (APAC).
• Advance County’s land use interests and protect
the Agriculture Preserve against unfounded
claims of tribal sovereignty.
• Initiate and complete a recruitment for three new
County Hearing Officers to handle administrative
appeals for various departments.
• Initiate and complete a recruitment for two new
Conflict Public Defenders to replace those who
have withdrawn from the panel.
• Work with the Registrar of Voters to ensure
compliance with the Section 203 of the Voting
Rights Act.
Construction Completion:
o HOJ Second Floor Earthquake Repairs
o Jail Security System Replacement
o Library Earthquake Repairs
o Napa Library Remodel
o Capell Valley Fire Station #214
(Berryessa Highlands)
o Pope Valley Fire Station #220*
(Berryessa Estates)
o Oak Knoll/Oakville Crossroad Restoration
Project, Group A and Phase 2, Group C,
Site 14*
o Sheriff’s Repairs, EOC and Conference
Room Acoustics*
o Silverado Trail Overlay
o Various Roads Safety Improvement
Projects
o Berryessa Estates – Phase II of the
Wastewater System Capacity Upgrades –
Lift Station Upgrades
• Construction Contract Award:
o Devlin Road Extension (Segment E)
o HOJ/Jail Remaining Earthquake Repairs
o Jail Basement Safety Upgrades*
o Berryessa Estates - Water Storage Tanks
and Booster Pump Station Replacement
and Rehabilitation
• Design:
o Staff Secure Facility Design Completion*
o Initiate Design for New Jail*
o Berryessa Estates – Phase II of the
Wastewater System Capacity Upgrades –
Lift Station Upgrades
• Continue implementation of the Bridge
Replacement Program*
• Continue Groundwater Monitoring and Planning*
Safety
• Improve safety for all users of County road
system*
• Complete highway widening on St. Helena
Highway*
• Implement safety improvements on Silverado
Trail between Yountville and Napa, including
rumble strips and intersection improvements at
Yountville Crossroad*
• Install guardrail on Silverado Trail, Deer Park
Road and Sanitarium Road
• Install high-friction surface treatment on Old
Sonoma Road, Hagen Road and Butts Canyon
Road
• Install solar powered “flashing chevron signs”
on Deer Park Road above Sanitarium Road
Reliability
• Pavement overlay on Silverado Trail Phase G
(Calistoga-Larkmead), Berryessa Knoxville Road
(Pope Canyon-Spanish Flat)*
• Implement long-term bridge replacement and
maintenance program; The next three bridges,
now in early design, are Dry Creek, Chiles Pope
Canyon and Garnett.*
• Implement vegetation management program*
• Implement speed survey program*
• Develop procedures for making traffic data
available to public*
Accessibility
• Plan, design and maintain County road system
in collaboration with regional partners so that it is
accessible to all modes and users*
• Completion of design for Devlin Road Segment
E, including environmental permits and right-ofway
acquisition*
• Complete construction of Vine Trail between
Yountville and Napa
• Collaborate with NVTA, City of Calistoga,
Caltrans and (VTC) on design of Vine Trail
between Calistoga and Bothe State Park*
• Complete repairs to sidewalks in the Silverado
residential area
217
Fiscal Viability
• Continue to participate within NVTA, MTC and
other appropriate local and regional frameworks
to justify and seek sustainable revenue sources
to provide for maintenance of roads infrastructure
requirements
• Investigate possibility of establishing a
countywide Traffic Mitigation Fee program*
Conduct an allocation methodology review to
ensure the Fleet fund is accurately collecting
funds for operations and maintenance, as well
as replacement costs, of vehicles. Recommend
changes to the Board of Supervisors as
necessary.
• Continue to review opportunities for improving
the Fleet’s environmental performance, including
the recommended purchase of 8 hybrid vehicles
replacing traditional gasoline vehicles in the
proposed budget
• Complete safety training program for staff
covering areas such as forklift safety, fleet
defensive driving, and large vehicle safety
characteristics.
• Continue to update off-road equipment fleet to
reduce emissions and extend County
compliance with Air Board standards.*
Review the County’s Facility Assessment Plan
and provide updates as necessary based on the
current facility portfolio.
• Enhance training program for Building
Maintenance HVAC control functions in
conjunction with building project commissioning
and proposed capital projects.*
• Continue to assist in the planning, coordination,
construction and commissioning of the new Staff
Secure Facility.*
• Ensure the efficient delivery of custodial services
at South Campus with the HHSA move.
• Implement return of Probation, Fire, and Parks to
Hall of Justice after completion of EQ repairs.
Develop and implement a Wildlife Hazard
Maintenance Plan with the information gathered
in the Wildlife Hazard Assessment and in
accordance to FAA guidelines.
• Develop and complete the design of the
Runway 18R/36L rehabilitation project, including
finishing the state environmental process.*
• Execute tasks involving planning, environmental
review, design, and construction for completion
of projects identified in the Airport Capital
Improvement Plan.*
Develop Capital Improvement Plan to remove
rock from the Animal Shelter Courtyard and
evaluate cost of concrete vs artificial turf.**
• Develop a strategic plan to focus efforts on
successful live-release of animals in the Shelter’s
care including program improvements with specific
focus on foster partnerships with local rescue
organizations, developing policies relating to Trap-
Neuter-Release (TNR) efforts, and reviewing
adoption policies.
• Continue updates on the Animal Shelter 5-Year
Capital Improvement Plan to include utility
conservation analysis, major maintenance and
equipment replacement projects. Include a
funding plan from the dedicated funds in the
Animal Shelter Budget to support the efforts.*
• Complete an analysis of staff educational and
training needs and increase opportunities for staff
development.
• Address waste reduction goals adopted by the
Sustainability Council by incorporating strategies
to reuse materials within the Animal Shelter as
appropriate such as the use of shredded recycled
paper within rabbit cages and cardboard boxes in
place of plastic litter boxes.
Cooperate with the federal and state
governments, wine industry, and community to
eradicate EGVM from Napa County, and remove
all areas from quarantine by the end of FY 2016-
17.
• Continue to protect the people, environment, and
economy by preventing the introduction of exotic
pests, ensuring safe and effective use of
pesticides, and creating opportunities to increase
the production, access, and sale of agricultural
commodities. protecting the public, industry, and
continuing to work cooperatively with our
stakeholders.
• Assure fair competition and equity in the
marketplace and ensuring that the interests of the
buyer and seller are protected with the goal of
promoting equity in the marketplace and
protecting consumers and businesses alike.
Finalize study related to the increase to the
General Plan Fee and implement any proposed
change.
• Complete General Plan Amendments to clarify
land use designations in Angwin and adopt
“Complete Streets” policies.
• Consolidate, standardize language, and
organize use permit conditions by milestones.*
• Prepare Policies and Procedures Manual for the
Department, which will include policies
regarding scanning, document retention, and
public access to information.*
• Develop and implement the fourth phase of the
State’s new MS4 storm water permit.*
• Continue the process of updating the Zoning
Code, create a streamlined process for small
wineries, and require signs to be located on-site
for public hearing notices.*
• Continue supporting and advancing the Board of
Supervisors direction on cumulative impact
analysis and the Winery Definition Ordinance.*
Apply for and become certified third party
provider for the RWQCB to retain jurisdiction
over winery process wastewater.
• Continue to explore opportunities for online
temporary food facility permit applications. The
long-term goal is to create a number of different
online permit applications for the division.
• Return the Mobile Home Park Enforcement
Program to the State Dept. of Housing &
Community Development.
• Complete the scanning and indexing of
approximately 4,000 assessor’s parcel files to
OnBase.
• Collaborate with the Public Works Department
on modifications to their groundwater database
to allow us to collect and provide water quality
data for monitoring and reporting purposes.
Complete State inspection requirements for all
types of solid waste facilities.
• Review and process rate reviews for
agreements with Berryessa Garbage Service
and Napa County Recycling & Waste
Services.
• Apply for, receive and implement Waste Tire
Enforcement Grant from State of California,
Department of Resources, Recycling and
Recovery.
Schedule a workshop for the Board of
Supervisors in FY 2016-17 to discuss
the funding and future role of the Wildlife
Commission.
• Provide grant funding opportunities for the
community that will address specialized or
seasonal needs and support the WCC mission.
• Provide support for local fish and wildlife
projects affected by State funding reductions
through targeted grant funding.
• Improve the effectiveness of project grants
through on-going Commission review of current
and past grant projects, and status reports at
regular meetings of the Commission.
• Improve community awareness through
outreach and participation in local and regional
environmental events, such as Napa Earth Day,
and others.
Publicize the newly rolled out online permitting
program and expand the County’s online
permitting presence by adding more types of
minor projects that are available for online
permitting.
• Fill the vacant Building Inspector position.
• Implement automated inspection scheduling as
part of Phase II of Accela Citizen Access (the
public facing side of the permitting database)
• Implement changes to the fee schedule as
approved by the Board. Fees that are being
considered include a technology fee, a Certified
Access Specialist fee and a more efficient
building permit fee calculation methodology.
• Implement electronic project plan submittal and
review system for minor projects as a pilot
program.
• Evaluate the backlog of expired building permit
applications and permits and take steps to either
clear those permits from the system or work with
property owners to finish the project and avoid a
potential code enforcement case.
• Prepare and adopt the new 2016 California
Building Code with local amendments. File the
adoption with the State Building Standards
Commission and Energy Commission.
Finalize the Code Enforcement Policies and
Procedures document and present to the Board of
Supervisors.
• Continue the Neighborhood Improvement
Program for the Pueblo Park and Berryessa
neighborhoods.
• Draft ordinance and procedures for annual winery
reporting based on APAC and Board of
Supervisors’ direction.
• Focus on reducing case back log with an
emphasis on Health and Safety violations.
• Receive input from the Board of Supervisors
related to a residential building permit amnesty
program and take steps to implement a program if
so directed.
Deliver research-based information from the
University of California and other institutions to
the residents and agricultural professionals of
Napa County in response to identified needs and
expectations.
• Conduct numerous, effective outreach efforts in
viticulture, weed science, pest management,
natural resources, food systems, youth
development and home gardening.
• Collaborate in on-farm research projects to
address local needs in viticulture, pest
management, weed science, water quality, and
rangeland management.
Begin remodel of the main library which includes
the children’s area, staff functions, and the
Friends of the Library area.
• Complete integration of a new Integrated Library
System including a discoverability layer which
will expose holdings on search engines to
patrons searching Google, Yahoo, and other
search engines.
• Implement Link+ to provide access to over 50
libraries’ holdings for inter-library loan.
• Work with County departments to increase the
accuracy of web presence and improve
exposure.
Continue to collaborate with other local agencies
and to utilize new technology, whenever
feasible, in order to develop streamlined
processes and reduce paper consumption;
specifically, the Department is in the
development phase for implementing an
electronic subpoena process.
• Maintain an active leadership role in the
reduction of elder abuse, gang violence, and
domestic violence by educating law enforcement
and the community to recognize, report, and
investigate such crimes, as well as to protect
victims and to then successfully prosecute those
offenders.
• Continue working with local stakeholders toward
the development of a new Family Justice Center
project that will help improve victim outcomes for
domestic violence and sexual assault cases.
• Pursue new revenues and grant funding for
programs that are essential to the District
Attorney Office’s mission and goals.
• Plan and prepare for increased workload
associated with local law enforcement use of
body worn cameras.
Continue to pursue cases and collect money to
restore victims, with a focus on protecting
consumers and our environment.
• Continue to engage in consumer outreach
activities to educate the public about scams
initiated through the internet and scams targeting
the elderly.
• Continue the successful collaborative code
enforcement prosecution program with County
Counsel, and provide ongoing code enforcement
related trainings to County staff.
Continue to meet State Bar of California and
American Bar Association caseload guidelines
for the provision of indigent criminal defense
services.
• Continue collaboration with fellow criminal justice
agencies in Public Safety Realignment and
assist in the development and monitoring of
evidence based practices in the Napa County
criminal justice system.
• Participate in the development of enhanced
programming for mentally ill defendants
designed to reduce the frequency of
incarceration for the mentally ill.
• Provision of MCLE (Mandatory Continuing Legal
Education) training programs for staff attorneys.
This effort was hampered by a lack of adequate
post-earthquake space for programming. With
the cost of MCLE programs reimbursable under
the Collective Bargaining Agreement, in-house
training can reduce training expenses and better
tailor programs to Napa County practice.
Review the investigator pay scale and work with
the Superior Court to make changes as
necessary to ensure the Conflict Public Defender
panel has access to necessary investigative
services.
• Complete a new competitive selection process to
execute a new contract for a Conflict Public
Defender after a vacancy was created in March
2016 and increase the qualifications for Conflict
Public Defenders handling capital cases.
Continue to work with the Information
Technology Services division to complete the
CJNET case management system for Juvenile
Probation. This project is moving slower as
implementation in other departments is taking
longer than anticipated.
• Continue to pilot Restitution Court in the Adult
division designed to provide victim restoration.
Select and implement gender specific treatment
programs for female wards. To date, the
Department has reviewed several possible
programs, but has not yet found a program that
meets the desired scope.
• The development of the Criminal Justice
Network (CJNET) case management system for
Juvenile Hall was not implemented in the past
fiscal year due to completion of other
Departments with the system. The goal is to
develop and implement the program this year.
• Expand the culinary program with youth in
Juvenile Hall.
Conduct a program designed to analyze offender
outcomes.
• Continue to maintain a recidivism rate of no
higher than 24% for graduates.
• Return to the Hall of Justice building to improve
in-custody services and programming to more
jail inmates.
Increase the Percentage of Current Support
Collected and Percentage of Cases with an
Arrears Payment (Federal Performance
Measures).
• Implement electronic document recordings with
Napa County Recorder’s office and Napa
County Courts.
• Partner with Napa County Probation to support
the reentry of probationers into the community to
maximize the payment of support.
Increase outreach to the public through social
media.
• Implement body worn camera program.
• Implement a recruitment program for college
graduates and bilingual individuals who are
interested in working in law enforcement.
Implement training for Patrol Deputies to be
resources for non-homicide deaths which will
reduce call outs for the Investigators, thus
reducing overtime.
• Develop a Coroner consortium with outside
Coroner agencies (Marin, Sonoma, Lake, Solano)
for training, mutual aid and resource sharing.
Work together with the Napa County Animal
Shelter on establishing an information/education
booth regarding animal related issues and
attending community events throughout the
County.
• Provide all Animal Service Officers up to date
training in the realm of Chemical Capture and
the care of animals after they have been
administered the chemicals.
• Work closely with local veterinarians on the best
practices for treating sick or injured animals
while at the call for service and before
transporting.Continue to disrupt and dismantle those
trafficking methamphetamine, heroin,
prescription pain medications, cocaine and
marijuana throughout Napa County.
• Continue to participate in Prevention and
Education programs, both in English and
Spanish, to share the message concerning the
destructive and devastating effects drug abuse
has on individuals, families and communities.
Continue to collaborate with other criminal
justice agencies to implement the
recommendations of the Community Corrections
Partnership Realignment Plan and lead the
effort in managing the correctional system
changes due to the 2011 Public Safety
Realignment Act by offering a variety of
alternatives to incarceration to reduce the
inmate population and programming options to
reduce recidivism.
• Working with various departments including the
County Executive Office and Public Works,
continue to manage the significant earthquake
repairs and other capital improvement projects
occurring in the current jail facility.
• Continue to implement AB 720 moving from a
case by case implementation to a continuous
enrollment process qualifying inmates to receive
Medi-Cal benefits for inpatient hospitalization
expenses that would otherwise be borne by the
County General Fund.
• Implement new programs, including the
expanded use of Jail Education Tablet program,
throughout the jail to assist with the continued
effort to utilize Evidence Based Programs to
reduce recidivism.
• Continue to work with Information Technology
Services on implementing CJNET.
• Further development and training within the
responsibilities of the Classification Unit.
Specific areas included Gang Intelligence, After
Care and a more concentrated implementation
of programming and alternatives to
incarceration. This also included the further
development of outside agency contacts and
cooperative partnerships.
330
Resume in-person programming and evaluate
options for education and employment
programming.
• Continue to improve inmate services related to
Canteen and video visitation usage to improve
commission revenue to the fund. This goal could
not be achieved during FY 2015-16 due to
delays in Earthquake repairs.
• Resume the pilot program to provide educational
services to inmates who lack completion of high
school. In partnering with the Napa County
Library, the Department will facilitate inmates in
completion of General Educational Development
(GED) testing to achieve high school
equivalency. This goal could not be achieved
during FY 2015-16 due to delays in Earthquake
repairs.
Continue working with local fire agencies to
develop and improve existing agreements and
response plans that will ensure efficiency and
increase the levels of service provided to Napa
County residents and visitors.
• Complete site-use agreements for all volunteer
stations.
• Continue to work closely with Napa Firewise and
local community-based groups to improve
preparedness for wildland fires.
• Work with the Insurance Services Office to
initiate a comprehensive County insurance
review.
• Create an Assistant Chief of Operations for Napa
County Fire Department (NCFD).
• Continue to improve on the “One Department”
concept for NCFD.
• Begin to implement NCFD Strategic Plan.
Procure and manage oversight of a single
electronic patient care reporting system for use
by all prehospital agencies in the EMS System.
• Enhance the outreach and education portions of
the Communicable Disease Control and
Immunization Programs through coordinated
campaigns and activities utilizing a Health
Education Specialist.
• Continue to expand outreach and education
efforts for healthy living strategies to support the
community in achieving optimal health and
wellbeing.
347
Continue to develop a community-wide
integrated health care and service delivery
model with Ole Health, Mentis, Aldea, Progress
Foundation, Buckelew and other community
partners to increase the number of successful
referrals for individuals experiencing mild to
moderate mental health symptoms and those
who are severely mentally ill.
• Establish the first Crisis Stabilization Unit in
Napa County as funded by the Investment in
Mental Health Wellness Act of 2013 (SB82)
grant.
• Increase collaboration with Alcohol and Drug
Services through expansion of the Drug Medi-
Cal Waiver and with Child Welfare Services to
sustain existing services and expand to meet
new state mandates.
Improve timely access and availability of alcohol
and drug treatment services to the Napa
community.
• Implement the Drug Medi-Cal Organized
Delivery System Waiver Implementation Plan, a
5-year Pilot Project designed to complete the
alcohol and drug treatment continuum of care in
Napa County and enable Napa County ADS to
provide expanded levels of care to the Napa
community.
• Reduce Underage Drinking by limiting access,
influencing social norms and increasing positive
peer influence.

Create a trained team of Triple P (Positive
Parenting Program) practitioners in Child
Welfare Services while supporting
community-wide Triple P implementation
to reduce:
o Substantiated child maltreatment
o Number of children in out-of-home
care
o Emergency room visits due to
child maltreatment
• Fully establish SDM (Structured Decision
Making) and Safety Framework
Integration across programs to ensure
high-quality risk assessment and safety
decision making through the life of the
case.
• Fully implement CCR (Continuum of Care
Reform) and RFA (Resource Family
Assessment) to ensure family-based
placement for youth and children that
ensures their safety and well-being while
concurrently identifying and securing
permanent homes.
Secure a dedicated workspace in Calistoga to
improve access to CSOA services for
individuals living in the northern part of the
County.
• Continue to ensure that CSOA’s infrastructure
meets the expanding needs of a changing
older and disabled population.
• Increase awareness and collaboration with
community partners to meet the needs of a
growing aging population.
Through a partnership with the California
Department of Social Services GeoCoding Pilot
Project, increase CalFresh participation rate by
focusing on outreach to targeted areas of Napa
County where potential non-participating
eligibles reside. CalFresh increases recipients’
ability to purchase healthy food, thus leading to
a healthier lifestyle, and CalFresh dollars spent
are a benefit to the local economy.
• Improve customer satisfaction by providing
place-based services in the community
including up valley, in schools, the Probation
Department, Jail and homeless shelter, and by
increasing HHSA’s presence in American
Canyon.
• Improve the Work Participation Rate for the
Welfare to Work program by increasing
community service placements and subsidized
employment and engaging participants in
activities to address barriers to employment.
Hire a 0.5 Mental Health Therapist in Public
Health to provide mental health screening,
assessment and infant-parent mental health
intervention, as well as brief therapy for women
being seen in the MCAH Public Health Nursing
Home Visiting program. This model of integrated
care by the Public Health Nurse and the Mental
Health Therapist will facilitate timely, language
appropriate services for women with perinatal
mood disorders including depression, anxiety and
other mental health issues, which can derail
bonding, attachment and caretaking for the
infant/child.
• Continue to expand Public Health’s Coordinated
Chronic Disease Prevention Program (CCDPP)
by applying for and managing external funding
sources that will increase collaboration with
community partners while enhancing efforts to
prevent chronic diseases and promote population
health.
• Continue Therapeutic Child Care Center
collaboration between Public Health and Mental
Health to maximize EPSDT mental health billing
and use the Multi-Disciplinary Team (MDT)
Model to holistically serve clients.
• Develop a robust database to support the
growing needs for data collection in the HHSA
Hub Care Access program.
• Link early intervention clinician services to the
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Psychosis
(CBTp) initiative through the Mental Health
Division’s First Episode Psychosis (FEP) portion
of the SAMHSA Mental Health Block Grant.
• Expand existing collaboration between the
Mental Health Division and City of Napa Police
Department to include the Napa County Sheriff’s
Office and the Public Defender’s Office by
providing additional licensed, bilingual staff with
expertise in co-occurring treatment to respond to
high needs youth, adults and older adults whose
behavioral health issues bring them to the
attention of local law enforcement.
Expand outreach services in the Outpatient Alcohol
and Drug Treatment Program to Spanish-speaking
clients receiving services at Puertas Abiertas
during evening hours.
• Increase care coordination services to Alcohol and
Drug Services clients enrolled in the OLE Health
Wellness Program.
• Develop co-occurring treatment services in the
residential alcohol and drug treatment program to
expand services to clients who have already been
assessed for a residential treatment level of care.
Services will include assessment and diagnosis of
mental health disorders, individual psychotherapy,
co-occurring mental health/substance use disorder
treatment groups, and crisis intervention services.
Instruct a cadre of staff to be trainers in the
Results Based Accountability outcome
measurement tool so it can be used to measure
the effectiveness of specific HHSA programs
and activities.
• Provide training to implement the Mutual
Learning teamwork model across the Agency.
• Determine a process and system to enable
HHSA to manage and analyze data across all
divisions.
