Provide a Capital Financing Plan that will identify
financing alternatives for the construction of a
new Jail.
? Continue working with the Director of Library
Services and Community Outreach to review,
update and implement the County’s External
Communications Plan to enhance public
awareness and communication about what the
County does.
? Negotiate a successor Memoranda of
Understanding with the County’s Miscellaneous
members that promotes the recruitment and
retention of a quality workforce.
? Support provision of the second tier of
Leadership Academy for County senior
managers.
Complete the next round of funding grant
agreements from the Special Projects Fund.
? Complete the second round of Arts and Culture
grants from the Special Projects Fund.
? Complete processes necessary to allow for
housing, commercial, and other uses in the
Napa Pipe Project.
? Renew the Tourism Improvement District.
? Further implement the recommendations of the
Affordable Housing Task Force.
? Seek Community Development Block Grant
funds for future projects.
? Develop a sustainable funding source for future
family farmworker centers.
? Identify funding for the maintenance of current
farmworker centers.
? Update the affordable housing impact fee for
both commercial and residential construction.
Continue efforts to implement the Affordable
Care Act (ACA) including tracking measurement
periods, determining eligibility, offering benefits
as required under the new regulations,
monitoring affordability, and tracking and
reporting compliance.
? Support the CalPERS Dependent Eligibility
Verification Project.
? Review and revise leave policies and disability
plans to ensure the most efficient and effective
approach for disability management.
? Establish regular leave policy and retirement
educational sessions.
? Review and revise the new employee enrollment
and on-boarding process.
? Complete transfer of responsibility for benefits
billing and reconciliation from the Auditor-
Controller’s Office.
? Revise Personnel Rules and Regulations to
ensure fairness and relevance to current
employment environment.
? Initiate process to consolidate County
employees currently covered by the State Local
Agency Personnel Standards (LAPS) under the
County’s personnel rules and regulations.
? Implement PeopleSoft delivered overtime
calculation.
Research opportunities for expansion of the
Lunch and Read program.
? Partner with Organizational Development
Committee and selected vendor to implement a
revised Senior Leadership Academy to County
staff.
? Continue to conduct quarterly meetings of the
Organizational Development Committee.
? Continue to write and publish the Napa County
Leadership Journal quarterly.
? Continue to support and respond to countywide
requests for training and organizational
development assistance on an as needed basis.
? Partner with Organizational Development
Committee and selected vendor to review the
current Management Academy program and
identify opportunities for changes or
improvements.
? Offer both a Supervisory Academy and
S.T.A.R.T. program.
Complete the Countywide Disaster Recovery
Plan project, which began in FY 2011-2012.
? Begin review of regional disaster response plans
for annex to the new Emergency Operations
Plan (EOP).
? Continue to coordinate a Countywide
Emergency Operations Plan update with the
Cities of American Canyon, Calistoga, Napa, St.
Helena and the Town of Yountville and the
County which will avoid duplication of effort by
various jurisdictions.
? Continue the development and implementation
of a multi-year training and exercise plan for
County emergency response staff and other
local jurisdictions.
? Revitalize the Community Emergency Response
Team (CERT) program for the residents,
governmental agencies and community-based
organizations of Napa County.
? Begin implementation of the WebEOC system
for improved functionality and communication
with the State and within the EOC.
Continue to work on the Records Retention
schedule to eventually have a schedule for all
County departments that is approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
? Hire a consultant to come up with a strategy to
improve the Archive section of the Records
Center.
Finalize Phase I of the Public Safety Simulcast
Radio System project, with the installation of
equipment at the Oat Hill radio site providing
another transmit location.
? Start implementing Phase II of the Public Safety
Simulcast Radio System by adding Berryessa
Peak as another transmitter for coverage in
Berryessa/Knoxville area.
Upgrade the SAS Budget application to the latest
version.
? Complete the Corrections module in the CJNET.
? Continue to work with Health and Human
Services Agency and County Counsel in the
development and implementation of a more
complex security and privacy system.
? Upgrade County website’s home page to
improve citizen experience.
? Set up a second data center for critical County IT
operations.
? Simplify the PeopleSoft Accounts Payable and
Purchasing data entry processes.
? Provide an update to the County’s mobile device
policy.
Continue to qualify for certificates of excellence
from State Controller’s Office and the Government
Finance Officers Association for the County’s
financial reporting and Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report (CAFR) for FY 2013-2014. This
includes the implementation of all new GASB
pronouncements issued during the year.
? With Information Technology Services, implement
the PeopleSoft Travel & Expense Module.
? With Purchasing Manager, expand the purchasing
card (P-Card) program for a secure and efficient
way to process specific County disbursements.
? Enhance the use of PeopleSoft Project Costing
module for accurate and consistent reporting of
revenue sources and project tracking.
? With Information Technology Services, implement
automated approval workflow and document
imaging across all ERP modules, eliminating
duplicate entry and multiple paper copies of
documents
? Create audit procedures for monitoring grants and
the various assessments created by special
districts.
? Provide significant accounting support to the
Parks and Open Space District due to
restructuring of current Planning Building and
Environmental Services (PBES) staff.
? Increase financial reporting and resources for
public access on the County’s website.
Continue enabling County departments to accept
credit cards and debit cards as payment for fees
and services, as they are needed and/or
requested.
? Complete comprehensive banking services
Request for Proposal (RFP) and make
recommendations based on results of RFP.
? Continue expanding the public’s ability to review
tax and treasury data online.
Continue to expand the public’s ability to review
data online and reduce the need to call or visit
this office in person.
? Continue to provide assessment value notices
on the County’s website for the January 1st,
2014 lien date.
? Continue to review properties for possible
decline in value and increases in Prop 8 values.
? Communicate restoration of Prop 8 values to the
public through news releases and local media.
? Create online filing capability for vine reports
Continue to survey all polling places and Voter
Assistance Centers for feedback on operational
improvements for future elections.
? Improve vote by mail and polling place
experience for voters by implementing
suggestions from survey respondents.
? Successfully conduct the November 4, 2014
General Election. Continue to implement voting
procedures that provide accurate election results.
? Continue to provide all election materials to
voters in both Spanish and English, including
voter information access through the division’s
website.
? Continue to provide interim election results.
Complete implementation of the Fictitious
Business Names (FBN) Index online.
? Implement government to government electronic
recording of liens.
? Implement Electronic Recording for national
submitters.
Continue to provide legal services to assist with
construction and expansion of the Health and
Human Services Agency campus.
? Assist staff with drafting an updated Housing
Element, taking it through the public hearing
process, State review, and Board adoption.
? Provide legal services to assist with the
construction of new Jail site.
? Continue to aggressively defend the County’s
interests relating to the Mishewal Wappo Indians
matter.
? Work with ITS to transition all of County
Counsel’s electronically stored documents to the
County’s SharePoint site.
? Continue to work with Health and Human
Services Agency and Information Technology
Services in the development and implementation
of a more complex security and privacy system.
Complete Construction (facilities):
o Administration Building Remodel
o Calistoga Library Remodel
o 650 Imperial Way Paint and Windows
o Jail Security System Replacement (Phase II)
? Complete Construction (transportation):
o White Sulphur Springs Flood Repair
? Complete Construction (other):
o Rutherford Restoration Reaches 5, 6, 7 & 9
? Design completion of:
o Oakville to Oak Knoll Group A restoration
sites
o Complete Environmental Review and
Design for the Milliken Creek Fish Passage
and Flood Reduction Project
o Devlin Road Segment E
? Award of construction contract and begin
construction on the Oakville Crossroad Bridge
Replacement Project
Continue implementation of the initiated Bridge
Replacement Program and the project
development process for the first bridge.
o With Napa Sanitation District, commence
construction of recycled water pipeline
o Construction of wastewater pond expansion
at Lake Berryessa Resort Improvement
District
Evaluate existing custodial practices, establish
training program and begin implementation of
new cleaning model.
? Reduce work-related injuries by enhancing safety
training and providing appropriate tools and
equipment for staff and operations.
? Develop training program for Building
Maintenance HVAC controls functions.
? Assist in the planning, coordination and
commissioning of the new South County
Campus.
Safety
? Improve safety for all users of County road
system
? Develop a traffic safety spot improvement
program
? Complete construction of utility facilities for
channelization on St. Helena Highway
? Implement safety improvements on Silverado
Trail between Yountville and Napa, including
rumble strips and intersection improvements at
Yountville Crossroad
Reliability
? Operate and maintain County road system so
that it is available at all times
? Develop and implement long-term bridge
replacement and maintenance program
? Implement vegetation management program
? Completion of flood repairs on White Sulphur
Springs Road
? Replace major culvert on Greenwood Avenue,
addressing structural, water quality and fish
passage concerns
? Develop speed survey program
? Develop procedures for making traffic data
available to public
Accessibility
? Plan, design and maintain County road system
in collaboration with regional partners so that it is
accessible to all modes and users
? Construction of Devlin Road Segment D
? Completion of design for Devlin Road Segment
E, including environmental permits and right-ofway
acquisition
? Collaborate with NCTPA, City of Napa and Vine
Trail Coalition (VTC) on construction of Vine Trail
between Yountville and Napa
? Collaborate with NCTPA, City of Calistoga,
Caltrans and (VTC) on design of Vine Trail
between Calistoga and Bothe State Park
Fiscal Viability
? Continue to participate within NCTPA, MTC and
other appropriate local and regional frameworks
to justify and seek sustainable revenue sources
to provide for maintenance of roads infrastructure
requirements
? Investigate possibility of establishing a
countywide Traffic Mitigation Fee program
Surplus high maintenance vehicles and reassign
vehicles between departments to align the size
and composition of the Fleet to the needs of the
departments served.
? Continue evaluation of potential vehicle sharing
system program in conjunction with increased
vehicle pool inventory.
? Purchase two plug-in electric vehicles; one for
use by Environmental Management and one to
add to the vehicle pool for access by all
departments.
? Administration:
o Procure tenant for former JAL facility.
o Procure tenant for the restaurant.
? Planning:
o Preparation of an Environmental
Assessment to support runway and taxiway
rehabilitation projects identified in the ACIP.
? Capital Improvement/Maintenance:
o Aircraft Parking Apron Repair/Seal.
Continue evaluation of the possibility of a costsaving
agreement to procure a veterinarian
specializing in Animal Shelter Medicine, utilizing
donated consultation time from Napa Humane.
? Update the Animal Shelter 5-Year Capital
Improvement plan to include utility conservation
analysis, major maintenance and equipment
replacement projects. Include a funding plan
from the dedicated funds in the Animal Shelter
Budget to support the efforts.
? Work with Napa Humane in development and
promotion of their “Shelter Support Services
Program” with the goal of procuring funds to
expand the spay/neuter fund and raising funds
to purchase new and improved cat cages.
In cooperation with the federal and state
governments, wine industry and community,
continue to make progress in eradicating EGVM
from Napa County, and incrementally remove
areas from quarantine.
? Work closely with the Napa County Local Food
Advisory Council to hold the fourth annual
National Food Day event to promote local food
production and consumption. Utilize time during
Council meetings to connect with key players in
the local food community to collaboratively find
solutions to challenges in local food initiatives and
work with the website vendor to establish and
maintain the Council’s website so it will serve as a
resource hub and the communities’ ‘go-to’ site for
local food information.
? Use a comprehensive regulatory inspection
program to ensure that pesticides are stored,
handled, and used properly to ensure the
protection and health and safety of the agricultural
work force, environment and public.
? Ensure fair competition and equity in the
marketplace through education and performance
of all mandated weights and measures
inspections and complaint investigations, promote
accurate pricing through the scanner inspection
program.
? Work collaboratively with the Napa County
Winegrape Pest and Disease Control District,
Board of Supervisors and winegrape industry, to
ensure that the County’s efforts to prevent the
introduction of GWSS, despite reductions in state
program funding; start Sentinel trapping for
serious winegrape pests not known to occur in
California. This provides an opportunity to detect
infestations early before they become widespread
throughout the County.
? Continue to participate in the Great Wine Capitals
Global Network.
Implement priority action items identified in the
2008 General Plan Update and complete the
2014 Housing Element Update.
? Continue the processing of major projects,
including Napa Pipe, and the Syar Quarry
expansion.
? Evaluate consolidated counter operation and
streamline processes through inter-divisional
collaboration and cross training.
? Work with Information Technology Services to:
(1) finalize development of Accela reports
required to monitor all performance metrics, and
(2) develop a scanning policy related to
maintenance of official records and retention
and continue scanning of property records and
improve “one-stop” public access to information
via the County website.
Coordinate with neighboring jurisdictions on the
preparation and implementation of the Local
Agency Management Plan as required by AB
885 to provide for regional consistency and
standard submittal format.
? Implement water system grant requirements,
meet grant milestones and improve the water
program for the benefit of local small water
systems.
? Facilitate process improvements and training of
staff related to permit center processing and
ensure Environmental Health requirements are
clearly explained to customers at the
appropriate time.
Complete State inspection requirements for all
types of solid waste facilities.
? Receive and complete review of a revised
permit application from City of Napa Materials
Diversion Facility for major change of
operations.
? Apply for, receive and implement Waste Tire
Enforcement Grant from State of California,
Department of Resources, Recycling and
Recovery.
? Review and process rate reviews for
agreements with Berryessa Garbage Service
and Napa County Recycling & Waste
Services.
Provide grant funding opportunities for the
community that will address specialized or
seasonal needs and support the WCC mission.
? Provide support for local fish and wildlife
projects affected by State funding reductions
through targeted grant funding.
? Improve the effectiveness of project grants
through on-going Commission review of current
and past grant projects, and status reports at
regular meetings of the Commission.
? Improve community awareness through
outreach and participation in local and regional
environmental events, such as Napa Earth Day,
Watershed Awareness Month activities, and
others.
237
Prepare written policies, procedures and
business practices for the Building Division.
Identify additional areas for which written
business practices are needed and distribute
and train staff as needed.
? Develop an electronic permitting program for
permit types that do not require approval from
other divisions or require the submittal of plans
such as re-roof, HVAC, water heaters and
window replacements, and explore the option for
electronic scheduling of inspections (part of
Phase II of Accela Citizen Access).
? Staff development through training at code
classes and seminars, as available.
Continue follow up on large project building permit
expirations and certificates of occupancy for
commercial operations.
? Recruit and hire an additional code enforcement
officer to assist with incoming case load and
current backlog of cases.
? Follow-up on older property nuisance cases and
use funding in the County Nuisance abatement
fund, if necessary.
? Conduct a farm labor audit to determine if units
are still being used as intended and permitted.
Deliver research-based information from the
University of California and other institutions to
the residents and agricultural professionals of
Napa County.
? Conduct numerous, effective outreach efforts in
viticulture, weed science, pest management,
natural resources, youth development and home
gardening.
? Collaborate in on-farm research projects to
address local needs in viticulture, pest
management, weed science, water quality, and
rangeland management.
Complete remodel of the Calistoga
neighborhood library with improvements to the
HVAC and lighting, and to create a more
functional space with room for improved
technology.
? The Library plans to have 6,500 children attend
a Library-sponsored or co-sponsored program
annually designed to stimulate their imaginations
(unrelated to school activities).
? The Library is partnering with Corrections to
provide GED classes to inmates.
? Provide Spanish language materials and
Literacy services at the three farm worker
housing locations.
? Increase internet connection speeds at the
Yountville and American Canyon Branch
libraries.
Continue implementation of evidenced based
practices, such as Deferred Entry of Judgment
programs, and continue to collaborate with other
criminal justice agencies to implement the
recommendations of the Community Corrections
Partnership Realignment Plan and assist in
managing the correctional system changes due
to the 2011 Public Safety Realignment Act.
? Continue to collaborate with other local agencies
and to utilize new technology, whenever
feasible, in order to develop streamlined
processes and reduce paper consumption.
? Maintain an active leadership role in the
reduction of elder abuse, gang violence, and
domestic violence by educating law enforcement
and the community to recognize, report, and
investigate such crimes, as well as to protect
victims and to then successfully prosecute those
offenders.
? Conduct targeted outreach and education
activities in the community for prevention of
DUI’s.
Continue to collect money to restore victims and
protect our environment.
? Engage in consumer outreach activities to
educate the public about scams initiated through
the internet and scams targeting the elderly.
? Successfully continue a collaborative code
enforcement prosecution program with County
Counsel and provide ongoing code enforcement
related trainings to County staff.
Continue to meet State Bar of California and
American Bar Association caseload guidelines
for the provision of indigent criminal defense
services.
? Continue collaboration with fellow criminal justice
agencies in the full implementation of the 2011
Public Safety Realignment Act and assist in the
management of the resulting changes to the
County’s correctional system.
? Comply with Court mandated time guidelines in
Parole Revocation Hearings filed on or after the
start of the fiscal year.
Continue to develop a tracking and reporting
system to monitor cases and associated
contracts.
? Continue to review the current contracts and
administrative structure of the Conflict Public
Defender panel to determine if any changes are
necessary.
Accurately report recidivism rates for offenders
on Probation, mandatory supervision and Post
Release Community Supervision.
? Work with the Information Technology Services
division to complete the CJNET case
management system for Juvenile Probation.
? Implement dosage probation, an evidence-based
practice that links the duration of probation
supervision to the optimal amount of intervention
an offender needs to reduce risk of recidivism.
Select and implement gender specific treatment
programs for female wards. To date the
Department has reviewed several possible
programs, but has not yet found a program that
meets the desired scope.
? Train juvenile hall staff on issues related to
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and
Queer (LGBTQ) youth. Design and implement a
plan for LGBTQ youth in custody.
Monitor outcomes of youth released from courtordered
placement camps.
? Expand camp program options to ensure
individualized needs are met.
Conduct a program designed to analyze offender
outcomes.
? Maintain a recidivism rate of no higher than 24%
for graduates.
Increase distributed child support collections by
3%.
? Increase the Percentage of Current Support
Collected and Percentage of Cases with an
Arrears Payment (Federal Performance
Measures).
? Increase community awareness of services
offered by Child Support Services by partnering
with other governmental and community
organizations.
? Improve cost effectiveness and efficiency by
implementing paperless litigation file processing.
Increase the number of deputies trained in the
DEC (Drug Endangered Children) program.
? Implement and deploy Mobile ID portable field
units. This will allow for immediate positive
identification of individuals via the Department of
Justice. It also allows deputies to electronically
send citations to the court.
? Continue monitoring the presence of sex offense
registrants in the County and ensure full
compliance with California Penal Code Section
290 - Sex Offender Registration Act.
Update Coroner Procedures regarding evidence
handling and submission of biological samples
for testing.
? Inventory and dispose of evidence related to
completed coroner cases within one year of case
closure.
Increase public awareness regarding the
importance of the care and control of their
animals.
? Modify existing horse trailer to allow for safe and
humane loading and unloading of large farm
animals for transportation and relocating during
disaster response.
Conduct public outreach and education related
to the abuse of prescription drugs and increase
focus on apprehending subjects participating in
the illicit use and sales of prescription drugs.
Continue to collaborate with other criminal
justice agencies to implement the
recommendations of the Community Corrections
Partnership Realignment Plan and lead the
effort in managing the correctional system
changes due to the 2011 Public Safety
Realignment Act by offering a variety of
alternatives to incarceration to reduce the
inmate population and programming options to
reduce recidivism.
? Complete the transition from written log books to
digital log books, improving the oversight and
safety and security within the jail.
? Working with various departments including the
County Executive Office and Public Works,
continue to manage the significant capital
improvement projects occurring in the current jail
facility. These projects will provide significant
safety and security improvement throughout the
facility.
? Implement video visitation throughout the facility
requiring less intensive use of staff to facilitate
inmate visitation and improving customer service
and safety and security.
? Complete contract negotiations with a
neighboring jail facility to rent jail beds in order
to complete a capital improvement project within
the current jail.
? Develop a GED program for inmates in custody
and individuals released on Probation.
? Continue to implement AB 720 moving from a
case by case implementation to a continuous
enrollment process qualifying inmates to receive
Medi-Cal benefits for inpatient hospitalization
expenses.
? Implement new programs throughout the jail to
assist with the continued effort to utilize
Evidence Based Programs to reduce recidivism.
Continue to provide qualified inmates access to
the Jail Education and Employment Program
(JEEP).
? Continue to improve inmate services related to
Canteen and inmate phone usage to improve
commission revenue to the fund.
? Implement a two year pilot program to provide
educational services to inmates who lack
completion of high school. In partnering with the
Napa County Library, the Department will
facilitate inmates in completion of General
Educational Development (GED) testing to
achieve high school equivalency.
? Complete a five year forecast of the Inmate
Welfare Fund fund balance to ensure the fund
will have enough resources to maintain its
current expenditure/program levels.
Continue working with local fire agencies to
develop and improve existing agreements and
response plans that will ensure efficiency and
increase the level of service provided to Napa
County residents and visitors.
? Complete site-use agreements for each
volunteer fire station and install emergency
generators at each location.
? Continue to support and work closely with Napa
Firewise and local community based groups to
improve preparedness for wildland fires.
? Working with the Fire Services Advisory
Committee, develop a long-range plan for the
Napa County Fire Department.
? Work with the Insurance Services Office to
initiate a comprehensive county insurance
review.
Use the Live Healthy Napa County Community
Health Improvement and Action Plans to inform
and engage policy and decision makers in the
process of improving health and wellbeing for
everyone in Napa County.
? Continue to implement and evaluate strategies
and interventions to improve exclusive
breastfeeding rates among Public Health clients.
? Continue to expand outreach and education
efforts for healthy living strategies to support the
community in achieving optimal health and
wellness.
Complete the expansion of the electronic
medical record (Anasazi) to the three major
external contract providers in Napa County.
? In collaboration with Child Welfare Services and
Probation, develop a Wellness Development
Team to implement the core practice manual for
the Katie A. Settlement. Katie A. requires
counties to improve the provision of mental
health and supportive services for children and
youth in or at imminent risk of placement in
foster care.
? Implement an outcome measurement/level of
care (LOC) tool within the Adult Mental Health
Services programs.
? In collaboration with Progress Foundation and
Family Service of the Napa Valley, implement
the program plan and services proposed in the
Mental Health Triage Personnel Grant, a
competitive grant awarded to Napa County and
administered by the Mental Health Services
Oversight and Accountability Commission
(MHSOAC). This grant provides funding for
counties, counties acting jointly, and city mental
health departments to hire at least 600 triage
personnel statewide to provide intensive case
management, which may include Medi-Cal
reimbursable targeted case management, and
linkage to services for individuals with mental
health or emotional disorders who require crisis
interventions. Increasing access to effective
outpatient and crisis services provides an
opportunity to reduce costs associated with
expensive inpatient and emergency room care
and to better meet the needs to individuals
experiencing a mental health crisis in the least
restrictive manner possible.
Obtain grant from the Bureau of Justice
Assistance to increase Drug Court participation,
timely access to assessment and treatment, and
enhance services offered to Drug Court clients
to include mental health care.
? Complete assessments within 14 days from
initial contact with the Access unit.
? Increase access to the Drug Medi-Cal
population by hiring a staff member to assist in
improving accessibility and timely assessment
services and increasing the capacity of the
treatment program to provide services.
? Utilize a youth development model, in
partnership with Community Action Napa Valley,
to conduct outreach to the seven (7) retail
merchants in the City of Napa that did not make
significant changes to their stores to comply with
the Lee Law, which requires merchants to abide
by a set of public health and safety standards to
protect the community from problems associated
with alcohol sales.
? Participate in three major prevention efforts
aimed at youth to increase access to good
health and well being, as part of the Prevention
Collaborative. Major joint prevention efforts
include Suicide Prevention and Alcohol,
Tobacco and Other Drugs (ATOD.)
? Implement Vivitrol Pilot Project, an evidencebased
medically assisted treatment of alcohol
and/or opiod addiction, to increase program
compliance and reduce occurrence of relapse.
? Fully implement “Members in Good Standing”
criteria in Calistoga High School and Napa
County Friday Night Live Partnership Youth
Council.
Implement a structured system of
administrative reviews for all cases where
children have re-entered foster care after
being returned to a parent.
? Add a supervisor position to the division to
focus on training and professional
development of staff, specifically induction
training to ensure all staff are provided a
consistent level of information and
support.
? Collaborate with the state and other
counties to develop a California child
welfare “practice model” that provides a
framework for the quality and consistency
of child welfare services across the state.
? In partnership with community providers,
expand the housing options for young
adults in the Extended Foster Care
Program to include a Transitional Housing
Plus – Foster Care (THP+ FC) program.
Work with Federal and State partners to
assure the implementation of the Affordable
Care Act (ACA) for the older and disabled
population in Napa County.
? Strengthen the partnerships with local service
providers and agencies in the up valley area to
develop support systems for “hard to reach”
clientele.
? Continue to ensure CSOA’s infrastructure
meets the expanding needs of a changing
demographic of older and disabled population.
Prepare for the expansion of Medi-Cal services
for Napa County residents by improving our
service delivery infrastructure, working with
community partners and developing targeted
outreach to individuals who may eligible.
? Continue to increase the incidence of healthy
food choices and improve wellness of low
income residents through the SNAP-Ed grant.
? Strengthen the capacity and skills of staff
focusing on customer service, quality
improvement and workforce development.
? Continue to enhance the American Canyon
Service Center in order to better serve and
improve awareness of residents in south
county.
? Continue the final phases of transitioning
approximately 4,000 children from Healthy
Families to Medi-Cal.
? Publish and implement a strategic workforce
development plan for the Napa-Lake Workforce
Investment Area.
? Achieve designation from the Governor as a
high performance Workforce Investment Board.
? Implement SB 1041 which allows more
flexibility for people to participate in activities
leading to self-sufficiency.
? Implement changes in reporting for most Cal
Fresh and CalWorks cases from quarterly
reporting to semi-annual reporting.
Complete implementation of early intervention
clinician project to intervene as early as possible to
mitigate illness progression, prevent development
of disease-related impairment, and limit treatmentrelated
side effects.
? Continue to support the expansion of Matrix Model
program to restore capacity and meet current
alcohol and drug treatment demands.
? Complete implementation of PCIT program to
provide multidisciplinary public and mental health
services to high-risk families with children ages 0-5.
? Complete implementation of CCDPP to build the
Public Health Division’s capacity to partner with
community organizations to effectively prevent
chronic disease and promote health.
? Complete implementation of the integrated care
coordination model at the Clinic Ole Community
Health Center located on HHSA’s campus to
improve health outcomes for shared clients.
? Complete implementation of HHSA Care Access
Hub pilot to provide an integrated approach to
providing services for HHSA clients with multiple
needs and conditions.
? Continue to support access to health care coverage
for low-income residents by the further
implementation of the CBO-MAA program.
Continue to implement HHSA’s strategic plan,
of which the four overarching goals are:
? To improve the community’s health and wellbeing
by defining and promoting desired
outcomes.
? To improve client access and outcomes by
integrating health and social services.
? To focus on continuous quality improvement
by building both the systems and the
communication to make data-informed
decisions.
? To promote public service by continuously
developing our high quality workforce.
Continue elevated budget management
activities to respond to constant changes in
State and Federal revenues.
? Work with the Auditor-Controller’s Office,
Information Technology Services and the
HHSA program divisions to implement “project
costing,” which integrates the Agency’s
program-based budget and fiscal reporting
processes into the County-wide system.
? Expand use of the PeopleSoft sytem to
include the use of the Receivable Module for
entering HHSA reimbursable claims earned
throughout the year.
? Further expand uses of the new County
budget module/financial management
application to include reporting functionality.
Continue to participate with the County Executive
Office, the Department of Public Works and other
County agencies in the development of the new
South County Campus.
? Continue the project to extend use of the
Agency’s electronic clinical record and billing
system to non-profit organizations contracting to
provide mental health and alcohol and drug
services to HHSA clients.
? Continue to manage the Tobacco Master
Settlement Agreement Grant process.
? Continue to work with the Continuum of Care to
develop and implement structural and
programmatic changes in response to the new
Federal HEARTH Act regulations
? Implement a system for the secure exchange of
electronic data between providers at the Clinic
Ole County Campus Clinic and HHSA program
staff.
Design and implement the HHSA Privacy
Program.
? Lead an Agency-wide effort to redesign the
Quality Management program.
? In collaboration with the Operations Division,
fully implement monthly Excluded
Individual/Entity screening for the agency and
covered contractors.
? Collaborate with the Comprehensive Services
for Older Adults Division to complete a quality
improvement project to improve the quality and
efficiency of Medi-Cal application processing.
? Design and implement new program outcome
and evaluation dashboards.
Work with the County Training Officer to develop
and implement a credentialing process that will
encompass all elements required for employment
at HHSA.
? Develop a training and organizational
development function that will be responsible for
all internal staff development activities and will
work with all divisions in supporting division
specific trainings as well as helping to create
agency wide trainings that support all staff. This
function will also have oversight over staff
credentialing and licensing responsibilities.
