Continue to facilitate the successful realignment
of offenders from the State Department of
Corrections to the County, including evaluating
and implementing additional alternative
sanctions.
• Review of CalFire contract.
• Identify a preferred location for a new Jail.
• Provide the Board with an updated Major
Facilities Capital Financing Plan that will identify
financing alternatives for future capital needs
including a new Jail.
• Review, if necessary update, and implement the
County’s External Communications Plan to
enhance public awareness and communication
about what the County does.
Adopt County Service Area No. 4 for another
five year cycle.
• Establish the Arts Advisory Committee and
allocate Special Projects funding from the Arts &
Culture category.
• Complete the next round of funding grant
agreements from the Special Projects Fund.
• Complete work of Countywide Affordable
Housing Task Force and present
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors.
Improve employee benefits communication to
assist employees in understanding and fully
utilizing available benefits.
• Implement changes in the PeopleSoft HR
computer system that will eliminate manual
processes and provide staff increased time to
assist employees and departments with their
human resource needs.
• Continue to review and revise Human
Resources business practices to improve
efficiency and effectiveness of HR functions and
services.
• Expand labor relations training in order to
improve employee relations.
• Revise leave management policies and
procedures to enhance employee and
department understanding of available benefits
and procedures, while ensuring legal
compliance.
• Evaluate and revise the employee On Boarding
process to ensure a smooth and successful
transition to County service for new employees.
• Review and update the Human Resources web
pages on the County website and the intranet to
provide more useful information and easier
access for the public and County employees.
Negotiate a contract with selected vendor to
deliver the Supervisory Academy program.
• Negotiate a contract with selected vendor to
deliver the Senior Leadership Academy
program.
• Partner with Organizational Development
Committee and selected vendors to develop a
successful implementation plan for the Senior
Leadership and Supervisory Academies.
• Communicate the tiered progressive leadership
model to the organization.
• Maintain the Organizational Development
Committee meetings.
• Continue to develop curriculum enhancements
to the current Management Academy and
Computer Training classes.
• Continue to support and respond to countywide
requests for training and organizational
development assistance on an as needed basis.
Complete the Countywide Disaster Recovery
Plan project which began in Fiscal Year 2011-
2012.
• Donations Management Plan: the draft plan now
needs to be reviewed by stakeholder groups,
followed by approval of the plan in its final
format. When final, this Plan will become an
annex to the Countywide Emergency Operations
Plan.(see below)
• Continue with the project to coordinate a
Countywide Emergency Operations Plan update
with the Cities of American Canyon, Calistoga,
Napa, St. Helena and the Town of Yountville
and the County which will avoid duplication of
effort by various jurisdictions.
• Continue the development and implementation
of a multi-year training plan for County
emergency response staff and other local
jurisdictions. On-going training is imperative for
effective disaster response as well as for
complying with NIMS training requirements.
• Continue delivering a quality Community
Emergency Response Team (CERT) program to
the residents, governmental agencies and
community-based organizations of Napa
County.
Complete State inspection requirements for all
types of solid waste facilities.
• Receive and complete review of a revised permit
application from Clover Flat Landfill for major
change of operations.
• Review and process rate reviews for
agreements with Berryessa Garbage Service
and Napa County Recycling & Waste Services.
• Apply for, receive and implement Waste Tire
Enforcement Grant from State of California,
Department of Resources Recycling and
Recovery.
• Complete performance audit for Napa County
Recycling and Waste Services.
Continue to work on the Records Retention
schedule to eventually have a schedule for all
County departments that is approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
• Work with Information Technology Services to
set up Electronic Records Management Center.
Implement Tactical Interoperable
Communications Plan (TICP) to identify and
assign efficient use of radio system in event of
emergency.
• Complete Phase 1 of simulcast Radio System –
Public Safety project – moving to Atlas Peak and
adding Oat Hill radio site as another transmit
location.
• Commence Phase II of Public Safety simulcast
radio system adding Berryessa Peak as another
transmitter for coverage in Berryessa/Knoxville
area.
Implement the Accela Asset Management
Module to be used by the Property Management
division.
• Complete the implementation of Smart ERP
software to streamline AR process (including
document management).
• Implement the PeopleSoft Travel and Expense
Module.
• Complete development of Adult Probation
Module of CJNET and begin working on the
Corrections Module.
Qualify for the Certificate of Achievement for
Excellence in Financial Reporting for Napa
County’s Comprehensive Annual Financial Report
(CAFR) from the Government Finance Officer’s
Association for Fiscal Year 2011-2012. This
includes the implementation of new GASB
standards for Fund Balance and Capital Assets.
• Qualify for the Certificate of Excellence in
Financial Reporting from the State Controller’s
Office for Fiscal Year 2011-2012.
• Implement the redesign of the County’s account
structure and chart of accounts as of July 1, 2012,
including all interfaces and several improved
processes, to gain efficiency in system
performance and quality of financial data.
• With Information Technology Services, implement
the PeopleSoft Travel & Expense Module.
• With Purchasing Manager, implement a
purchasing card (P-Card) program for a secure
and efficient way to process specific County
disbursements.
• Enhance the use of PeopleSoft Project Costing
module for accurate and consistent reporting of
revenue sources and project tracking.
• With Information Technology Services, implement
automated approval workflow and document
imaging across all ERP modules.
Continue the installation and implementation of
comprehensive plan enabling County
departments to accept credit cards and debit
cards as payments for fees and services, as they
are needed and/or requested.
• Continue to review and develop departmental
brochures and other communications, in both
English and Spanish, to assist taxpayers in
understanding tax collection services.
• Investigate possible cost savings in banking
services by analyzing detailed charges, activity
and alternative payment options.
• Continue expanding the public’s ability to review
tax and treasury data online.
• Research imaging and scanning options for both
tax and treasury functions.
Continue to expand the public’s ability to review
data online and reduce the need to call or visit
this office in person.
• Continue to provide assessment value notices
on the County’s website for the January 1st 2012
lien date.
• Continue to review properties for possible
decline in value.
Successfully conduct the June 2012 Presidential
Primary, which is the County’s first election
implementing a second language ballot
(Spanish).
• Survey of all Polling Places to ensure that they
are in compliance with ADA requirements.
• Successfully conduct the November 2012
Presidential General Election. Continue to
implement voting procedures that provide
accurate election results.
• Bilingual – Continue to provide all election
materials to voters in both Spanish and English,
including voter information access thru the
department’s website.
• Offer 15,000 + polling place voters the
opportunity to receive their ballot by mail.
Complete online grantor-grantee index by
adding data back to 1848.
• Complete implementation of the fictitious
business names (FBN) index online.
• Implement new online marriage license
application system which will improve customer
service and reduce staff time needed to prepare
marriage licenses.
Provide legal services to assist with
implementation of a countywide transportation
sales tax measure that will bring $270 million to
local agencies for road rehabilitation and
maintenance.
• Complete a countywide record retention policy.
• Work with staff in the Regional Housing Needs
Assessment (RHNA) allocation and Housing
Element adoption process to ensure that the
County’s interests are adequately addressed.
• Continue to aggressively defend the County’s
interests relating to the Mishewal Wappo Indians
matter.
• Complete training of staff in case management
system to utilize new updated document
management and time and billing system for
efficiency.
Completion of the HHSA Campus Master Plan
and initial phases of design.
• Complete Design and/or Planning:
o New jail facilities
o Devlin Road segments C, D and E
o Oakville Crossroad Bridge
o Mt. Veeder Road geotechnical
studies
• Complete Construction (facilities):
o HHSA Solano Avenue
o County Facilities Photovoltaics
o Jail Security System
o Calistoga Library
o Admin Building remodel/exterior
• Complete Construction (transportation):
o Big Ranch Road, Trancas Street,
American Canyon Road, Silverado
Trail, South Kelly Road, Oak Knoll
Avenue paving
o South County and Calistoga area
surface treatments
• Complete Construction (other):
o Rutherford Reach 4 West
• Initiate a Bridge Replacement Program and the
project development process for the first bridge.
• Continue to evaluate and revise internal
permitting processes and develop a division
handbook standardizing processes and
procedures.
• Continue to work with ITS and CDP to enhance
the reporting capabilities of Accela for improved
division management and customer service.
• Continue to improve web based information for
Engineering Services division.
• Continue to evaluate the feasibility of
establishing base flood elevations (BFE) for all
special flood hazard areas in the County
• Work with FEMA representatives to resolve
floodplain issue to allow Napa County to
participate in FEMA’s CRS.
Complete the Asset Management software
implementation.
• Facilitate transition to new business model.
• Complete RFP’s and implement new contracts
for all our vendors and services under the
CUPPCA rules.
Safety
• Develop a traffic safety spot improvement
program
• Completion of grant funded Deer Park,
North Kelly and Wooden Valley safety
enhancements
• Construct utility facilities for channelization
on St. Helena Highway
• Pedestrian safety improvements at Pacific
Union College
• Skid-resistant surface treatment on Butts
Canyon Road
• Operate and maintain County road system
so that it is available at all times
Reliability
• Implement chip seal and vegetation
management programs
• Completion of flood repairs on White
Sulphur Springs Road and Dry Creek Road
• Develop traffic count and speed survey
programs
• Develop procedures for making traffic data
available to public
• Plan, design and maintain County road
system in collaboration with regional
partners so that it is accessible to all modes
and users
Accessibility
• Completion of Devlin extension design
• Continue to participate within NCTPA, MTC
and other appropriate local and regional
frameworks to justify and seek sustainable
revenue sources to provide for maintenance
of roads infrastructure requirements
Fiscal Viability
• Investigate possibility of establishing a
countywide Traffic Mitigation Fee program
Examine options for improved fueling and related
record keeping.
• Develop plan for car wash and recycling of the
water.
• Implement new vehicle life cycle tracking and
purchasing model.
Administration:
o Take required action, as directed, regarding
Runway 18R-36L load-bearing ordinance.
o Draft policy regarding Minimum Standards,
Lease/Rents and Fees Policy, Rules and
Regulations, and Development Guideline.
o Identify at least one new tenant for the JAL
facility and terminal building.
o Amend Napa County Policy Manual, Part III:
Fees, Part 30 Airport.
• Planning:
o Work constructively with U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service (USFWS) and FAA to
resolve issues resulting from the designation
of Vernal Pool Fairy Shrimp Critical Habitat
Unit 17.
• Capital Improvement/Maintenance:
o Design Reconstruct/Strengthen Taxiway H
Section 1, Runway 6 Holding Apron and
Safety Area Grading.
o Property acquisition for improved runway
approach protection, as identified in the
Airport Master Plan.
o With FAA coordinate new PG&E electrical
service to localizer.
o Restripe Runway 18L-36R.
The Agricultural Commissioner, in cooperation
with the federal and state governments, wine
industry and community, will continue to make
progress in eradicating European Grapevine
Moth from Napa County, and in early 2013
request that Pope Valley and Chiles Valley be
removed from quarantine, to be followed in late
2013 with a request to have the remainder of
the county removed as well, provided there are
no further detections of EGVM.
• Work closely with the Napa County Local Food
Advisory Council to hold the second annual
National Food Day event, and in doing so
promote local food production and consumption;
utilize time during Council meetings to connect
with key players in the local food community for
the purpose of collaboratively finding solutions
to the problems and obstacles faced in local
food initiatives; and establish the Council’s
website so it will serve as a resource hub and
the communities’ ‘go-to’ site for local food
information.
• Use comprehensive regulatory inspection
program to ensure that pesticides are stored,
handled, and used properly and ensure the
protection and health and safety of the
agricultural work force, environment and public.
• Ensure fair competition and equity in the
marketplace through education and
performance of all mandated weights and
measures inspections and complaint
investigations, including implementation of a
price verification or scanner inspection program.
• Work collaboratively with the Napa County
Winegrape Pest and Disease Control District,
Board of Supervisors and winegrape industry, to
ensure that the County’s efforts to prevent the
introduction of GWSS, despite reductions in
state program funding.
• Continue to participate in the Great Wine
Capitals Global Network and attend the annual
general meeting in Florence, Italy.
Continue implementation of priority action items
as identified in the 2008 General Plan Update
and the 2009 Housing Element Update,
including establishment of a ground water
monitoring program and adoption of a climate
action plan.
• Continue processing major projects, including
Napa Pipe, Soscol Mountain Vineyards and
Syar Industries Mining.
• Consolidate functions of the County’s
Department of Conservation, Development and
Planning, Department of Public Works, and
Department of Environmental Management into
two departments. This realignment process will
also create a “one stop” counter for customer
service involved with all permit application.
Provide on-going monitoring, analysis and
recommendations to shape development of
State Water Resources Control Board and
Regional Water Quality Control Board(s) policy
and regulatory developments for Napa County.
• Build and strengthen effective partnerships to
foster communication, coordination and
involvement among all those working to
improve the health of Napa County’s
watersheds.
• Seek Federal, State and local funding in
support of watershed research and planning,
project implementation, and community
educational programs that foster the mission of
the WICC, and offset County costs.
Provide grant funding opportunities for the
community that will address specialized or
seasonal needs and support the WCC mission.
• Provide support for local fish and wildlife
projects affected by State funding reductions
through targeted grant funding.
• Improve the effectiveness of project grants
through on-going Commission review of current
and past grant projects, and status reports at
regular meetings of the Commission.
• Improve community awareness through
outreach and participation in local and regional
environmental events, such as Napa Earth Day,
Watershed Awareness Month Activities, and
others.
Continue meeting established turnaround times
for permit processing and plan review for
standard and quick permits. Work with the other
permitting agencies to expand “same day
permitting” so that it benefits more projects and
happens on more days.
• Continue to work with ITS and the “one stop”
committee in developing the permit center and
on line permitting process. This will enable our
customers to apply for and obtain permits that
are typically issued over the counter, such as
water heater and furnace change outs, reroofing
and other types of permits that do not
require the submittal of plans.
• Continue to implement recommendations from
the customer service survey, including:
o Establishing a user group so customers
and staff can collaborate on process
improvements;
o Assessing the feasibility of a “one stop”
permit counter on the second floor;
o Improving consistency and reducing
processing times; and conducting an “exit
survey” after customers receive their
permits to gauge how service was
provided to them.
Continue meeting established turnaround times
for permit processing and plan review for
standard and quick permits. Work with the other
permitting agencies to expand “same day
permitting” so that it benefits more projects and
happens on more days.
• Improve case management to incorporate a
paperless system for code enforcement.
• Work with ITS to improve code enforcement
mobile technology.
• Increase abatement activities for long term
property nuisance cases.
Continue to work with the Local Foods Advisory
Council and implement recommendations
consistent with good Public health practices.
• Progress various Climate related programs:1)
Assist in bringing to the Board for consideration
the unincorporated county Climate Action Plan;
2) continue to chair the Sustainably Council; 3)
Implement a commercial Property Assessed
Clean Energy (PACE) program if practical.
• Implement the California Environmental
Reporting System (CERS); an electronic
database to capture all hazardous materials
information in a paperless manner.
• Certify at least 25 new businesses into the
Green Business Program
• Participate in a consolidated permitting counter
Continue to increase the number of dogs under
license by obtaining rabies records from all the
local veterinarians to identify and follow up with
those owners that have not yet licensed their
pets.
• Obtain a new database for use at the Animal
Shelter. The existing database does not meet
requirements of the Auditor who, after audit,
required that the database be updated or
replaced. This new database will not only meet
the Auditor’s needs but will also provide the
ability to maintain accurate data for regional and
national comparisons.
• Continue to maximize partnerships with local
animal welfare organizations and better utilize
cooperative arrangements to improve animal
welfare in Napa County.
• Continue efforts to reach out to the community
for volunteer recruitment with the goal of
establishing a solid foster program to increase
adoptions.
• Replace remaining floors and doors, fence lawn
to provide for an off-leash play area for dogs,
install acoustical mitigation in kennel areas,
install dishwashers for both food/water dishes
and litter pans. Replace and relocate chill box if
possible.
• Work with Napa Humane in development of a
“Shelter Support Services Program” with the
goal of raising funds to purchase new and
improved adoption cat cages.
• Establish protocol with Animal Services for
special circumstance housing (e.g. animals
taken as evidence in cases).
Complete remodel of the former American
Canyon city hall to create a neighborhood
library with a meeting room, space for teens
and improved services.
• Complete remodel of the Calistoga
neighborhood library with improvements to the
HVAC and lighting and create a more
functional space with room for improved
technology.
Deliver research-based information from the
University of California and other institutions to
the residents and agricultural professionals of
Napa County
• Conduct numerous, effective outreach efforts in
viticulture, weed science, pest management,
natural resources, youth development and home
gardening.
• Collaborate in on-farm research projects to
address local needs in viticulture, pest
management, weed science, water quality, and
rangeland management.
Continue to collaborate with other criminal
justice agencies to implement the
recommendations of the Community Corrections
Partnership Realignment Plan and assist in
managing the correctional system changes due
to the 2011 Public Safety Realignment Act.
• Maintain leadership role in the reduction of elder
abuse, gang violence, and domestic violence by
educating and working collaboratively with law
enforcement and the community, including
organizations, individual private citizens,
probation, and educators, to recognize, report,
and investigate such crimes, as well as to
protect victims and to then successfully
prosecute those offenders.
• Coordinate the Gang and Youth Violence Task
Force and assist in the implementation of the
Master Plan recommendations.
• Continue to develop the Victim-Witness Services
Division to assist crime victims in all respects
from enforcing their state constitutional rights;
advising victims of progress in their cases; and
assisting victims in preparing claims for
reimbursement for expenses related to their
victimization including restitution.
Continue to collect money to restore victims and
protect our environment.
• Engage in consumer outreach activities to
educate the public about scams initiated through
the internet and scams targeting the elderly.
Meet State Bar of California and American Bar
Association caseload guidelines for the
provision of criminal defense.
• Interview all in-custody defendants within three
working days of case assignment.
• Continue to collaborate with other criminal
justice agencies to implement the
recommendations of the Community Corrections
Partnership Realignment Plan and assist in
managing the correctional system changes due
to the 2011 Public Safety Realignment Act.
Review and amend the investigator/expert
witness billing process.
• Continue to develop a tracking and reporting
system.
Continue to collaborate with other criminal
justice agencies to implement the
recommendations of the Community Corrections
Partnership Realignment Plan and lead the
effort in managing the correctional system
changes due to the 2011 Public Safety
Realignment Act.
• Develop a Rewards/Sanctions grid for
implementation in Juvenile Probation.
• Focus efforts on providing the Courts the
necessary information to practice more
evidence-based sentencing.
• Continue to implement the Sanctions/Rewards
grid for adult supervision in the entire Adult
Probation division.
Select and implement gender specific treatment
programs for female wards. To date the
Department has reviewed several possible
programs, but has not yet found a program that
meets the desired scope.
• Train additional Juvenile Hall staff in evidence
based programs to be able to increase number
of programs offered in Juvenile Hall.
Continue to reduce numbers of youth sent to
camp and DJJ.
Review the program for possible expansion in
light of the changes to the criminal justice system
due to Realignment.
Increase distributed child support collections by
3%.
• Increase the Percentage of Current Support
Collected and Percentage of Cases with an
Arrears Payment (Federal Performance
Measures).
• Increase community awareness of services
offered by Child Support Services by partnering
with other governmental and community
organizations.
• Outreach to Napa employers to increase the
number of employers paying electronically to
improve timeliness of support to families.
Increase the Problem Oriented Policing team’s
outreach and communication with non-profit
organizations representing the Hispanic
community.
• Establish a standard personnel rotation system
for specialty assignments to aid in professional
development of staff.
• Continue monitoring the presence of sex offense
registrants in the county and ensure compliance
with Jessica’s Law for 100% of offenders in city
and county jurisdictions.
Coroner’s Office to provide training to local
hospitals regarding coroner procedures and
elder death protocol.
• Establish protocol for determining responsibility
for indigent burials of out-of-county persons.
Provide advanced training for all Animal Service
Officers to keep current with laws, regulations
and humane practices.
• Establish protocol with the Animal Shelter for
special circumstance housing (e.g. animals
taken as evidence in cases).
Update policy and procedure manual due to the
elimination of the Bureau of Narcotic
Enforcement participation on the Napa Special
Investigation Bureau unit.
Continue to collaborate with other criminal
justice agencies to implement the
recommendations of the Community Corrections
Partnership Realignment Plan and lead the
effort in managing the correctional system
changes due to the 2011 Public Safety
Realignment Act by offering a variety of
alternatives to incarceration to reduce the
inmate population and programming options to
reduce recidivism.
• Complete the implementation of the Automated
Information System (AIS) to improve the
customer service and information available to
the public.
• Complete the transition from written log books to
digital log books, improving the oversight and
safety and security within the Jail.
• Working with the County Executive Office,
identify and evaluate the future staffing and
operational needs of the current Jail.
• Working with various departments including the
County Executive Office and Public Works,
identify future building needs of the Jail (based
on projected inmate populations) as well as
possible sites for alternative custody housing
methods.
• Complete the Master Control Room upgrade
project improving the video monitoring, intercom
and jail controls throughout the facility ensuring
greater safety and security.
Continue to provide qualified inmates access to
the Jail Education and Employment Program
(JEEP).
• Continue to improve inmate services related to
Canteen and inmate phone usage to improve
commission revenue to the Fund.
• Implement an alternative system for releasing
inmate funds (upon their release from jail) where
inmates have access to their funds immediately,
not having to wait to cash a check.
Continue working with local cooperators to
develop and improve existing agreements and
response plans which will ensure efficiency and
increase the level of service provided to Napa
County residents and visitors.
• Continue working with the City of Napa and
American Canyon to coordinate/consolidate the
delivery of Fire Marshal Services.
• Continue to support and work closely with Napa
Firewise and local community based groups to
improve preparedness for wildland fires.
Expand outreach and education efforts for
healthy living strategies to support the
community in achieving optimal health and
wellness.
• Develop, implement and evaluate strategies and
interventions to improve exclusive breastfeeding
rates among public health clients.
• Engage partners and the community in the
Mobilizing for Action through Planning and
Partnership strategic planning process to create
a Community Health Improvement Plan.
Expand the Central Access and Authorization
Team (CAAT) to facilitate timely assessment
and linkage to mental health services for
children.
• Participate along with Clinic Ole, ADS and
Quality Management Division (QM) in the
California Institute for Mental Health (CIMH)
Care Integration Collaborative. The goal of this
collaborative is to improve the health outcomes
of individuals with serious mental illness and
substance use disorders at risk/experiencing
chronic health conditions through
screening/monitoring of risk and treatment
effectiveness, care coordination and a focus on
client/family health literacy and selfmanagement.
• Implement the Milestones of Recovery Scale
(MORS) outcome measure in the Adult mental
health programs and collaborate with the QM
Division to implement the Palette of Measures in
the Children’s mental health programs.
• Expand the electronic medical record to include
the capacity to electronically transmit medication
prescriptions and track other required health
indicators. This involves the implementation of
the Anasazi “Doctor’s Homepage” application
and allows the agency to have a platform for the
“meaningful use” of a nationally certified
electronic health record – a requirement all
federally funded health care providers must
meet before 2014.
Implement the Three-Year Prevention Plan,
Strategic Prevention Framework (SPF), which
will include the top prevention priorities for Napa
County and its residents.
• Continue supporting the Napa County Tobacco
Advisory Board initiatives of smoke free multiunit
housing and smoke free parks.
• Implement the Matrix Model, intensive outpatient
evidence-based practice, in English and
Spanish, for adult men and women with
substance use disorders.
• Increase number alcohol and drug referrals to
HHSA-Clinic Ole County Clinic for integrated
mental health, alcohol and drug, and primary
care.
Plan, hire/train staff and operate a countyrun
adoption services program.
• Adopt and fully implement the Signs of
Safety CWS (Child Welfare Services)
practice model which assists families and
social work staff to focus on the specific
risk and safety concerns.
• Complete the County Self-Assessment
and Peer Quality Case Review to inform
our 5 year CWS System Improvement
Plan.
Improve Comprehensive Services for Older
Adult’s (CSOA’s) infrastructure to better meet
the expanding needs of the community.
• Work with the Area Agency on Aging and
District Attorney’s Office to educate the public
about the Caregiver Permit Program.
• Further develop CSOA’s workforce by
supporting staff to obtain an online certificate in
gerontology.
Complete “First 100 Hires” campaign to
celebrate job placements and raise awareness,
energy and focus on jobs as the path to self
sufficiency.
• Increase the incidence of healthy food choices
and improve wellness of low income residents
through implementation of a nutrition education
project in partnership with Public Health.
• Effectively launch strategic initiatives focusing
on customer service, quality improvement and
workforce development.
• Increase Dislocated Worker (laid off)
enrollments through continuous marketing and
outreach in the Career Center.
• Increase the amount of resources dedicated to
job training/re-training and align these
resources with targeted industry sectors.
• Further develop the reconstituted Napa-Lake
Workforce Investment Board and set strategic
direction for the Napa-Lake workforce area.
HHSA’s new strategic plan identifies four
overarching goals for the Agency over the next two
to five years:
• To improve the community’s health and
wellbeing by defining and promoting desired
outcomes.
• To increase the integration of health and
social services.
• To focus on continuous quality improvement
by building both the systems and the
communication to make data-informed
decisions.
• To promote public service by continuously
developing our high quality workforce.
Continue elevated budget management
activities to respond to constant changes in
revenues resulting from the unstable State and
Federal fiscal situation as HHSA moves to a
separate fund.
• Further expand uses of the new county budget
module/financial management application.
• Utilizing the new Agency wide contract
administration and monitoring policy, develop
contract monitoring protocols and begin
implementation of contract monitoring.
• Continue the expansion of HHSA’s “Medi-Cal
Administrative Activities” program to
community-based organizations.
Continue to participate with the County
Executive’s Office, the Department of Public
Works and other County agencies in the
redevelopment of the agency’s Old Sonoma
Road Campus.
• Participate in the project to extend use of the
Agency’s electronic clinical record and billing
system to non-profit organizations contracting to
provide mental health and alcohol and drug
services to HHSA clients.
• Work with contractors to expand new work
experience and supportive employment training
programs operating in the Agency kitchen.
Collaborate with HHSA Divisions and
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs) to
increase the development and implementation
of coordinated program evaluation.
• Revise the HHSA Incident Reporting system.
• Collaborate with HHSA Divisions and CBOs to
support the model adherent implementation of
evidence-based practices, with an emphasis
upon integrated and prevention services.
• Expand the application and functionality of the
Learning Management System to increase
support for all divisions’ workforce development
efforts.
• Update QM Dashboard to improve accessibility
and reflect evolving needs.
Work with agency Diversity Committee to include
an introduction to the Diversity Initiative Strategic
Plan in the agency New Hire Orientation.
• Complete review of current credentialing efforts
and finish development of a comprehensive
agency-wide process for credentialing all
employees, contractors, interns, and volunteers.
Ninety five percent (95%) of IHSS recipients will
remain living in their own homes and avoid
institutional care.
• The Public Authority will maintain a registry with
the minimum number of providers equal to 10%
of the total number of IHSS recipients.
• The Public Authority will hold at least one
training per quarter to enable IHSS providers to
improve their care giving skills.
