Monitor and recommend actions to restore
General Reserve post-earthquake to the level
established by Board of Supervisors’ policy.
• Continue working a Capital Financing Plan that
will identify financing alternatives for the
construction of a new jail and other County
facilities.
• Complete a long term real estate use strategy
and begin implementation of strategic goals.
• Update Performance Measurements reporting to
focus on more outcome oriented measurements.
• Continue coordinated efforts to strengthen staff
development and succession preparedness,
including supporting multi-tiered leadership
academies throughout the County.
Further implement the recommendations of the
Affordable Housing Task Force.
• Seek additional Community Development Block
Grant funds for community projects.
• Identify a long-term, sustainable funding source
for the on-going operations of the current
farmworker centers and for the development of
additional farmworker housing.
• Identify one-time funding to address
maintenance needs at the existing farmworker
centers.
Continue efforts to implement the Affordable
Care Act (ACA) including tracking measurement
periods, determining eligibility, offering benefits
as required under the new regulations,
monitoring affordability, and tracking and
reporting compliance.
• Implement the provisions of California’s new sick
leave laws (AB 1522), including expanding sick
leave provisions to extra help employees and
expanding use of sick leave for additional family
members for employees not covered by an
MOU.
• Establish regular leave management and
retirement educational sessions.
• Review and revise the new employee enrollment
and on-boarding process.
• Revise County Personnel Rules and
Regulations to streamline the hiring process and
modernize the approach to ensure relevance to
the current employment environment.
• Initiate process to consolidate County
employees currently covered by the State Local
Agency Personnel Standards (LAPS) under the
County’s personnel rules and regulations.
• Implement PeopleSoft delivered overtime
calculation.
Implement a Senior Leadership Academy and/or
a Supervisory or Management Academy based
upon the needs of the organization.
• Create a quarterly Training and Development
meeting for those individuals responsible for
training within their divisions/departments
countywide.
• Continue to conduct ongoing meetings of the
Organizational Development Committee.
• Continue to produce the Napa County
Leadership Journal quarterly.
• Continue to support and respond to countywide
requests for training and organizational
development assistance on an as needed basis.
Including training, mentoring and coaching
services. Supporting HHSA/ESD Manager.
• Partner with the County PIO and Webmaster to
enhance our current County intranet site and
establish a more robust and user-friendly training
and organizational development site within
Chardonnay.
• Implement and pilot “FedEx Days” with the ITS
Division.
• Continue to participate and co-facilitate the
Senior Leadership Academy 2014 Cohort
meetings.
• Continue to participate on the Department
Head/Manager meeting committee team –
creating a guest lecture series.
Implement the numerous After Action
Improvement Plan items related to the South
Napa Earthquake.
• Continue earthquake recovery operations
including working with the consultant and County
staff to submit the necessary documentation to
FEMA to obtain the maximum reimbursement for
County infrastructure damages from the
earthquake.
• Reorganize implementation of Phase II of the
County’s Disaster Recovery Plan.*
• Review regional disaster response plans for
annex to the new Emergency Operations Plan
(EOP). *
• Coordinate a Countywide Emergency Operations
Plan update with the Cities of American Canyon,
Calistoga, Napa, St. Helena and the Town of
Yountville and the County which will avoid
duplication of effort by various jurisdictions. *
• Develop and implement a multi-year training and
exercise plan for County emergency response
staff and other local jurisdictions. *
• Work with ITS to begin implementation of the
WebEOC system for improved functionality and
communication with the State and within the
EOC and County Operational Area partners.
Continue work on updating records retention
schedules to eventually have a schedule for all
County departments that is approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
• Develop a strategy to improve the Archive
section of the Records Center.
Finalize Phase I of the Public Safety Simulcast
Radio System project, with the installation of
equipment at an additional radio site, providing
another transmit location.
• Continue implementing Phase II of the Public
Safety Simulcast Radio System by adding
Berryessa Peak as another transmitter for
coverage in Berryessa/Knoxville area.
• Begin County-wide strategic plan for improved
radio coverage and additional Simulcast sites.
Complete the build of the Corrections module in
the County’s criminal justice management
information system.
• Implement new Expense management
application, replacing the current, older system.
• Continue to work with Health and Human
Services Agency and County Counsel in the
development and implementation of an improved
privacy and security system.
• Begin work to build a second data center for
critical County IT and business operations.
• Update the County’s mobile device policy.
• Begin developing a paperless building plan
review process.
• Plan for a verification process for wired
broadband access in known problem areas and
provide results back to the California Public
Utilities Commission.
Continue to qualify for certificates of excellence
from State Controller’s Office and the Government
Finance Officers Association for the County’s
financial reporting and Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report (CAFR) for FY 2014-15. This
includes the implementation of all new GASB
pronouncements issued during the year.
• With Information Technology Services, implement
the PeopleSoft Travel & Expense Module.
• With Information Technology Services, implement
automated approval workflow and document
imaging across all ERP modules, eliminating
duplicate entry and multiple paper copies of
documents
• Develop a grant compliance policy and procedural
manual to ensure comprehensive compliance and
a more integrated team approach beginning from
the application process through to the close out
and audit of the grant.
• Create audit procedures for monitoring grants and
the various assessments created by special
districts.
• Increase financial reporting and resources for
public access on the County’s website.
Continue enabling County departments to accept
credit cards and debit cards as payment for fees
and services, as they are needed and/or
requested.
• Complete comprehensive banking services
Request for Proposal (RFP) and make
recommendations based on results of RFP.
• Continue expanding the public’s ability to review
tax and treasury data online.
Continue to expand the public’s ability to review
data online and reduce the need to call or visit in
person.
? Continue to provide assessment value notices
on the County’s website for the January 1st,
2015 lien date.
? Continue to review properties for possible
decline in value and increases in Prop 8 values.
? Communicate restoration of Prop 8 values to the
public through news releases and local media.
? Complete relocation to downtown offices after
earthquake restoration.
Continue to survey all polling places and Voter
Assistance Centers for feedback on operational
improvements for future elections.
? Improve vote by mail and polling place
experience for voters by implementing
suggestions from survey respondents.
? Prepare for and conduct a successful June 7,
2016 Primary Election.
? Continue to provide all election materials to
voters in both Spanish and English, including
voter information access through the division’s
website.
? Continue to provide interim election results.
? Successful implementation of new election
system.
? Increase yield of eligible voters who register to
vote.
? Return to downtown quarters after earthquake
restoration.
Complete implementation of the Fictitious
Business Names (FBN) Index online.
? Implement government to government electronic
recording of liens.
? Implement Electronic Recording for national
submitters.
.
? Return to downtown quarters after earthquake
restoration.
? Implement system sharing of vital records with
Public Health.
Support Planning, Building & Environmental
Services in increasing Code Enforcement
activities and effectiveness.
• Coordinate legal support of Public Works
Greenwood Avenue culvert replacement project.
• Provide legal services to assist with the
construction of new jail site.
• Assist County departments in working with
FEMA and County insurers on earthquake cost
recovery.
• Support development of comprehensive Countywide
privacy and security system.
• Finalize Napa Pipe related MOUs with City of
Napa and implement Napa Pipe Development
Agreement.
• Support the Agricultural Protection Advisory
Committee (APAC) to achieve its goals as set by
the Board of Supervisors.
• Advance County’s land use interests and protect
the Agriculture Preserve against tribal
sovereignties.
• Formalize and implement the County’s Code
Enforcement program.
Construction Completion:
o Carithers Building Earthquake Repairs
(Phase 2)
o Calistoga Library Remodel
o Greenwood Culvert Replacement
o Jail Basement Safety Upgrades
o Jail Earthquake Repairs-Epoxy and Grout
o Jail Security System Replacement
(Phase II)
o Jail Supply and Exhaust
o Oakville Crossroad Bridge Replacement
(Year one of two year project)
o Oak Knoll/Oakville Crossroad Restoration
Project (Group A)
o Pope Valley Fire Station
o Sheriff’s Repairs, EOC and Conference
Room Acoustics
o South Campus Improvements
o Continue Earthquake repairs as FEMA
process allows, including Roads, Bridges,
the Hall of Justice and the Historic
Courthouse
o Lake Berryessa ponds, spray field and
water tank replacement
o With Napa Sanitation District, complete
construction of MST (Milliken-Sarco-
Tulocay) Phase 1 recycled water pipeline
and pump station
? Design Completion:
o Staff Secure Facility Design Completion
o New Jail Initiation Design Process
? Continue implementation of the Bridge
Replacement Program
? Continue Groundwater Monitoring and Planning
Continue to support capital project efforts related
to earthquake recovery.
? Assist in the planning, construction and
commissioning of the South Campus HHSA
tenant improvements.
? Enhance training program for Building
Maintenance HVAC control functions in
conjunction with building project commissioning.
? Assist in the planning, coordination, construction
and commissioning of the new Staff Secure
Facility.
? Evaluate energy conservation opportunities in
County buildings and parking facilities.
Safety
? Improve safety for all users of County road
system
? Complete utility undergrounding, begin highway
widening on St. Helena Highway
? Implement safety improvements on Silverado
Trail between Yountville and Napa, including
rumble strips and intersection improvements at
Yountville Crossroad
Reliability
? Operate and maintain County road system so
that it is available at all times
? Pavement overlay on Silverado Trail Phase G
(Calistoga-Larkmead), Berryessa Knoxville Road
(Pope Canyon-Spanish Flat)
? Begin construction of Oakville Crossroad bridge
replacement
? Replace major culvert on Greenwood Avenue at
Napa River
? Implement long-term bridge replacement and
maintenance program
? Implement vegetation management program
? Implement speed survey program
? Develop procedures for making traffic data
available to public
Accessibility
? Plan, design and maintain County road system
in collaboration with regional partners so that it is
accessible to all modes and users
? Completion of design for Devlin Road Segment
E, including environmental permits and right-ofway
acquisition
? Collaborate with NCTPA, City of Napa and Vine
Trail Coalition (VTC) on construction of Vine Trail
between Yountville and Napa
? Collaborate with NCTPA, City of Calistoga,
Caltrans and (VTC) on design of Vine Trail
between Calistoga and Bothe State Park
Fiscal Viability
? Continue to participate within NCTPA, MTC and
other appropriate local and regional frameworks
to justify and seek sustainable revenue sources
to provide for maintenance of roads infrastructure
requirements
? Investigate possibility of establishing a
countywide Traffic Mitigation Fee program
Surplus high maintenance vehicles and reassign
vehicles between departments to align the size
and composition of the Fleet to the needs of the
departments served.
? Update off-road equipment fleet to reduce
emissions and extend County compliance with
Air Board standards.
? Continue Implementation of vehicle sharing
program for South Campus and other County
locations.
Seek opportunities to gain or retain private and
commercial airport tenants with the objective of
facilitating quality aviation services and
infrastructure, as well as Airport Enterprise Fund
self-sustainability.
? Analyze, evaluate, and coordinate execution of
tasks necessary for the safe and secure operation
of the airport. These tasks include, but are not
limited to, quarterly meetings of the Airport
Security Committee/Runway Safety Action Team
(ASC/RSAT), completion of the ongoing Wildlife
Hazard Assessment (WHA), as well development
and implementation of required actions identified
by the WHA.
? Execute tasks involving planning, environmental
review, design, and construction for completion of
projects identified in the Airport Capital
Improvement Plan, including a focus on tasks
associated with the rehabilitation of Runway 18R-
36L.
Develop Capital Improvement Plan to remove rock
from Animal Shelter courtyard, evaluating cost of
concrete vs. artificial grass.
? Continue updates on the Animal Shelter 5-Year
Capital Improvement Plan to include utility
conservation analysis, major maintenance and
equipment replacement projects. Include a
funding plan from the dedicated funds in the
Animal Shelter Budget to support the efforts.
? Continue work with Napa Humane in
development and promotion of their “Shelter
Support Services Program” with the goal of
procuring support purchases of non-budgeted
items and raising funds to purchase new and
improved cat cages.

In cooperation with the federal and state
governments, wine industry and community,
continue to make progress in eradicating EGVM
from Napa County, and remove all areas from
quarantine.
• Work closely with the Napa County Local Food
Advisory Council to hold the fifth annual National
Food Day event to promote local food production
and consumption. Support the Food Council local
food initiatives.
• Partner with Live Healthy Napa County to improve
community access to locally produced healthy
food.
• Ensure fair competition and equity in the
marketplace through education and performance
of all mandated weights and measures
inspections and complaint investigations; promote
accurate pricing through the scanner inspection
program.
• Work collaboratively with the Napa County
Winegrape Pest and Disease Control District,
Board of Supervisors and winegrape industry to
ensure that the County’s efforts to prevent the
introduction of GWSS, despite reductions in state
program funding. Continue Sentinel trapping
throughout the County for serious winegrape
pests. This provides an opportunity to detect
infestations early before they become widespread
throughout the County.
• Continue to represent the Napa Valley in the
Great Wine Capitals Global Network.
Evaluate an increase to the General Plan Fee.
? Complete General Plan Amendments to clarify
land use designations in Angwin and adopt
“Complete Streets” policies.
? Consolidate, standardize language, and
organize use permit conditions by milestones.
? Work with Information Technology Services to:
(1) finalize development of Accela reports
required to monitor all performance metrics, and
(2) develop a scanning policy related to
maintenance of official records and retention
and continue scanning of property records and
improve “one-stop” public access to information
via the County website.
? Develop and implement the third phase of the
State’s new MS4 storm water permit.
? Streamline and clarify the permit process for
vineyard erosion control plans within the
Conservation and Engineering division.
? Begin the process of updating the Zoning Code.
? Support and advance the Board of Supervisors
direction on cumulative impact analysis and the
winery definition ordinance.
? Begin an update to the historic inventory.
Submit LAMP to San Francisco Bay Regional
Water Quality Control Board for approval.
? Create online temporary food facility permit
applications. The long-term goal is to create a
number of different online permit applications for
the division.
? Implement data reporting component of Local
Primary Agency grant to minimize duplication of
data entry and increase reporting efficiency to
the EPA Safe Drinking Water Information
System (SDWIS).
? Return the Mobile Home Park Enforcement
Program to the State Dept. of Housing &
Community Development.
? Approve contract to operate household waste
collection program.
Complete State inspection requirements for all
types of solid waste facilities.
? Receive and complete review of program
implantation plan for Berryessa Garbage
Service franchise agreement.
? Apply for, receive and implement Waste Tire
Enforcement Grant from State of California,
Department of Resources, Recycling and
Recovery.
? Review and process rate reviews for
agreements with Berryessa Garbage Service
and Napa County Recycling & Waste
Services.
Provide grant funding opportunities for the
community that will address specialized or
seasonal needs and support the WCC mission.
? Provide support for local fish and wildlife
projects affected by State funding reductions
through targeted grant funding.
? Improve the effectiveness of project grants
through on-going Commission review of current
and past grant projects, and status reports at
regular meetings of the Commission.
? Improve community awareness through
outreach and participation in local and regional
environmental events, such as Napa Earth Day,
and others.
Implement an online permitting program for
minor improvements that do not require
approval from other divisions or require the
submittal of plans; such as re-roof, HVAC, water
heaters and window replacements.
? Provide online scheduling of inspections (part of
Phase II of Accela Citizen Access).
? Evaluate a technology fee that would be paid as
a part of the building permit.
Establish a neighborhood improvement program
to abate property-related nuisances.
? Amend County Code to provide more flexibility
with temporary certificates of occupancy.
? Increase fines and penalties for use permit
violations.
? Expand the winery audit.
? Create an amnesty program.
Deliver research-based information from the
University of California and other institutions to
the residents and agricultural professionals of
Napa County.
• Conduct numerous, effective outreach efforts in
viticulture, weed science, pest management,
natural resources, food systems, youth
development and home gardening.
• Collaborate in on-farm research projects to
address local needs in viticulture, pest
management, weed science, water quality, and
rangeland management.
Complete remodel of the Calistoga
neighborhood library with improvements to the
HVAC and lighting, and to create a more
functional space with room for improved
technology.
? Increase broadband capacity at all locations to
one gigabit.
? Launch redesigned department homepage to
countyofnapa.org using a responsive
framework.
? Provide a variety of programs and services at all
locations for a variety of ages and interests.
Continue to collaborate with other local agencies
and to utilize new technology, whenever
feasible, in order to develop streamlined
processes and reduce paper consumption;
specifically, the Department is in the
development phase for implementing an
electronic subpoena process.
? Maintain an active leadership role in the
reduction of elder abuse, gang violence, and
domestic violence by educating law enforcement
and the community to recognize, report, and
investigate such crimes, as well as to protect
victims and to then successfully prosecute those
offenders.
? Continue working with local stakeholders toward
the development of a new project that will help
improve victim outcomes for domestic violence
and sexual assult cases.
? Enhance efforts to assist victims in preparing
claims for reimbursement for expenses related
to their victimization, including restitution.
? In order to improve operational efficiencies, the
Department is working toward consolidating all
staff into one building by Fall 2015 (prior to the
earthquake in August 2014, staff were separated
into 3 different office spaces).
Utilize the expansion of staffing in the unit to
continue to pursue cases and collect money to
restore victims, with a focus on protecting
consumers and our environment.
? Engage in consumer outreach activities to
educate the public about scams initiated through
the internet and scams targeting the elderly.
? Continue the successful collaborative code
enforcement prosecution program with County
Counsel, and provide ongoing code enforcement
related trainings to County staff.
Continue to meet State Bar of California and
American Bar Association caseload guidelines
for the provision of indigent criminal defense
services.
? Continue collaboration with fellow criminal justice
agencies in Public Safety Realignment and
assist in the development and monitoring of
evidence based practices in the Napa County
criminal justice system.
? Participate in the development of enhanced
programming for mentally ill defendants
designed to reduce the frequency of
incarceration for the mentally ill.
? Continue testing available tablet devices and
legal software applications, including Westlaw, to
increase attorney productivity and efficiency
while in the courtroom.
Continue to develop a tracking and reporting
system to monitor cases and associated
contracts.
• Review the investigator pay scale and work with
the Superior Court to make changes as
necessary to ensure the Conflict Public Defender
panel has access to necessary investigative
services.
Implement a Rewards/Response grid in Juvenile
Probation to help guide decision making around
responses to violations of probation and positive
behavior changes.
• Work with the Information Technology Services
division to complete the CJNET case
management system for Juvenile Probation.
• Implement dosage probation, an evidence-based
practice that links the duration of probation
supervision to the optimal amount of intervention
an offender needs to reduce risk of recidivism.
Select and implement gender specific treatment
programs for female wards. To date, the
Department has reviewed several possible
programs, but has not yet found a program that
meets the desired scope.
• Train Juvenile Hall staff on issues related to
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and
Queer/Questioning (LGBTQ) youth. Design and
implement a plan for LGBTQ youth in custody.
• Design and implement a culinary program with
youth in Juvenile Hall.
Monitor outcomes of youth released from courtordered
placement camps.
• Continue to develop re-entry plans with youth
prior to their entrance into a camp program
focused on successful community integration.
Conduct a program designed to analyze offender
outcomes.
• Maintain a recidivism rate of no higher than 24%
for graduates.
• Continue to work with County and community
partners to locate suitable temporary location in
order to expand the hours and services that can
be provided.
• Work with partners at NCDC to determine the
capability of the new Jail Education Tablet
Program to accommodate Community
Corrections Services Center programs and begin
offering an in-custody module once again.
Increase distributed child support collections by
2%.
? Increase the Percentage of Current Support
Collected and Percentage of Cases with an
Arrears Payment (Federal Performance
Measures).
? Increase community awareness of services
offered by Child Support Services by partnering
with other governmental and community
organizations.
? Improve cost effectiveness and efficiency by
implementing paperless litigation file processing.
Provide CIT (Crisis Intervention Training) to all
Sergeants and Deputies.
? Continue to research and test body cameras,
determine training and policy implications, and
seek potential funding sources.
? Train additional personnel in the forensics of cell
phone data retrieval.
? Complete an update to the Trial Court Security
MOU with the Napa County Superior Court
which will help inform recommendations on fulltime
staffing models as the Department
transitions away from the use of Extra Help for
these functions.
Develop new procedures for non-homicide related
autopsies to reduce turnaround time of reports to
family members.
? Develop improved processes to reduce the time
for a full autopsy report to be issued.
Continue public awareness regarding the
importance of the care and control of their
animals especially during the summer months
and 4th of July holiday.
? Continue to measure the temperature of
vehicles where animals are left unattended and
prosecute owners for heat exposure to those
animals.
Target mid-upper level dealers of prescription
and illicit drugs operating in, and supplying,
Napa County.
Continue to collaborate with other criminal
justice agencies to implement the
recommendations of the Community Corrections
Partnership Realignment Plan and lead the
effort in managing the correctional system
changes due to the 2011 Public Safety
Realignment Act by offering a variety of
alternatives to incarceration to reduce the
inmate population and programming options to
reduce recidivism.
? Working with various departments including the
County Executive Office and Public Works,
continue to manage the significant earthquake
repairs and other capital improvement projects
occurring in the current jail facility.
? Continue to implement AB 720 moving from a
case by case implementation to a continuous
enrollment process qualifying inmates to receive
Medi-Cal benefits for inpatient hospitalization
expenses that would otherwise be borne by the
County General Fund.
? Implement new programs, including the
expanded use of Jail Education Tablet program,
throughout the jail to assist with the continued
effort to utilize Evidence Based Programs to
reduce recidivism.
? Participate on the County’s project team to
assess funding opportunities for the construction
of a new jail, such as the State’s SB 863 jail
construction funding program.
Continue to provide qualified inmates access to
the Jail Education and Employment Program
(JEEP).
? Continue to improve inmate services related to
Canteen and inmate phone usage to improve
commission revenue to the fund.
? Resume the pilot program to provide educational
services to inmates who lack completion of high
school. In partnering with the Napa County
Library, the Department will facilitate inmates in
completion of General Educational Development
(GED) testing to achieve high school
equivalency.
Continue working with local fire agencies to
develop and improve existing agreements and
response plans that will ensure efficiency and
increase the level of service provided to Napa
County residents and visitors.
• Complete site-use agreements for each
volunteer fire station and install emergency
generators at each location.
• Continue to support and work closely with Napa
Firewise and local community-based groups to
improve preparedness for wildland fires.
• Working with the Fire Services Advisory
Committee, develop a long-range plan for the
Napa County Fire Department.
• Work with the Insurance Services Office to
initiate a comprehensive County insurance
review.
Complete an evaluation of the Live Healthy
Napa County (LHNC) work, including its overall
impact, and develop a shared measurement
system to continue monitoring progress toward
LHNC outcomes.
• Continue to implement and evaluate strategies
and interventions to improve exclusive
breastfeeding rates among Public Health clients.
• Continue to expand outreach and education
efforts for healthy living strategies to support the
community in achieving optimal health and
wellbeing.
Continue development and implementation of a
community-wide model of integrated health care
and service delivery with Clinic Ole, Family
Service of Napa Valley, Aldea and other
community partners and, as part of this initiative,
develop and adopt a universal referral form for
primary care, mental health and alcohol and
drug services.
• In partnership with Alcohol and Drug Services,
develop a pilot program for the treatment of cooccurring
mental health and substance abuse
disorders for individuals whose mental health
symptoms fall in the mild to moderate range.
• Complete the expansion of the electronic
medical record (Anasazi) to the three major
external contract providers in Napa County.
Improve timely access to culturally and
linguistically competent care.
? Continue to integrate with other Napa County
HHSA Divisions and community partners to
provide comprehensive wellness, recovery and
outreach services to individuals in the
community and clients enrolled in the Alcohol
and Drug Services Division treatment programs.
? Reduce Underage Drinking by limiting access,
influencing social norms and increasing positive
peer influence.
Develop a structure to implement and
monitor new case review requirements
including relevant policies and
procedures.
• Identify opportunities to work with
community partners to expand prevention
services.
• Collaborate with other counties and
community partners to implement
strategies to reduce the pregnancy rate
among foster youth.

Expand Medi-Cal outreach in clinics and
skilled nursing facilities throughout the County
to improve access to individuals in all
communities.
• Continue to ensure that CSOA’s infrastructure
meets the expanding needs of a changing
older and disabled population.
• Relocate CSOA to a site that offers increased
access to clients and community members and
accommodates the needs of a growing aging
population.
Identify evidence-based practices to eliminate
“churn” (customers who are discontinued in the
CalFresh program and have to reapply shortly
thereafter) to improve customers’ access to
healthy foods and prevent the ineffective use of
staff hours.
• Improve customer satisfaction by reducing
processing time and providing access to
medical care, food and cash assistance more
quickly than called for in State-established
timelines.
• Successfully transition from the Workforce
Investment Act to the new Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act and initiate a
certification process for career counseling.
Integrate early intervention clinician services into
existing HHSA Care Access Hub program and
Mental Health Access Unit to promote greater
access for consumers and expand the reach of the
early intervention services to Medi-Cal
beneficiaries.
• Transition PCIT program funding model to a Medi-
Cal funding model to ensure long term financial
sustainability of the program; and expand outreach
and identification of eligible clients in collaboration
with community providers to promote health
through access and treatment.
• TCCC collaboration with Mental Health to maximize
EPSDT billing and begin implementation of the
Multi-Disciplinary Team (MDT) model to holistically
serve clients.
• Expand the CCDPP to build the Public Health
Division’s capacity to partner with community
organizations to effectively prevent chronic disease
and promote health.
• Further implement the integrated care model at the
Clinic Ole Community Health Center located on
HHSA’s campus and begin measuring outcomes.
• Develop a robust database to support the growing
needs for data collection for the HHSA Care
Access Hub program.
• Provide timely access to culturally and linguistically
competent care for alcohol and drug services
clients.
• Continue to support access to health care coverage
for low-income residents through the CBO-MAA
program. Conduct a program evaluation of the
impact of the program on community based
services.
Continue to implement HHSA’s strategic plan,
of which the four overarching goals are:
° To improve the community’s health and wellbeing
by defining and promoting desired
outcomes.
° To improve client access and outcomes by
integrating health and social services.
° To focus on continuous quality improvement
by building both the systems and the
communication to make data-informed
decisions.
° To promote public service by continuously
developing our high quality workforce.
Continue detailed, ongoing budget monitoring
activities to respond to frequent changes in
state and federal revenues.
• Ensure that HHSA achieves a reserve of $9
million for future fiscal uncertainties by the end
of Fiscal Year 2015-16.
• Evaluate internal processes to ensure
compliance with the new federal Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) Supercircular
guidance on Administrative Requirements,
Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for
Federal grant awards.
Continue to participate with the County Executive
Office, Public Works and other County agencies
in the development of the new South County
Campus.
? Work with the Continuum of Care to implement
best practices and structural and programmatic
changes to improve services to those who are
homeless or at risk of homelessness.
? Expand use of secure electronic data exchange
between contract providers and HHSA program
staff.
Design and implement new program outcome
and evaluation dashboards for HHSA
divisions.
• Provide staff expertise to the Quality and
Excellence Support Team (QuEST), including
development of at least one quality
improvement project per division and reviews
of division performance indicators with all
Agency staff.
• Expand Learning Management System and
Incident Reporting System functionality and
use.
In alignment with the countywide leadership
development program and other countywide
trainings, continue to develop and implement a
training and organizational development function
for HHSA.
• Train staff on, and fully implement, the new
credentialing process.
• Develop strategies to increase the efficiency of
processes and services to increase the
satisfaction of our internal customers.
