Objective:
Accurately assess all taxable property located within
Nevada County, as mandated by California
constitutional law.
Performance Measures:
? Assess over 58,000 secured roll units for a net
secured roll value of more than $16.5 billion.
? Assess over 6,000 unsecured roll units for a net
unsecured roll value of close to $325 million.
Objective:
Continue to annually review properties affected by
prior real estate market decline and value in an
equitable manner according to fair market value
standard.
Performance Measures:
? Identify properties within the county on
Proposition 8 status assigned temporary reduced
assessments due to market conditions.
? Review and adjust values of affected properties
until such time that the fair market value meets
or exceeds the inflation adjusted base year value.
Objective:
Monitor legislation pertaining to Nevada County’s
interests related to property taxation.
Performance Measures:
? Monitor future property tax legislation proposed
for implementation affecting our county,
including potential split roll initiative.
? Lobby for best interests of our local citizens and
county government at the California state level
through active participation in the activities of
the California Assessors’ Association.
Objective:
Continue to enhance the online delivery of
information and services from the Assessor’s Office
to the public, including implementation of a new
property tax software system.
Performance Measures:
? Monitor Assessor’s website content to ensure
taxpayers are provided current property tax
assessment information.
? Ensure office focus on modernization and public
benefit. Scan and index 800,000 archived deed/
documents.
? Commence implementation of new property tax
system.
Objective:
Maintain high quality customer service for both
internal and external customers by enhancing
process efficiencies, accuracy and timeliness of
financial transactions.
Performance Measures:
? Audit and process department authorized vendor
claims within 10 working days of receipt in
Auditor-Controller’s office 100% of the time.
? Complete a process review for department
journal batches for potential efficiency
improvements utilizing enhancements in the
upgraded accounting system.
? Process 100% of Employee Personnel Actions
received timely prior to payroll processing.
? Explore alternatives to warrant printing and
distribution for potential efficiency
improvements using e-Payables, Direct Deposit
or other payment processes.
? Regularly review and update accounting policies
and procedures to incorporate new technologies
and accounting requirements.
? Complete a customer service survey to obtain
feedback and look for opportunities to improve
services.
Objective:
Verify the effectiveness of internal control structure
and provide recommendations to department
managers to improve financial accountability, fiscal
control, safeguard County assets and mitigate
potential risks.
Performance Measures:
? Complete cash and revenue audits of the
selected county departments including review of
internal controls, procedures and cash handling
practices.
? Complete 100% of the 120 department credit
card transaction audits within planned
timeframes.
? Audit County contracts representing over 50%
of the $30 million total expenditure contract
dollars.
? Continue to review contract processes and
requirements to improve consistency in contract
procedures and efficiencies.
? Assist department with implementation of new
financial transaction related software by
reviewing procedures and looking for
opportunities to increase efficiencies.
Objective:
Continually maintain and improve the financial
management systems used by County departments in
accordance with sound principles of internal controls
assuring the integrity of data used by the public and
County management to promote efficiencies and
reduce redundancies.
Performance Measures:
? Continue implementation of new property tax
system to replace outdated legacy system and
increase efficiencies within and across the
offices of Auditor, Tax Collector and Assessor.
? Participate in the monthly Internal Services and
Contract Management Communities of Interest
(COI) group meetings to bring forward
department’s needs.
? Participate in the selection and implementation
of a countywide contract and grant tracking
management system.
? Continue training of County departments by
Auditor-Controller staff on financial processes
by instructing 120 users through three Auditor
Forums, 24 users through bi-annual hands-on trainings and 22+ department liaisons at an
annual Credit Card Custodian Forum through biannual
hands-on trainings.
Objective:
Provide timely, accurate and accessible financial
information of the County organization.
Performance Measures:
? Obtain an unqualified opinion and the GFOA
award for excellence on the County’s
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report.
? Publish the audited comprehensive annual
financial statements on the County Auditor-
Controller’s web page by January 28th.
? Obtain the California State Controller’s Award
for Achieving Excellence in Financial
Reporting.
? Compile and submit the Countywide Cost
Allocation Plan to the State Controller’s Office
by December 31st.
Objective:
Ensure records are maintained, legislative history of
the County is preserved; while continuing to seek
workflow solutions to streamline business processes,
reduce paper documents and increase online
department and public access to official county
documents.
Performance Measures:
? Continue progress in scanning to SharePoint all
Resolutions from 1959 forward.
? Continue to seek funding to preserve historical
Board minutes from 1856 to 1966.
? Upload the Committee, Commission and Special
Districts database, currently stored in the Access
program, into a new online system for easier use
and maintenance of information. This will
drastically reduce the need for hand-typing data
into hundreds of letters annually.
? Streamline our comprehensive Access database
in SharePoint to enable the Assessor’s office to
input data and to have additional access to
information input by our office.
? All Resolutions, Ordinances, Minutes will be
scanned in PDFa format.
? Work with IGS to satisfy new state
mandates for electronic storage of records
lost on 39 rolls of microfilm. In the interim,
move forward with copying 2003-current
documents onto DVDs.
Objective:
Continue to strive for excellence in leadership and
public service by facilitating training and
educational opportunities for staff and Supervisors.
Performance Measures:
? Obtain CSAC Credential by Clerk of the Board
? Continued effort toward obtaining California
State Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
Association (CCBSA) Clerk of the Board
official certification
Objectives:
Work with the Assessor to ensure all assessment
appeals by County property owners are considered
and resolved by the Assessment Appeals Board in a
timely manner.
Performance Measures:
? Schedule 100% of all assessment appeals within
two (2) years of application, unless a waiver
agreement to extend the two-year period in
which the Assessment Appeals Board is required
to conduct a hearing has been received.
(Mandatory)
? Provide on-line training to Assessment Appeals
Board through State Board of Equalization.
? Continue to develop and implement an improved
SharePoint site for shared information between
the Assessor’s office and Clerk of the Board.
? Migrate property tax records from NEMO to
Aumentum Government Revenue Management
(GRM) software system for administration of
the County’s property taxes.
Objective:
Prepare to implement electronic recording pursuant
to the Electronic Recording Delivery Act of 2004.
Performance Measures:
? Review and install any additional software and
hardware needed for the county and for external
submitters.
? Complete system certification from the Attorney
General.
? Contact prospective submitters of electronic
documents.
? Complete a systems test period and prepare an
implementation plan.
Objective:
Complete conversion of Official Records, from 1980
– 1993, to digital images to comply with the Social
Security Truncation Program as outlined in CA
Government Code.
Performance Measures:
? Install images into software system.
? Create a digital image then link images to index.
? Review and redact images.
Objective:
Digitize and install Official Records from 1856 -
1979 into Recorders software program allowing a
more efficient access for staff and public.
Performance Measures:
? Create and install 1856-1979 official records
into software system.
? Digitize all vital records from 1856-1970.
? Index and verify documents and vitals.
? Link all images to indices.
Objective:
Begin the Nevada County Military Service Record
Assistance Program.
Performance Measures:
? Locate and scan all military Reports of
Separation (hereinafter DD214) from 1912 to
present.
? Create an index for DD214s.
? Link images to the index.
? Send the records to The National Personnel
Record Center in Missouri.
Objective:
Prepare and Conduct the 2016 Presidential General
Statewide Election fairly and openly by ensuring all
involved parties adhere to Federal and State Laws.
Performance Measures:
? Conduct Campaign and Candidate Services
accurately.
? Create and distribute Vote-By-Mail Ballots,
Sample Ballots, and Precinct Ballots.
? Recruit and train approximately 320 poll
workers.
? Coordinate pre-election and post-election
polling location activities.
? Successfully enter all qualifying voter
registration cards in the time prescribed by law
and perform outreach to new and existing voters.
? Comply with all new regulations regarding same
day registration.
Objective:
Improve our Electronic Poll Book Technology
Performance Measures:
? Improve e-poll book performance on Election
Day at the polls resulting in fewer lines and
quicker check in service.
? Continue software testing before deployment at
the November 2016 Election.
? Improve e-poll book training for our poll
workers.
Objective:
Prepare for upcoming legislation including VoteCal
(statewide registration database) and same day
registration.
Performance Measures:
? Prepare for VoteCal County certification
activities.
? Continue testing VoteCal during implementation
and attend training to ensure proper deployment
of VoteCal.
? Prepare logistics for same day registration.
Objective:
Provide value-added customer service.
Performance Measures:
? Monitor customer service surveys to evaluate
performance and address areas of improvement.
? Facilitate pre-application consultations with key
staff members to improve process efficiency on
economic development projects.
? Make customer service follow-up phone calls
where appropriate.
? Utilize CDA Dashboard to effectively monitor
customer service levels.
Objective:
Administer the coordination of efforts for Land Use
projects.
Performance Measures:
? Monitor the permit process and identify and
correct any inefficiencies.
? Expand the use of digital submission to other
CDA departments.
Objective:
Assist Departmental planning for future activities.
Performance Measures:
? Reduce overhead costs by streamlining fiscal
processes for shared functions i.e. mail
distribution, contracts management, and
accounts payables.
Objective:
Incorporate Accela civic software program into the
management of Code cases.
Performance Measures:
? Ensure the workflow within Accela provides a
streamlined approach to managing Code cases.
? Establish a greater level of efficiency with a
more robust and comprehensive program.
? Work with other CDA departments to test all
applicable software modules to correct any
problems prior to go-live.
? Provide thorough and regular employee training
to seamlessly operate the new software system.
Objective:
Prepare for any changes to existing County
ordinances that may affect the Code Compliance
Officers workload.
Performance Measures:
? Monitor for potential changes in standards and
regulations that would require training or recertification
of staff
? Provide necessary training to ensure all Code
Compliance Division staff can handle new tasks
effectively.
Objective:
More appropriately address long-term and/or
involuntary compliance of Code cases.
Performance Measures:
? Continue the use of the nuisance abatement
process, administrative citation, criminal
infraction citations, and Notice of Pendency
recordation to reduce the number of open Code
cases that are more than five years old by 5%.
Objective:
Ensure Nevada County Code violations are being
addressed in a timely manner.
Performance Measures:
? Provide initial response to new case assignments
with serious health and safety concerns within
48 hours and all other cases within 2 weeks.
? Provide complete and timely information for
staff and CDA customers by maintaining
guidelines regarding case documentation.
? Continue to develop relationships with and be
responsive to inter-agency departments i.e.,
Nevada County Sheriff’s Office and Child
Protective Services.
Objective:
Provide timely and effective abatement of
abandoned vehicles throughout the County.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain response time to agency and citizen’s
complaints/reporting of Abandoned Vehicles
throughout the County by assigning staff as
necessary and increasing efficiencies.
? Ensure initial inspections occur within 1 week of
the case being assigned.
? Evaluate the execution of a new 2-year tow
contract for the Abandoned Vehicle Abatement
Program.
Objective:
Continue to properly train Code Compliance
Officers to effectively perform both the office and
field duties related to their positions and to maintain
required certifications.
Performance Measures:
? Continue the training of all staff members to
ensure the proper application and enforcement
of County Codes while maintaining a high level
of professionalism.
? Ensure all Code Compliance Officers maintain
their certification with the California
Association of Code Enforcement Officers.
? Newly hired Code Compliance Officers will
work towards certification with the goal of
meeting the County established timeline of two
years from the date of hire.
? Require all Code Compliance Division staff to
participate in customer service training made
available to them by both the Community
Development Agency and the County.
Objective:
To protect Nevada County and California agriculture
and the environment through the inspection of
incoming shipments and conveyances that might
harbor plant or animal pests.
Performance Measures:
? Deploy and service 100% of the insect traps for
‘A’ rated exotic insects.
? Complete 100% of High Risk Pest Exclusion
facility visits/inspections.
? Complete 100% of Sudden Oak Death Contract
work.
? Complete 100% of inspections required for
Glassy-winged Sharpshooter shipments.
Objective:
To protect both the people and the environment in
Nevada County by ensuring that pesticides are used
properly.
Performance Measures:
? Complete all required inspections per contract
with the California Department of Pesticide
Regulation.
? Continue to improve the Pesticide Use
Enforcement program through expanded
education to the public, local businesses and the
agricultural industry.
Objective:
Continue to reduce noxious and invasive weed
populations in Nevada County.
Performance Measures:
? Develop Scotch Broom Leading Edge Line in
cooperation with the Nevada County Fire Safe
Council.
? Maintain Yellow Starthistle Leading Edge Line
by treating all infestations east of the established
no-spread line.
? Survey the 249 recorded noxious weed sites.
? Treat 200 of the 237 known noxious weed sites at
least once.
Objective:
To promote locally grown products and ensure that
quality goods are available at our local farmers
markets, local restaurants and retail grocery stores.
Performance Measures:
? Inspect all Certified Farmer’s Markets to ensure
that Certified Producers are only selling products
listed on their certificates.
? Inspect all growing grounds of certified
producers in Nevada County.
Objective:
To ensure the accuracy of commercial weighing and
measuring devices to provide equity in the market
place for all businesses and consumers.
Performance Measures:
? Complete Device inspections sufficient to
maintain statutorily mandated frequencies.
? Respond to consumer complaints within 2
business days.
? Complete 10 Price Verification inspections at
retail locations throughout the county.
? Test 10% of all vapor (gas), water and electric
sub-meters in the county, for accuracy, on a
yearly basis.
Objective:
Improve staff skills by sending them to professional
trainings offered by the California Department of
Measurement Standards, the National Institute of
Standards and Technology, and other County
trainings.
Performance Measures:
? Monitor for changes in standards and regulations
that would require training or re-certification of
staff
? Send staff to trainings as necessary to upgrade
their professional skills.
Objective:
Enforce the Fair Packaging and Labeling Act to
ensure fair and equitable business practices and fair
value comparisons to consumers.
Performance Measures:
? Complete package inspections in 10 retail stores
that sell pre-packaged products.
? Complete test purchases and tare buys in 10
retail establishments to ensure proper prices are
changed based on correct weighing.
? Perform 10 price verification inspections to
ensure pricing accuracy.
Objective:
Respond to request for services by meeting with
local wildlife groups and local citizens.
Performance Measures:
? Respond to citizen inquiries within three
business days.
Objective:
Improve services for the public by coordinating
programs with other agencies.
Performance Measures:
? Improve public awareness of the Commission
by issuing at least two press releases and
holding six public meetings.
Objective:
Improve the agricultural economic viability, soil
health, and drought management in Nevada County
for local residents and agricultural producers.
Performance Measures:
? Hold a minimum of 30 educational workshops
and training/forums.
? Provide a minimum of 800 consultations.
? Conduct 1 farm business planning short course,
1 Beginning Farming Academy, and 1
Marketing workshop.
? Conduct 1 drought management workshop and
assist farmers and ranchers with drought
planning consultations.
? Provide support to local ranchers on the
development of a business plan for constructing
of a USDA inspected harvest and processing
facility. This effort is supported through a
$75,000 USDA Value-Added Producer grant.
? Increase development and distribution of
publications to 5 newsletters and 10 information
sheets.
? Work with Nevada County Food Policy Council
to develop a Nevada County Food System
Assessment.
? Work and consult with Nevada County Grown,
Sierra Harvest, Farm Bureau, and others to
improve niche marketing of local beef, pork,
sheep, goat, and chicken products and other
agricultural products including vegetables and
fruit. Continue to work with other county
departments and the Nevada County
Agricultural Commission on agricultural policy
issues.
? Continue expansion of Foothill Farming website
and blog.
Objective:
Provide ongoing opportunities to educate the public
about residential composting and master gardener
program.
Performance Measures:
? Continue to provide training on compost and
gardening education to the volunteers.
? Increase Master Gardner volunteers to 135.
? Conduct 1 workshop and develop information
on water wise gardening to deal with drought
conditions.
? Recruit and train 20 new volunteers through a
17-week training in 2017.
? Present to the community a minimum of 25
workshops and trainings.
? Increase distribution of communications to 4
newsletters, 40 news releases, and 1,000
publications.
? Reach a consultation level of at least 950.
? Increase number of residents reached by 15%
through the Master Composters and Master
Gardener program.
? Increase Master Gardener volunteer hours of
outreach in Nevada County to 3,500.
Objective:
Increase the use of sustainable pest, soil, and grazing
management practices for agricultural producers,
small farm owners, and home residents.
Performance Measures:
? Hold 6 educational workshops.
? Conduct California Grazing and Multi-species
Academies.
? Conduct 2 soil health workshops
? Provide at least 500 consultations.
? Distribute 6 informational sheets articles.
Objective:
Develop competencies and skills needed for lifelong
success for Nevada County youth 5-19 years of age
through the 4-H Community Club, and Summer
Camp.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain youth enrollment.
? Maintain number of educational events,
activities and trainings.
? Offer at least 2 trainings for volunteers and
junior / teen leaders.
? Provide at least 700 consultations.
? Continue the distribution of 11 newsletters.
? Continue the oversight of 8 4-H Clubs.
? Maintain recruitment and training levels of adult
volunteers.
Conduct Nevada County 4-H Summer Camp for
130 youth.
? Implement fifth year of CYFAR afterschool
nutrition and gardening project at Scotten and
Bell Hill Afterschool program supported by
$46,666 in grant funding.
? Implement presentation given by Nevada
County 4-H CYFAR teen teachers at a national
conference in Washington, D.C.
Objective:
Improve youth nutritional status for Nevada County
children.
Performance Measures:
? Continue to provide educational events,
activities and trainings for teachers in the school
and preschool systems.
? Implement a Family Fun Fair at Bell Hill School
to complement classroom nutritional lesson and
connect parents to health topics their children
are learning at school.
? Implement physical activity program, tastings,
and take-home recipe kits for the Bell Hill
Academy afterschool program.
? Continue our distribution of 4 newsletters.
? Provide consultation and support to Scotten
Elementary in development of a “Smarter
Lunchroom” to encourage children to make
healthier eating choices at lunch.
? Provide continued education for elementary
school students and preschoolers.
? Continue recruitment and training of at least 30
pre-school, elementary school, and after-school
teachers and staff.
? Collaborate with Sierra Harvest’s Harvest of the
Month Program to provide nutrition information
and produce tastings at low-income schools in
Nevada County.
? Participate in the development of the Nevada
County Nutrition Action Plan.
? Participate in the implementation of the three
year 2017-2019 SNAP-Ed Local Implementing
Agency Workplan in coordination with Nevada
County Public Health.
Objective:
Streamline the building permit process.
Performance Measures:
? Partner with other Agency Departments to
implement the new Accela Land Use
Management Software.
? Develop an improved and simplified building
permit application to implement into the new
land use management software.
? Work towards perfecting the Over-the-Counter
Plan Review Program to make it easier to use for
customers.
? Work with local design professionals to create
and make available “master-plans” for basic
construction projects such as decks, garages and
barns.
? Continue to cross train the Senior CDA
Technicians and Building Inspectors with other
departments regarding project plan review to
expand the amount of permit types that can be
issued over-the-counter.
? Continue to provide public outreach and
informational workshops to improve customer
awareness of building permit requirements.
Visit two (2) neighboring jurisdictions to
explore permit streamlining opportunities that
other jurisdictions are currently implementing.
? Train/mentor the Building Inspectors to
complete plan review for light commercial and
residential projects.
Objective:
Enhance customer service by improving building
code enforcement consistency.
Performance Measures:
? Continue the regular Wednesday “White Board”
group meetings with Building Inspectors and
Plans Examiners to discuss difficult and
sensitive building code issues.
? Continue to meet with neighboring cities and
counties on a monthly basis to discuss ways to
improve building code enforcement consistency.
? Continue to attend regular meetings with the
Nevada County Contractors Association
(NCCA) and Contractors Association of Truckee
Tahoe.
? Continue to create common forms and
applications that can be used by multiple
agencies and jurisdictions.
? Continue to create basic building inspection
checklists for customers to review prior to
scheduling inspections. Target checklists are for
final building inspections and all rough building
inspections.
? Ensure that appropriate staff members attend
relevant building code training courses to
enhance their professional knowledge and
development.
? Create plan review submittal checklists for
common projects such as commercial tenant
improvements, swimming pools and decks.
? Continue to work directly with the City of Grass
Valley to create consistent building inspection
and plan review policies, forms and applications.
Objective:
Continue to reduce the amount of materials and
waste produced during the building permit, plan
review and building inspection process to reduce
departmental costs.
Performance Measures:
? Partner with other Agency departments to
implement the new Accela Land Use
Management Software.
? Encourage employees to create an additional
10% of their projects digitally.
? Encourage and provide incentives to customers
that submit projects electronically through the
digital permit application and plan submittal
process once the new land-use software system
is implemented. Work directly with the NCCA
to train contractors on how to submit projects
electronically. Work towards increasing the
amount of digitally submitted projects by 5%.
? Continue to work towards converting all
building permit handouts, checklists and
applications to fillable documents so applicants
can complete them online by June 1, 2017.
Objective:
Improve employee growth and retention within the
department.
Performance Measures:
? Continue to offer technical and professional
training opportunities to employees that will
improve their professional knowledge and
growth. Offer a minimum of three (3) training
opportunities per employee.
? Continue to offer financial reimbursements for
employees that take and pass technical
certificate examinations in their respectable
field.
? Offer cross training opportunities for employees
to expand their professional skills and
knowledge that will benefit both the employee
and the department.
? Provide professional advancement opportunities
to those employees that excel in their field and
continue to perform at and above minimum
standards.
? Continue to develop a team atmosphere that will
improve the working environment. Complete a
minimum of three (3) team building exercises.
? Offer 360 degree evaluation opportunities to
staff that would like to participate in this style of
evaluation process to improve their professional
development.
Objective:
Continue to update and scan all new and archived
Building Department files to be made available
online. Also continue to review and purge expired
building permit files to ensure all files are current.
Performance Measures:
? Verify permit status and clean all building
permit files of duplicate material in order to
provide a clear scanned project file.
? Scan all finalized building permit records that
are finalized over the fiscal year
? Continue to budget for temporary administrative
staff to complete scanning and related
administrative services.
? Evaluate current scanning policies and
procedures to see if there are ways to streamline
the document scanning process.
? Continue to notify permit applicants of their
expired permit status.
? Continue to work and communicate with the
development community to ensure projects are
completed in a timely manner per County
ordinance.
Objective:
Update Chapter V (Buildings) of the Nevada County
Land Use Code to reflect the requirements shown in
the 2016 California Building Standards Codes.
Performance Measures:
? Review the requirements shown in the 2016
California Building Standards Codes and amend
any sections of the code that are needed based
on any local climatic, geographic and
topographic conditions.
? Review the existing ordinance and proposed
changes with applicable CDA departments to
ensure consistency with other Chapters of the
Land Use Code.
? Review the existing ordinance and proposed
changes with local fire districts to ensure
consistency with any locally adopted district
ordinances.
? Compare the existing ordinance to any adopted
department policies to ensure consistency
between ordinance and policy enforcement.
? Organize the existing ordinance by removing all
previously “repealed” sections of the ordinance
so as to be easily understood and enforced.
? Present the revised and updated ordinance to the
Building and Accessibility Standards Board of
Appeals for review by November 30, 2016.
? Present the revised and updated ordinance to the
Board of Supervisors for review by the first
board meeting in December 2016.
Objective:
Work with other Agency Departments to ensure the
successful implementation of the new Accela Land
Use Management Software.
Performance Measures:
? Coordinate with partner Community
Development Agency departments to ensure
proper setup and installation of the software to
meet their needs.
? Continually test all software modules to correct
any problems that will ensure a smooth
transition to the new software system.
? Consistently meet with customers to ensure the
software installation will meet their needs for
improved customer service.
? Provide thorough and regular employee training
to seamlessly operate the new software system.
? Host a minimum of three (3) customer trainings
regarding the online portal of the new software
system prior to the software “go-live” date.
? Review current policies and procedures for
needed revisions related to the new software
implementation.
? Create “how-to” guides for employees and
customers to post online.
Objective:
All mitigation fees are due by December 31, 2016.
Complete remaining activities related to this fund.
Performance Measures:
? Work with Auditor-Controller to calculate
accrued interest and final amount due.
? Send notices to the two parcels on fee deferral
program that their fee is due.
? Collect mitigation fees from three remaining
unpaid parcels.
? Repay dollars to the General Fund and close the
fund.
Objective:
Meet Mitigation Fee reporting requirements.
Performance Measures:
? Present annual accounting report to Board of
Supervisors within 180 days of the end of the
fiscal year.
Objective:
Provide services protecting health and promoting
safety to the residents and visitors of Nevada County
by maintaining an effective comprehensive
environmental health department.
Performance Measures:
? Conduct inspections of 943 food facilities, 93
public swimming pools and spas, 109
community sewage disposal systems, and 20
organized camps on a risk-based priority.
? Conduct an average of one inspection per month
of 3 County solid waste transfer stations and one
inspection per quarter of 12 closed, illegal or
abandoned sites (State-mandated frequency).
? Conduct an average of one annual inspection at
a minimum of 130 of the 390 hazardous
materials storage facilities, 85 of the 255
hazardous waste facilities, all 41 underground
storage tank facilities, 2 of the 6 California
Accidental Release Prevention Program
facilities, and 17 of the 51 Aboveground
Petroleum Storage facilities.
? Conduct inspections of at least 17 of the 69
small public water systems (State-mandated
frequency).
? Conduct on-line CERS compliance of all CUPA
hazardous materials/waste facilities to assist in
inputting inventory reports required by Cal-EPA
CERS project.
? Schedule and conduct an average of 193 Onsite
Soil Evaluations within four weeks of the date of
request and issue an average of 131 onsite
wastewater system construction permits within
four weeks of receiving complete permit
applications.
? Issue an average of 200 water well construction
permits within two working days of receiving a
complete permit application; inspect during
placement of well seal on 90% of all new wells;
complete follow-up inspection of all new wells
not inspected during seal placement; and GPS
location of all new wells.
? Review and comment on all Planning
Department-referred land use projects within
time allotted for comments on complete land use
project applications (use permits, parcel maps,
etc.).
? Provide 24/7 emergency response to hazardous
materials spills and other defined Environmental
Health emergencies.
? Provide public review, assistance, permit plan
checks, and document review for site
assessments involving due diligence with
hazardous materials investigations.
? Provide a community service by conducting at
least five Food Safety Certification Training
Courses for retail food handlers in and around
Nevada County.
? Investigate all Environmental Health-related
public complaints.
Objective:
Streamline the Retail Food Inspection and approval
of facilities process.
Performance Measures:
? Complete the purchase and installation of
Decade Press Agent software that will allow for
on-line public access to view retail food
inspections.
? Complete design of webpage for client research
related to retail food facilities.
? Improve food facility inspection form.
? Develop retail food inspection guide.
? Standardize EH staff to California Retail Food
Code regulations to streamline inspection
processes and education to industry partners.
? Conduct quarterly industry meetings.
Objective:
With the assistance of EH’s contracted On-site
Wastewater Treatment System consultant, review
Nevada County’s current sewage disposal ordinance
in collaboration with the Nevada County Sewage
Disposal Technical Advisory Group and surrounding
jurisdictions and prepare a Local Agency
Management Plan (LAMP). When the State releases
AB885 application/requirements, the LAMP will
then be used to prepare a response to the State.
Performance Measures:
? Submit draft LAMP to State Water Resources
Control Board for initial review.
? Obtain Board approval for the LAMP.
Objective:
Continue working with CDPH and continue to
update the Nevada County’s Vector Control
Program. Continue to provide Vector service and
surveillance in Nevada County to maintain the goal
of promoting public health and safety by monitoring
for and employing vector control measures to reduce
the threat of vector-borne diseases.
Performance Measures:
? Provide for the protection of the public health
and comfort through a coordinated program of
safe, effective and economical use of pesticides
in the control of mosquitoes. Respond to
complaints to potential vector program concerns
where appropriate.
? Use integrated vector control best management
practices when considering treatments for
breeding sources.
? Maintain sentinel chicken flocks and take bimonthly
blood samples for early detection.
? Collect samples of RNA of dead birds reported
by the Dead Bird Hotline/public and submit to
lab for testing of WNv.
? Hold bi-weekly mosquito fish giveaways from
May through July and by service request
thereafter.
? Keep and maintain accurate and timely data of
all vector program activities utilizing the Decade
software system.
? Maintain effective working relationships with
appropriate State and Federal agencies by
collaborating and sharing resources where
possible.
Objective:
Pursue grants and maximize the use of grant funds if
available.
Performance Measures:
? Monitor legislation for funding options.
? Obtain grant funding when opportunities
arise.
Objective:
Maintain and improve the Nevada County
Biological Emergency Vector Control Task Force to
ensure preparedness and coordination of resources.
Performance Measures:
? Coordinate Task Force meetings.
? Coordinate Nevada County Public Health, the
Agricultural Commissioner, Environmental
Health, and State and Federal Agencies to
maximize efficiency and allocate resources
appropriately.
Objective:
Develop and implement a tick surveillance program
to determine the impact of nymphal, Western Black
Legged Tick - Ixodes pacificus potential to transmit
Lyme disease. Adult ticks will be collected; species,
densities, and transmission risk will be determined.
Conduct public outreach as necessary.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain a tick surveillance program by working
with the State Vector Biologist and identify
appropriate public access locations. Improve
collection technique for nymphal ticks. Renew
tick program in January 2017. Sample
approximately ten locations for the presence of
nymphal and adult Western Black legged ticks.
Samples of nymphs will be collected and sent to
the State Department of Public Health for Lyme
disease testing.
? During sampling by county personnel,
informational handouts will be provided to the
public. The information is provided to the
Environmental Health Department by the state at
no cost. Public outreach through flyers
distributed at trailheads is a proven effective
face to face education tool.
Objective:
Establish standard operating procedure for Adult
Mosquito Trapping in Nevada County as a new tool
for comprehensive surveillance of vector-borne
disease (VBD). The emergence of new species of
Mosquitoes and the possibility of outbreaks of new
diseases requires Nevada County EH to develop the
Vector program in line with the standards set by the
VBD community.
Performance measures:
? Establish and maintain sites for effective Adult
Trapping within four distinct regions.
? Identify and ship samples to State for testing.
? Increase surveillance for early detection by
including adult mosquito trapping and testing.
? Develop and maintain County information on
the CalSurv Gateway State database.
? Work with Placer County to develop training for
the new surveillance technique.
Objective:
To provide services and recommendations on actions
for land use development in accordance with
adopted State and local laws, and in accordance with
the community’s development goals as embodied in
the Nevada County General Plan.
Performance Measures:
• Continue to evaluate modifications for a FY
2016-17 cleanup/rewrite of the Zoning Code.
• Continue to assist the Agricultural Advisory
Commission and Agricultural Commissioner’s
Office with updates to the County Zoning
Ordinance related to agricultural resources in
Nevada County. Examples include creating
standards for Agricultural Homestays, proposed
changes to the County’s Animal Keeping and
Raising Standards to include provisions for
allowing the keeping of Backyard Chickens in the
R1 Zoning District, and updating the Agricultural
Uses section to be consistent with the California
Retail Food Code.
• Complete the state mandated 2009-2014 and
2014-2019 Housing Element Rezone Program
Implementation Project, by completing the
environmental analysis of the East Bennett Road
sites and either rezoning those sites or Sites 3 and
5 if the East Bennett Road site prove infeasible.
• Complete the Soda Springs Area Plan during FY
2016-17.
• Work with the City of Grass Valley to establish
appropriate policy agreements related to the
physical development of rezoned sites within the
City’s Sphere of Influence (SOI).
• Provide effective public meeting design and
facilitation in a manner that achieves robust
community input and builds public support for
the final project.
• Evaluate and process potential amendments to
the General Plan policies and Zoning Ordinance
for technical Code amendments, consolidation
of redundant land use designations.
• Maintain effective planning coordination and
collaboration with the City of Grass Valley,
Nevada City and the Town of Truckee.
Continue to provide representation for Nevada
County as a Board Member for the Regional
Housing Authority of Nevada and Sutter
Counties.
• Actively pursue mutually acceptable Regional
Housing Need Allocation (RHNA) transfer
agreements with incorporated jurisdictions when
territories of the County are annexed into the
City.
• Continue implementation of the new Accela
permit tracking software, the Comprehensive Site
Plan process, GIS improvements, and website
interactivity for permit processing and tracking
throughout FY 2016-17.
• Continue to participate in City-County Review
Team with City of Grass Valley to provide
oversight and input in lead agency planning for
projects within the City of Grass Valley’s SOI
throughout FY 2016-17.
• Continue to work with cities and eligible
recreation providers to prepare agreements,
reports, and resolutions to ensure allocation of
remaining AB 1600 funds throughout FY 2016-
17 and continue to monitor and administer grant
agreements for prior funding cycles.
• Assist in the implementation of the Board of
Supervisors direction to plan and develop a
public hiking trail in the Golden Oaks, Lodestar
Unit II, and Sunshine Valley subdivisions during
FY 2016-17.
• Continue to work with the Nevada Irrigation
District (NID) on matters of mutual concern as
they may arise throughout FY 2016-17, such as
the Centennial Dam project.
• Continue to coordinate development proposals
with neighboring counties to evaluate the need to
develop MOU’s on joint issues.
Coordinate with the Health and Human Services
Agency to prepare environmental clearance
documents for housing grant activities as
necessary.
Objective:
Enhance customer service and project processing
efficiencies.
Performance Measures:
• Improve effective and timely permit processing
of land use permits by acting on 90% of
applications within the following time frames:
• Discretionary projects requiring environmental
review: 84-92 days
• Discretionary projects exempt from
environmental review: 64 days
• Lot Line Adjustments and Pre-applications: 45
days
• Administrative and Ministerial Permits: 30
days
• Building and Grading Permit Review: 5
working days
• Reduce staff time spent on project review by
providing effective comprehensive preapplication
meetings for Community
Development Agency customers throughout FY
2016-17.
• Assist discretionary project applicants to
understand agency comments by continuing to
hold effective DRC Meetings throughout FY
2016-17.
• Ensure availability of planning staff to the public
during all business hours Monday-Friday.
• Provide responses to telephone calls and e-mail
requests within one business day. Continue to
monitor and update the content on the Planning
Department’s website to enhance quality and
accuracy of information available to the public
throughout FY 2016-17.
• Function as an integrated Planning Department
that capitalizes on the synergies between
Advance Planning, Current Planning, and Code
Compliance.
• Update the CEQA Initial Study template with
searchable headers and documentation tools to
increase template time efficiency.
Objective:
Continue to explore the potential development of a
process to receive digital submissions for
planning/land use applications.
Performance Measures:
• Coordinate with IS to ensure technical equipment
capability.
• Update website to include information about
digital submission process.
• Train staff on digital submission process.
• Develop training and in-house expertise in the
use of Accela to support multiple divisions and
programs (e.g., Current Planning application
processing and permit generation, Code
Compliance inspections).
Objective:
Enhance customer service by ensuring all Planning
staff participates in County and/or Agency
sponsored customer service trainings.
Performance Measures:
• Achieve 100% attendance at all County
sponsored customer service trainings.
• Participate in development of training topics for
benefit of County-wide staff.
Objective:
Increase professional and technical training of staff.
Performance Measures:
• Ensure that all appropriate staff attends relevant
professional development courses through UC
Davis Extension, California State Association of
Counties (CSAC), Nevada County Community
Leadership Institute (NCCLI) and others as
available.
• Create a department culture of high-performance
through a Continuous Improvement Program
that provide staff with processes and tools to
meet and exceed performance targets.
• Allow individual planning staff to conduct
training sessions in their respective areas of
expertise.
Objective:
Improve staff communication and consistency.
Performance Measures:
• Enhance functionality of the work space by
grouping cubicles around a common, centralized
meeting and plan review area.
• Provide cross-assignments to planners in
different divisions to enhance knowledge and
understanding of integrated department
functions and increase communication between
divisions.
• Provide inter-departmental cross-training to
planners to enhance the integrated management
of projects.
• Provide information to other CDA departments
to enhance their understanding of the Planning
Department’s needs in processing private and
public development projects.
Deliver County infrastructure projects.
Performance Measures:
? Complete conceptual design and begin final
design of McCourtney Road Transfer Station
Improvements.
? Complete the construction of the Penn Valley
Pipeline project within budget.
? Obtain funding and begin design activities on
the Cascade Shores Leachfield project.
? Work with Facilities to start construction of the
Nevada County Operations Center project.
Objective:
Improve customer feedback for road maintenance
requests.
Performance Measures:
? Work with IS to expand the use of iPads by field
staff.
Objective:
Improve efficiencies in Transit operations.
Performance Measures:
? Implement staffing revisions.
Objective:
Improve Countywide recycling efforts.
Performance Measures:
? Use waste characterization studies to target
recycling programs.
? Implement AB 1826 mandatory organics
recycling requirements.
Objective:
Manage available Road Funds to fully fund high
priority road maintenance, safety activities and
projects.
Performance Measures:
? Expend 100 % of Gas Tax Funds.
? Hold funding constant on safety and routine
maintenance categories for three years.
? Maintain functional cash reserves.
Objective:
Continue to maintain and improve the County’s
infrastructure through implementation of the Road
Maintenance and Capital Improvement Plan.
Performance Measures:
? Complete construction on the following CIP
projects in 2015-16:
? Maybert Road Bridge Project
? Newtown Road CMAQ Project
? Newtown Road Overlay Project
? Emergency Vehicle Preemption Project
? Retrac Way Bridge Project
? Combie Road Rule 20a Phase 3a Project
? HSIP Cycle 7 Thermoplastic Project
? Nevada City Highway Sidewalk Project
? Annual Striping Program
? Assist as needed on the following Road
Maintenance or Wastewater Projects:
? Penn Valley Pipeline Project
? Bridge and Culvert Repairs and
Maintenance
? Prepare Plans, Specifications and Estimates and
award projects for construction in 2017-18:
? Garden Bar (Sanford Crossing) Bridge
Project
? Garden Bar (Railcar Crossing) Bridge
Project
? McCourtney Road Bridge Project
? High Friction Surface Treatment Project
? Road Safety Audit – Phase 2
? 2017 Annual Striping Project
? Combie Road Widening Project
Objective:
Provide engineering and support services to other
County departments, regional and local agencies and
partners, and the general public.
Performance Measures:
? Respond in a timely manner to requests for
engineering services and support.
? Assist Planning, Building and Code Compliance
with consistent application of County policies
related to access, impacts and mitigations on
development projects.
? Participate in meetings and provide technical
assistance and support to community groups.
? Provide representation at NCTC and Technical
Advisory Committee (TAC) meetings.
? Coordinate with Caltrans and the Cities of Grass
Valley, Nevada City and Truckee on projects
and issues that may affect each agency.
Objective:
Continue to develop and update information about
County roads (traffic volumes, pavement condition,
and collision rates) to support the prioritization of
transportation resources by Department of Public
Works, Board of Supervisors and NCTC.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain an accurate and complete database of
traffic counts, speed studies, collision histories
and pavement evaluation to support
transportation planning activities.
? Respond in a timely manner to public requests
for safety investigations.
Objective:
Continue to protect roads and bridges infrastructure
from damage by issuance of encroachment permits
onto County roads and transportation permits for
over-weight use of the road system.
Performance Measures:
? Respond in a timely manner to encroachment
and transportation permit applications.
? Provide engineering inspection services for large
encroachment permit applications as needed.
Objective:
Continue to pursue grant funding opportunities and
to maintain the safety of the County’s infrastructure.
Regularly review available transportation data to
improve infrastructure safety.
Performance Measures:
? Apply for grant funding opportunities as they
become available.
? Proactively work with grant funding sponsors
and agencies to pursue grants conducive to the
Department’s needs.
? Evaluate regional and local road data for
potential trends that may suggest potential safety
issues.
? Proactively utilize the CIP program to fund
program safety improvement projects as needed.
? Continue to leverage local funds as necessary
when applying for various grant funding.
Objective:
Continue to ensure that eligible road funds received
by Department of Public Works are allocated in the
most efficient manner to maintain our road
infrastructure by planning a work program that both
preserves and improves our road system.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain and monitor the 2016 Nevada County
Department of Public Works Capital
Improvement Plan.
? Update the 5-year Nevada County Capital
Improvement Plan in early 2017.
Objective:
Continue to provide design, survey, and construction
inspection services in a timely manner on all projects
to ensure completion of the projects on time
consistent with existing guidelines for design and
environmental protection and within the approved
budget.
Performance Measures:
? Construct the following road projects for
summer/fall 2016 or spring 2017 on time and
within budget:
o Maybert Road Bridge Project
o Newtown Road CMAQ project
o Newtown Road Overlay (non-CMAQ)
o Nevada City Highway Sidewalk Project
o Emergency Vehicle Preemption Project
o HSIP Cycle 7 Thermoplastic Striping
o 2016 Annual Striping
o Retrac Way Bridge Project
o Combie Road Rule 20a Phase 3a
? Prepare final project design and plans,
specifications and estimates for the following
projects listed in the Annual CIP for
construction in summer 2017:
o Garden Bar at Sanford Crossing Bridge
Rehabilitation
o Garden Bar at Railcar Bridge
o McCourtney Road at Rock Creek Bridge
o High Friction Surface Treatment Project
o Road Safety Audit – Phase 2
o 2017 Annual Striping Project
o Combie Road Widening Project
Objective:
Maintain the condition of the County’s public road
assets through regular maintenance and road
preservation projects identified in the Department of
Public Works 2016 Capital Improvement Program.
Performance Measures:
Conduct the following road maintenance activities:
? Complete road preparation activities for
2016 Newtown Road Overlay Project.
Objective:
Maintain the safety of County roads through the
signing and striping program and through the
completion of shoulder improvements in high
collision sections of road.
Performance Measures:
Conduct the following road maintenance activities:
? Restripe various roads annually.
? Replace roadside safety signs as identified by
customer comments or through a comprehensive
sign evaluation program.
? Complete shoulder work on Newtown Road.
Objective:
Maintain a roadside vegetation control program to
provide clear line of sight for the motoring public,
fuel reduction, and safe emergency response and
evacuation routes.
Performance Measures:
? Use in-house labor assisted by Cal Fire CDC
crews.
? Clear brush and small trees on approximately 60
miles of County road shoulders as part of the
vegetation control program.
? Follow or exceed the guidelines of Fire Safe
Council and 4290 Regulations.
Objective:
Assist in the design and construction of the new
Nevada County Operations Center space on La Barr
Meadows Road.
Performance Measures:
? Assist Facilities for design layout and project
costs of the facility.
? Annual funding contributions to the project
costs of the new Nevada County Operations
Center.
Objective:
Continue to review land use submittals in a timely
and efficient manner.
Performance Measures:
? Review applications within timelines established
in State law and County ordinances.
? Accomplish completeness review on all
submissions within twenty (20) working days.
? Respond to all inquiries within 48 hours.
Objective:
Monitor County Surveyor workload to provide
services in a cost efficient manner.
Performance Measures:
? Evaluate costs of various delivery models to best
match the workload.
? Continue to maintain the previous County
Surveyor contract in FY 16/17 to provide
assistance to the County Surveyor and surveyor
support on an as-needed basis.
Objective:
Perform general road maintenance and preservation
scheduled for each of the 39 special districts.
Provide detailed budget reports when requested by
the road associations and continue communication
on long-term goals.
Performance Measures:
Conduct the following road maintenance activities:
? Winter snow removal
? Storm water damage repairs
? Asphalt repairs
? Sign replacement and repairs
? Vegetation removal
? Long-term pavement management
Objective:
Explore alternatives to resolve underfunded
Districts. Currently only 5 PRDs (and no CSAs)
have annual inflationary adjustments that allow
Districts to remain solvent in perpetuity. Many of
the remaining districts are underfunded at various
degrees. Some Districts formed many decades ago
only have enough funds to adequately cover their
administrative overhead.
Performance Measures:
? Explore the possibility of a special
comprehensive ‘annual inflationary adjustment
zone’ that would allow moderately funded
Districts to remain sufficiently funded in the
future.
? Work with local residents through the ballot
election and Proposition 218 process to increase
annual contributions for poorly funded Districts.
? Work with local residents to eliminate Districts
that are no longer sufficiently funded in which
local residents are not in support of increased
annual assessments.
Objective:
Provide a high level of vehicle service to all
departments and divisions and outside customers,
and insure the safe operating condition of all Fleet’s
vehicles.
Performance Measures:
? Interact with all department representatives to
insure their vehicles are adequately maintained
and repaired.
? Conduct customer service surveys.
? Perform bi-annual safety inspections and
services on all vehicles with a 90 percent on
time record.
Objective:
Get the most value out of vehicles at the end of their
expected life.
Performance Measures:
? Redeployment of older vehicles into less
demanding assignments.
? Selling surplus vehicles at the correct time in
their lifespan to ensure maximum return on
investment.
? Preparing surplus vehicles for sale so the
highest sale price may be achieved.
Objective:
Improved Nevada County Operations Center space
for Fleet vehicle storage and maintenance
operations.
Performance Measures:
? Work with Facilities to design layout and
project costs of the facility.
? Implement funding plan that will maintain
service levels and contribute to the costs of the
new Nevada County Operations Center.
Objective:
Fleet Management will insure all future vehicle
replacement needs are met for all departments.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain adequate fund balance to insure
funding is available for future vehicle
replacement needs.
? Provide purchases for the departments within the
stated guidelines in the Vehicle Purchase Plan.
? Provide recommendations and management
strategies for departments that must
independently fund their vehicle replacements.
Objective:
Continue to improve service for all Departments to
meet their vehicle needs in a professional and
fiscally responsible manner.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain a dialog with vehicle users to insure
that Fleet Management understands the needs of
its customers.
? Conduct customer service surveys with all Fleet
customers to insure their vehicle needs are met.
? Will continue communications with other county
fleet managers through quarterly meetings with
“North American Fleet Association” Fleet will
continue to seek training and seminars to learn
updated methods of fleet management.
Objective:
Provide all County Departments with the vehicles
that suit their needs in a cost-effective manner.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain open communication with all
department representatives to discuss their
needs. Then provide them with the best possible
vehicles, while remaining consistent with the
Vehicle Purchase Plan.
? Combine the use of the State contract,
cooperative purchasing agreements and local
dealers to insure vehicles are purchased in the
most cost-effective manner.
Objective:
Improved Nevada County Operations Center space
for Fleet vehicle storage and operations.
Performance Measures:
? Work with Facilities to design layout and
project costs of the facility.
? Implement funding plan that will maintain
service levels and contribute to the costs of the
new Nevada County Operations Center.
Objective: Increase recruitment and retention of bus
drivers.
Performance Measures:
? Develop and implement an in-house Transit Bus
Driver Training Program to support certification
for qualified applicants.
? Fill the Temporary Bus Driver roster to the
maximum approved.
Objective: Utilize the Gold Country Stage “Bus
Stop Assessment Plan” to improve system and
passenger accessibility, amenities, safety and
security improvements.
Performance Measures:
? Identify site locations in need of improvement
and develop workable upgrades.
? Prioritize up to three identified bus stop sites and
develop plans to implement workable
improvements.
? Install new trash receptacles at applicable stops
and shelters throughout the service area.
Objective: Continue to develop passenger mobility
and transportation options by matching service
adjustments with available resources.
Performance Measures:
? Configure individual route alterations that
address identified needs and increase travel
opportunities.
? Increase route boardings by 1-3%.
Objective:
Improved corporation yard space for Transit vehicle
storage and operations.
Performance Measures:
? Work with Facilities on developing design
layout and efficient allocation of funding for
project costs of the facility.
Monitor the solid waste contract to ensure the
franchised contractor’s compliance with the various
components of the contract. Components include the
County’s recycling diversion rate, effectiveness of
refuse and recycling collection for residential and
commercial customers, facility operations and
capital improvements.
Performance Measures:
? For residential and commercial collection, the
performance measures are the number of
complaints, quality of customer service
responses, safety record, efficiency of curbside
pickup (number of missed pickups) and monthly
operations meetings.
? The performance measures for recycling are
monitoring diversion through the use of monthly
reports, measured against the overall diversion
goal of 75% and the State mandated diversion
target for the County, expressed in a pounds-perperson,
per-day measurement.
? The performance measures for the transfer
station operations are customer complaints and
compliments, traffic queuing/wait times and
monthly operations meetings.
? The performance measures for Capital
Improvements will be to develop a conceptual
design for improvements to the McCourtney
Road Transfer Station.
Objective:
Continue to monitor contractor’s efforts regarding
the multifamily recycling program. Effective
January 1, 2012, Assembly Bill 341 went into effect
stating the multifamily sector must recycle if they
meet a minimum threshold. Ensure the contractor is
in compliance with the regulations.
Performance Measures:
? Utilize reports detailing service levels and
participation of multifamily dwellings.
? Utilize volume reports to compare trash disposal
pre and post program implementation.
Objective:
Continue upgrades of the primary and secondary
pump stations associated with leachate collection at
the landfill. The pump stations were initially
installed as part of the landfill closure in 1993 and
improvements to pumps, meters, electrical systems,
plumbing and structures are necessary.
Performance Measures:
? Identify components that will be replaced or
repaired and create a work plan.
? Prepare RFP and Award Contract for project.
Objective:
Continue training of landfill technicians at the site to
perform gas monitoring, routine testing and
compiling of data.
Performance Measures:
? Research training program availability.
? Research cost of equipment necessary to
conduct all required testing for gas monitoring.
? Budget equipment and training costs.
Objective:
Facilitate safe, cost-effective solid waste and
recycling services to eastern Nevada County
residents and businesses.
Performance Measures:
? Visually monitor the post closure maintenance
program at the Hirschdale Landfill to ensure
compliance with State requirements and make
adjustments as needed.
? Continue to work towards obtaining permanent
closure status from the California Department of
Resources Recycling and Recovery
(CalRecycle) for the Hirschdale Landfill site.
? Continue to work with Tahoe-Truckee Sierra
Disposal Company to ensure excellent service
and ample recycling opportunities.
? Continue to work with Truckee to assess the
potential for complimentary changes to our
respective franchise agreements.
Objective:
Provide assistance in promoting recycling activities
for the Town of Truckee.
Performance Measures:
? Attend four quarterly meetings of the recycling
working group for the Town of Truckee.
? Provide technical support and program ideas to
Town of Truckee staff and organizations.
Objective:
Management of this activity has been transferred to
the solid waste and recycling franchisee and once
these funds are expended no new funds are
anticipated. Complete remaining activities related to
this fund and close.
Performance Measures:
? Work with finance to calculate final fund
balance.
? Expend remaining dollars and close the fund.
? Utilize reports to monitor the contractor’s efforts
to maintain the program and ensure the
contractor promotes used oil and filter
collection.
Objective:
To provide efficient, cost-effective delivery of legal
services in a time of reduced staffing by working
closely with County officers and employees to
evaluate legal needs, provide in-house training and
prepare standardized procedures and forms.
Performance Measures:
? Provide legal advice and assistance to
Information and General Services and other
departments regarding development and
implementation of a Countywide solar project,
the Library tax measure and the Corporation
Yard project.
? Review, update and provide staff training
regarding standardized contract templates.
? Continued work with Sheriff’s office to update
Sheriff’s policies and procedures.
? Review and update the County’s Administrative
Citation Ordinance.
? Provide continued support to the Sheriff’s
Office, District Attorney and other County
offices regarding policies and procedures
pertaining to records maintenance and
disclosure.
? Review and comprehensively update the Nevada
County Administrative Code.
Objective:
To increase revenue or savings by pursuing cost
recovery where appropriate, implementing and
managing pro-active and effective risk management
strategies, and developing innovative, cost effective
programs.
Performance Measures:
? Continue to pursue aggressive cost recovery and
cost mitigation procedures in litigation matters.
? Continue to assist staff in developing efficient
and cost-effective methods for collecting
enforcement costs and for remediating repeat,
chronic violations, including work with the
Sheriff’s Office to implement administrative
finds and improve the efficiency of the cost
recovery process for Marijuana Abatement
program.
? Work with various departments to update and
create reasonable user fees where appropriate,
including implementation and updating of
appropriate appeal and permit fees.
? Work with Risk Management to develop and
implement pro-active programs to avoid and
reduce litigation risks.
Objective:
To increase the availability of legal skills in areas
required to support County priorities by encouraging
staff to undertake activities or participate in
organizations that strengthen and demonstrate our
commitment to professionalism.
Performance Measures:
? Continue to implement and monitor tracking
system for legal matters being handled by the
Office, allocate legal resources as appropriate,
and develop in-house legal specializations based
on County needs and priorities.
? Continue to provide in-house training for
County commissions and staff on basic legal
topics, including the Brown Act, Conflict of
Interest, Public Records Act and the respective
rules and regulations of each Commission.
? Continue to encourage ongoing staff and
attorney training and active use and participation
of professional networking groups such as the
County Counsels’ Association, California State
Association of Counties (CSAC), local bar
associations, and the Nevada County
Community Leadership Institute (NCCLI).
Objective:
Support the Board of Supervisors in developing
policy and legislative priorities.
Performance Measures:
? Conduct annual budget planning workshop with
the Board of Supervisors to provide information
and receive policy and legislative direction.
? Work with County departments to implement
Board of Supervisor’s policy and legislative
priorities and communicate important outcomes
and results.
? Develop countywide performance measures to
be included in the annual Proposed Budget.
Objective:
Advocate and promote County legislative priorities
at federal, state and local levels.
Performance Measures:
? Prepare the County's 2016 Legislative Plan.
? Provide assistance and coordination with regard
to legislative advocacy efforts at state levels on
issues of importance to the County.
? Hold regular meetings with other jurisdictions to
identify areas of collaboration which may
include opportunities to improve services, lower
costs, and improve economic competitiveness.
? Effectively communicate Nevada County’s
specific legislative needs to Sacramento
representatives and make a concerted effort to
address critical County legislative issues by
working closely with our advocates.
Objective:
Conduct high level budget analysis for sustaining
core county services, program efficiencies, and
budgetary savings.
Performance Measures:
? Present County fiscal status to the Board of
Supervisors and Nevada County citizens at least
semi-annually, and to county staff annually and
as needed in department meetings; publish fiscal
updates in the weekly Friday Memo and through
the County Executive Office Budget Portal,
where citizens can follow the budget process.
? Continue the Vacancy Review process instituted
by the County Executive Office in November
2002 to evaluate countywide reorganization
opportunities as they arise.
? Monitor service levels for any deficiencies in
departments with major staffing reductions or
reorganizations, through regular
communications with departments and
recommended mitigation measures where
appropriate.
? Encourage the use of current County technology
and applications to develop improved business
practices and create efficiencies within the
county.
? Seek alternative methods of providing services
including contracting out of public services to
non-profits or other providers.
? Attract and retain Department Heads for critical
leadership positions in the County.
? Attract, develop, and retain key fiscal staff for
succession planning and consistency across
operations.
Objective:
Promote citizen engagement by educating and
creating interest in the community regarding the
operations, challenges and opportunities of local
government.
Performance Measures:
? Distribute CEO’s Friday informational memo on
county current events weekly to twenty six news
and social media outlets.
? Coordinate an annual Citizens Academy to
provide citizens the opportunity to gain
additional knowledge about county government
with the specific goal of improving citizens’
understanding of county operations, developing
citizens’ understanding of their role in
government, developing a pool of
knowledgeable individuals to serve on future
boards and commissions.
? Continue and expand participation in the Nevada
County Community Leadership Institute
(NCCLI).
Objective:
Conduct an overall assessment of the County’s
workforce safety program, facilities, and policies
and procedures to identify problematic areas and
prioritize opportunities for improvement.
Performance Measures:
? Conduct site visits to assess existing facility
security measures.
? Retain security expert to evaluate security
policies and procedures and update as
necessary.
? Address immediate critical security needs.
? Provide countywide training for all
employees on office security and response.
? Continue frequent regularly scheduled
training exercises and drills for employees.
Objective:
Support employee and organizational development
within the County of Nevada to develop a highly
efficient organization.
Performance Measures:
? Administer a Leadership and Management
training series for Senior Executives.
? Expand acting assignments to promote
professional development opportunities for
employees.
? Maximize the utilization of volunteers and
interns to support Department projects.
? Administer a County academy for
employees modeled after the successful
Citizens Academy.
? Rejuvenate the tuition reimbursement to
boost employee engagement and grow
County of Nevada talent.
Objective:
Enhance service delivery through implementation of
a countywide performance measurement process that
will serve as a tool for departments to track and
improve performance.
Performance Measures:
? Work with departments to develop a countywide
performance measurement and reporting
process, including identification of performance
measurement software.
? Purchase or subscribe to performance
measurement software that will serve as a tool
for departments to set targets and monitor
performance towards the achievement of County
objectives.
? Through a phased approach, work with
individual departments and agencies to
implement the performance software over the
course of fiscal year 2016-17.
? Integrate performance reports into the annual
budget documents and the County website.
Objective:
Create a Justice Information Dashboard for in
custody tracking for filing complaints, court
transportation and agency reports.
Performance Measures:
? Complete development and be in production by
spring 2017.
Objective:
Implement electronic discovery to outside defense
attorneys with credit card payments.
Performance Measures:
? Provide discovery to the defense counsel in
electronic format in all misdemeanor cases by
March 2017.
Objective:
Establish a High Tech Fraud/Forensic Investigations
Unit.
Performance Measures:
? To be fully staffed, trained and equipped by
January 2017.
Objective:
Upon request, provide comprehensive services to all
victims of crime in our community.
Performance Measures:
? Provide at least one identified "primary" service
per California Penal Code section 13835.5 to
100% of victims of felony, misdemeanor or
juvenile crimes who request services.
? Support the needs of victims and their families
regarding court procedures in order to enable
them to assist in a successful prosecution.
? Report results to the State of California in
California Office of Emergency Services
biannual reports and quarterly federal reports.
Objective:
Provide notification of rights and services to all
victims of crime under the Crime Victim’s Bill of
Rights and Marsy’s Law.
Performance Measures:
? Inform 100% of victims requesting services of
their eligibility for services and assist them in
obtaining services.
? Respond to requests for service within 2
working days of receiving the request.
? Provide court escort/support services for victims
upon request.
Objective:
Improve the delivery of victim services in Truckee
and other Eastern County areas.
Performance Measures:
? Support victims and witnesses by having an
advocate available on primary court days when
hearings are occurring in the Truckee region.
? Continue collaboration with allied professionals
in the Truckee region including criminal justice
colleagues, schools, Tahoe SAFE Alliance,
Truckee Family Resource Center, Truckee
Community Collaborative and the North Tahoe
Resource Center.
Objective:
Respond to Citizen Complaints.
Performance Measures:
? Acknowledge all citizens’ complaints within one
week of receipt.
? Release subject area reports as dictated by
significant findings and recommendations for
change related to citizen complaints.
Objective:
Inspect custodial facilities.
Performance Measures:
? Inspect all county facilities by June 30, 2016.
? Release Reports on any significant findings with
recommendations for improvement.
Objective:
Monitor the general efficiency and effectiveness of
local government entities.
Performance Measures:
? Review management and finances of all three
cities in the county.
? Review at least 5 special districts.
? Monitor school district responses to the state
budget for indicators of efficiency and
educational excellence preservation.
? Release subject area reports at various times if
significant areas of concern are noted and post
them on the Grand Jury website.
Objective:
Consolidated Final Report.
Performance Measures:
? Publish a Consolidated Final Report of the
proceedings of the 2015-2016 Grand Jury,
including all subject area Reports and Responses
to them by December 31, 2016.
Objective:
Provide highly effective human resources consulting
and administrative services to County managers and
employees.
Performance Measures:
? Support approximately 225 recruitments,
process an estimated 3,100 Personnel Action
Forms, administer 250 Leaves of Absence and
assist in 50 customized retirement packages in a
twelve-month period.
? Review and revise, as necessary, job
classification specifications prior to opening new
recruitments to ensure that we are targeting and
receiving applicants with needed qualifications
and skills.
? Continue to offer succession planning services
to requesting Departments and individuals.
? Continue to provide consultation to supervisory
and management staff relating to performance
issues and staff development.
? Develop an action plan for the 2020 Affordable
Care Act (ACA) Excise Tax implementation.
Objective:
Enhance the onboarding experience for all new
Nevada County employees.
Performance Measures:
? Update the New Hire Orientation process.
? Create a Target Solutions Training package for
all new County employees to provide basic
required training upon hire.
? Engage other County departments to revitalize
their portion of the orientation process.
Objective:
Conduct a comprehensive update to the Nevada
County Personnel Code.
Performance Measures:
? Meet with Labor groups to provide input on
changes to the Personnel Code.
? Review and revise administrative procedures
outlined in the Personnel Code.
? Take the revised Personnel Code to the Board of
Supervisors for adoption.
? Provide training as appropriate to managers,
supervisor and personnel representatives.
Objective:
Enhance Education and Training deliverables to all
levels of the County workforce.
Performance Measures:
? Continue delivery of compliance training to
appropriate staff on Sexual Harassment
Prevention, and Reasonable Suspicion Drug/
Alcohol testing.
? Conduct training sessions for appropriate staff
on Performance Reviews, Discipline and Leave
Management.
? Enhance and marry the Employee University
registration site to the curriculum included in the
Target Solutions platform for workstation
delivery of training.
? Continue to provide the current Supervisory
Academy.
Objective:
Continue the implementation of the HHSA Strategic
Plan through an inclusive and participatory process
between management, staff, and intra-county
stakeholders with specific focus on advancing the
key strategic issues of cultivating a positive work
environment and the integration of client services.
Performance Measures:
? Develop an annual work plan.
? Review progress on the annual work plan on a
quarterly basis, involving all HHSA managers
and staff representatives.
? Develop an annual review to evaluate and
prioritize implementing objectives that are most
relevant and achievable for the upcoming period.
Objective:
To promote better wellness throughout our
community and the people we serve, the Health and
Human Services Agency will promote, include and
ensure Health in All Policies.
Performance Measures:
? Ensure all new policies include an evaluation of
how the policy will impact the health of the
community it serves, whether it be at a staff or
service level.
? Evaluate existing policies to ensure compliance
with the Health in All Policies principles.
Objective:
Utilize technology to continue to increase
efficiencies throughout the Agency and better share
information.
Performance Measures:
? Continue to further the development of the
electronic agency dashboard to allow for the
enhanced monitoring of agency caseloads,
program activities, and performance measures.
? Continue to develop the HHSA SharePoint
InfoNet, providing a true central location for all
points of reference, including Agency policies
and procedures.
? In order to provide excellent customer service,
the Agency will work towards a single
assessment for client/customer needs that
incorporates a coordinated plan of care, and a
shared electronic database for the entirety of the
Health and Human Services Agency, providing
true integration of services as well as faster,
more efficient, and more satisfactory customer
service.
Objective:
Continue to capture and promote fellowship and
partnership with both the community and Agency
staff.
Performance Measures:
? Continue to conduct the annual All-Staff
Meeting, ensuring the continued open
communication and inspiration of Agency
principles, practices, and direction to all
personnel.
? Conduct the annual Community Partner Awards,
spotlighting and rewarding individuals and
community organizations for exceptional work
to improve our community.
? Continue to participate in the Continuum of Care
partnership, ensuring the issue of regional
homelessness is both addressed and funded.
? Continue to interface with and represent the
community to the Board of Supervisors on
issues regarding health and human services and
family interests via the Adult and Family
Services Commission.
Objective:
Continue to provide financial sustainability for the
Health and Human Services Agency. In order to
effectively and efficiently serve our clients
throughout the County, we will again continue to
seek out new revenue sources while closely
monitoring expenditures and economic indicators at
the local, state and federal levels.
Performance Measures:
? Continue quarterly management meetings
including fiscal management, the CEO and the
Auditor-Controller’s office to review Agency
financial status and proactively address issues
and/or concerns specific to the Agency.
? Maintain and promote continued planning
utilizing the three-year sustainability plans for
each department, with plans due by February of
each year.
? Continue to remain connected to State and
Federal associations that communicate the
anticipated financial impact of legislative and
regulatory changes. Participate in conference
calls and attend regular meetings of the
California Welfare Directors Association
Directors and Fiscal Committees; the California
Behavioral Health Directors Association,
Financial Services Committee, Governing
Board, and the Medi-Cal Policy Committees; the
Northern California Association of Mental
Health Administrators; the County Health
Executives Association of California Directors
and Financial Committees; and the Health and
Human Services Agency Fiscal Directors.
? Participate in a Rate Range Intergovernmental
Transfer (IGT) to secure additional funds for
unreimbursed costs of Medi-Cal delivered
services for FY 2014-2015 through the
execution of agreements with the California
Department of Health Care Services, agreement
amendments with the County’s Medi-Cal
managed care plans, the submission of
accompanying documentation to the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services, and the
ultimate transfers of IGT funds from and to the
Agency. Additionally, we will initiate the IGT
process for FY 2015-16.
Objective:
Maintain and further Agency and County
compliance with the HIPAA and other applicable
Federal and State laws and regulations.
Performance Measures:
? Further the professional development of the
Privacy and Security Officer (PSO) through
the certification in privacy compliance from
the Compliance Certification Board and
attendance of other important applicable
training forums. Additionally, the PSO will
participate in statewide meetings that
advance privacy and security compliance.
? Conduct general New Hire Orientation
trainings for all County staff, as well as
annual Agency departmental trainings, on
the HIPAA and other applicable Federal and
State laws and regulations.
? Conduct auditing, monitoring, and incident
investigations as required, of Agency’s
departments to determine compliance with
the HIPAA and other applicable Federal and
State laws, regulations and contractual
obligations.
? Continue to advance the work of the Privacy
and Security Workgroup including the
development of a second Three-Year Plan
through the implementation of a privacy and
security risk analysis on the Agency
departments and applicable County
counterparts.
Objective:
Collaboratively manage the SB 163 California
Wraparound Program with Probation, Schools,
Behavioral Health and Social Services staff in order
to reduce the incidence of group home placements.
Performance Measures:
? Avert group home placements of a minimum of
2 youth annually through the provision of
wraparound services in our community.
Objective:
Meet and continuously strive to exceed performance
goals. SNRDCSS’s goals for FFY 2016 (October
2015 through September 2016) are:
? Paternity Establishment 100%
? Cases with Support Orders 96%
? Collections on Current Support 76%
? Collections on Cases with Arrears 73%
? Cost-Effectiveness $3.17 collected for every
$1.00 spent
Performance Measures:
? Continue to work with various county agencies
to educate staff about the Paternity Opportunity
Program. Many children in our community will
benefit from the establishment of paternity.
Educating county staff will ensure those services
reach families without a child support case.
? Explore stratification of case management to
target cases without orders and reduce the
average number of days from case opening to
establishment of court order.
? Explore additional opportunities for shared
services with State DCSS and Local Child
Support Agencies to increase overall cost
effectiveness.
? Support training opportunities for staff
development. Have at least 50% of staff take a
minimum of one non-mandatory Information
Systems or Human Resources training in the
next year.
? Encourage management and supervisory staff
participation at quarterly Leadership meetings
with a minimum of 80% attendance rate.
Objective:
Increase the reliability of child support payments to
families and decrease the amount of unpaid support.
Performance Measures:
? Station a full time staff member assigned to our
Employment Efforts caseload at the HHSA
Brighton Greens Resource Center.
? Explore methods to better serve our clients in
Sierra County, Truckee and other remote areas
of the County.
? Further develop collaboration with local One-
Stop employment services
? Implement a “debrief” session with each obligor
after a new court order has been entered to
outline payment methods, due dates and
compliance issues.
Objective:
Strengthen partnerships with community partners,
county agencies and judicial branch.
Performance Measures:
? Collaborate with the Superior Court and
Commissioner to establish a child support staff
presence at the court on the private child support
case calendar. There is a population in the
community of families that are not aware of our
services, or believe that our services are reserved
for those who receive public assistance.
Appearance at the court to aid with child
support-related questions, and preparation of
support orders would aid the community as well
as promote the available services.
? Communicate and collaborate with the Family
Law Facilitator. Increased collaboration with
the Facilitator will increase efficiencies for both
agencies, and potentially increase our caseload.
? Expand collaboration with the Probation
Department to better serve our shared customers.
Objective:
Utilize technology to improve the delivery of
program services and departmental efficiencies.
Performance Measures:
? Increase customer service survey participation
by 10% and increase positive feedback
percentage by 5%.
? Reestablish committee to oversee social media
and website functionality.
? Increase outreach efforts via social media.
Improve existing Facebook page to allow
customer interaction.
? Expand website features to further promote
customer ability to self-serve.
? Increase usage of the Performance Management
Tool and implement Case Highlighter to manage
case performance.
Objective:
Develop new and enhance existing measures to
increase collections.
Performance Measures:
? Continue successful collaboration with the
courts in the areas of court collections and
increased occurrence of legal processes.
? Collaborate with other counties to exchange
ideas on successful collection techniques.
? Work with new debtors through early
intervention to increase the payment of new
debts when there is the greatest chance of
success.
? Continue to schedule the maximum number of
cases without judgments (Sheriff’s Medical,
Code Enforcement) for Small Claims Court in
order to obtain court orders.
? Schedule the maximum number of Order of
Examinations to gather information from debtors
while encouraging payments.
? Work with the Community Development
Agency, Auditor, and Tax Collector to
maximize the placement of all Code
Enforcement accounts onto the county tax roll as
allowed by law.
? Continue to train the volunteer from the Retired
and Senior Volunteer Program (RSVP) in
clerical processes that will allow the
department’s employees to concentrate on
collection activities.
? Continue Saturday call project to reach debtors
during a focused time.
Objective:
Develop more efficient processes in RevQ to
maximize accuracy, usability, and functionality.
Performance Measures:
? Develop more workflows (automated processes)
in RevQ to automate debtor and account actions
such as account status or field changes.
? Reach out to other counties to gather best
practices on workflows and automation.
? Develop work lists for targeted collection phone
calls to debtors who meet certain criteria, such
as previously paying, but who are no longer
paying.
? Attend trainings and work with vendor Revenue
Results to maximize the potential of the debt
collections software.
? Work on clean-up lists (FTB/COD returns,
victim restitution and trust accounts, debtor
skips) to maximize the accuracy of RevQ
information.
? Work with vendor to resolve SB940 reporting
and other ongoing issues in RevQ.
Objective:
Increase collaboration with referring departments
and the courts to ensure consistent customer service.
Expand and enhance services provided to include
other county debts.
Performance Measures:
? Work with referring departments to understand
the types of cases being referred, the importance
of accurate demographic information submitted,
and any government code or departmental
requirements, in order to provide proper and
consistent enforcement of accounts.
? Attend other department All Staff meetings to
educate them of our services, procedures,
practices, and to explore future collaborations.
? Look for opportunities with other departments to
collect their outstanding debts.
? Work with the Department of Social Services to
increase the number of general assistance
referrals sent to the Collections Division.
? Develop a single solution for a paperless referral
process for all referring departments.
Objective:
Create a Strategic Plan for the new fiscal year to
gather objectives, goals, and strategies to increase
performance.
Performance Measures:
? Develop Strategic Plan by reviewing
performance areas including the areas of debts
collected, customer service, and program
enhancement/efficiencies.
? Develop goals for the coming fiscal year.
? Monitor the Plan by reviewing projected
completion dates and quarterly progress.
Objective:
Continue to coordinate multiple HHSA agency
programs in a cohesive, client-focused, integrated
model at the Brighton Greens Resource Center
(BGRC).
Performance Measures:
? Maintain fluid communication with leaders of
Public Health, Behavioral Health, Child
Support, NoRTEC JPA, and multiple Social
Services divisions on daily operations and
NEVADA COUNTY BUDGET 2016-17 2-216
Social Services Administration
expansion of a Warm Handoff Model of doing
business.
? Seek a strong process for ongoing feedback in
the delivery of services among multiple partners
at the BGRC, with an eye towards improving the
client experience.
? Initiate alternative models for intake and
assessment that utilize a common platform for
all departments.
? Draft a release of information form that meets
the state and federal requirements of all
departments and disciplines.
Objective:
Expand capacity of Eligibility Services to improve
delivery of timely services to those in need of
assistance.
Performance Measures:
? Continue the transition to a task-based model of
processing eligibility case renewals.
? Strengthen technical knowledge of eligibility
staff as it relates to the implementation of
Federal and State rules.
? Develop and utilize technology to distribute
work tasks and monitor staff performance.
? Develop and implement internal training
programs so employees may improve their
skills, knowledge, and abilities.
? Explore and create efficiencies to facilitate
timely processing of applications.
Objective:
Expand the utilization of alternative funding streams
to strengthen and increase available services to
clients of Child Protective Services (CPS), Veterans
Services Office (VSO), and the Probation
Department.
Performance Measures:
? Strengthen and expand the CalWORKs Linkages
Program with CPS, VSO, and the Probation
Department.
? Develop and expand delivery of eligibility
outreach services to the AB 109 and jail
populations.
? Leverage Medi-Cal Administrative Activities
funding to expand services at the VSO.
? Develop Mental Health Services Act funding to
support delivery of outreach services to veterans
served by the VSO.
Objective:
Coordinate the successful implementation of the
Resource Family Approval legislation incorporated
in AB 403.
Performance Measures:
? Create training and pre-approval processes for
all non-licensed foster placements.
? Establish a Permanency Assessment process up
front for all potential family placements through
CPS.
? Contract with a provider to expand foster family
recruitment within Nevada County.
Objective:
Promote and protect the health, safety,
independence, and financial resources of seniors and
dependent adults by investigating allegations of
abuse and/or neglect.
Performance Measures:
? Provide response within a maximum of 10 days
of report if determined necessary.
? Investigate and provide case management and
referrals to approximately 500 cases.
? Report to and collaborate with law enforcement
on all cases where a suspected penal code
violation has occurred.
Objective:
Create coordinated and personalized service plans to
reduce the vulnerability of seniors and adults with
disabilities.
Performance Measures:
? Coordinate case conference meetings weekly to
discuss complex and recurring cases.
? Create an individualized service plan for each
client. Include family members and critical
support people in the development of the plan
when appropriate.
? Determine cases with high risk factors and
increase case conferencing at time of both case
opening and closure.
? Evaluate service plan effectiveness at case
closure.
? Assure that service plans are developed in
coordination with other HHSA departments and
include them in the service planning process.
Objective:
Promote community awareness on the significant
issue of elder and dependent adult abuse by
educating the public through training and outreach.
Performance Measures:
? Provide 5 or more outreach presentations to
community organizations.
? Collaborate with the Falls Prevention Coalition,
and assist with the annual Falls Prevention
Event.
? Attend Aging and Disability Resource
Connection meetings to integrate client services
and improve client outcomes.
? Coordinate the MDT to assure agency
collaboration and provide community partners
with training opportunities.
Objective:
The Senior Outreach Nursing Program (SONP) will
assess the health of clients through targeted nursing
services.
Performance Measures:
? Conduct a mental health screening on all clients
who are referred to the SONP.
? Conduct 500 in home visits to evaluate and
monitor the health of clients.
? Jointly attend home visits with Adult Services
staff as needed.
? Conduct four blood pressure clinics monthly in
both Western and Eastern County.
? Meet quarterly with the Public Health Officer
and Director of Nurses to review cases, policies
and procedures, and the use of the electronic
medical record system.
? Collaborate with Public Health as needed to
assist with immunization clinics and other
community health events.
? Meet quarterly with the Behavioral Health
Director and designated staff to review
identified behavioral health issues, training
needs, treatment resources, and referral
processes.
Objective:
The Public Guardian’s office will safeguard the lives
and estates of adults who are unable to care for
themselves with the least possible restriction of their
personal liberties.
Performance Measures:
? Manage and protect the income and assets of an
average of 35 conservatees and 4 Special Needs
Trusts monthly.
? Review treatment plans and coordinate care with
Behavioral Health and Turning Point weekly.
? Take pictures of conservatees per requirement,
and scan to case management software.
? Visit conservatees quarterly to ensure
appropriate placement, medications, and
services are being provided.
? Participate in care conference meetings with
facility team members either in facility or via
conference call.
? Assist LPS conservatees: individuals with a
mental health diagnosis who are temporarily
gravely disabled, in obtaining needed resources
and services for the purposes of supporting a
goal to return to independent living within 12
months, and promoting successful integration
into the community.
? Advocate as needed for services and supports for
clients.
Objective:
Adult Services staff will continue to partner with the
Aging and Disabilities Resource Connection
(ADRC), for the purpose of providing the “No
Wrong Door” approach and integrated services.
Performance Measures:
? Attend the Community Living Council
meetings quarterly.
? Attend the ADRC line staff sub-committee
meetings as scheduled.
? Promote the No-Wrong Door approach.
Objective:
Support seniors and clients with disabilities to
remain safely in their homes through the provision
of IHSS case management services.
Performance Measures:
? Serve a monthly average of 695 consumers and
provide case management to all recipients.
? Conduct home visits for recipients within State
Guidelines.
? Meet with the Nevada-Sierra Regional Public
Authority to discuss IHSS and collaborate on
cases as needed.
Objective:
Ensure IHSS assessments meet State standards by
conducting QA case reviews and implementing
necessary corrective action.
Performance Measures:
? Review 149 cases per year to ensure cases are
compliant with State Hourly Task Guideline
regulations and contain the requisite
documentation.
? Meet monthly with the Supervisor and Program
Manager to discuss identified case discrepancies
and training issues.
? Provide training and informational documents to
social workers to enhance training, work
performance and client service.
Objective:
Enhance the IHSS client’s ability to live
independently and safely through coordination of
efforts with other community resources.
Performance Measures:
Refer all new clients 60 years old and older to
the Senior Outreach Nurse program; the nurse
will assess for adaptive equipment, evaluate
medications, check blood pressure and link to
other services and supports as needed.
? Refer clients to Adult Protective Services for
assessment and/or investigation of abuse or
neglect as mandated.
? Link consumers to appropriate community
resources such as FREED, Public Authority and
Adult and Disability Resource Connection.
Objective:
Strengthen the integrity of the IHSS program by
identifying potential fraud and possible
overpayments through Program Integrity activities
and refer to the appropriate investigative department.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain current departmental websites to
include specific information for referral of
suspected IHSS fraud activities.
? Report suspected fraud for investigation.
? Utilize CMIPS Online Reports and other QA
activities to identify potential fraud.
? Track fraud utilizing the Fraud Data Collection
Tool provided by California Department of
Social Services (CDSS).
? Conduct Directed Mailings and Unannounced
Home Visits as directed by CDSS.
Objective:
Reduce the number of children reentering the child
welfare system through of timely and effective
interventions when a family first becomes involved
in the Child Welfare System and establishing
effective after-care strategies and family natural
support systems.
Performance Measures:
? Reduce the percentage of reentry cases by 2% or
more in FY 2016-17 with the goal of reaching
the National Standard of 8.3% for Federal
Outcome Measure 3-P4.
Objective:
Mitigate the number of substantiated abuse and
neglect referrals and the number of children reentering
the foster care system by creating and
expanding prevention and early intervention
collaborations.
Performance Measures:
? At least 200 families will be referred to
community partners for support services through
the Differential Response Program.
? Provide monthly community training to
prevention partners, child abuse prevention
councils and community members to enhance
cooperation and collaboration across agencies.
Provide wraparound services to 100+ families to
keep children in their homes and in their
communities.
? Provide Nurturing Parenting Program and Safety
Organized Practice services through our
visitation program and through comprehensive
preventive services.
Objective:
Ensure that no child “ages out” of the foster care
system without a permanent connection to a caring
adult and the skills needed for successful transition
to adulthood. Youth will also automatically, under
AB 12, enter into extended assistance in foster care
and will have an active Supervised Independent
Living Placement, that supports the youth moving
toward a greater level of independence.
Performance Measures:
? 100% of foster children ages 9-18 who are not in
a reunification plan or a permanent guardianship
will be referred to the Destination Family
Program.
? 75% of case plans will be developed in close
collaboration with other HHSA departments (i.e.
Linkages to CalWORKs, Public Health,
Behavioral Health, etc.)
? 100% of the children referred will have adoptive
homes or permanent lifelong connections before
aging out of foster care.
? 90% of eligible children will attend Independent
Living Program classes.
? 100% of eligible foster youth will earn their high
school diploma or General Education
Development (GED) high school equivalent test
before they exit the foster care system.
? 100% of the Transitional Housing Plan Plus
beds will be filled throughout the fiscal year.
? 100% of youth aging out of foster care will have
a Supervised Independent Living Placement and
will be referred per AB12 to extended services
until they are 21 years old.
Objective:
Whenever appropriate, children will remain at home
or be reunified with their families through timely
risk and safety assessments, strengths and needs
assessments, case planning and case management.
Performance Measures:
? All case plans will be created with family input
and 95% will be completed within mandated
timeframes.
? 90% of all necessary Structured Decision-
Making tools will be completed within
mandated timeframes.
? 95% of all face-to-face contacts will be made
within mandated timeframes.
? 75% of all face-to-face contacts will occur in the
child’s preferred location
? 90% of families will participate in Family Team
Meetings, will have a safety plan in place and
will have at least three new natural supports
developed through their team.
? 100% of children involved with Child Welfare
will be screened for compliance with Katie A.
requirements related to mental health service
provision, and referred to behavioral health for
treatment as appropriate.
Objective:
Increase outreach, education, and presence in the
Tahoe/Truckee region in order to improve services,
collaboration, and build relationships within that
community.
Performance Measures:
? Provide bi-monthly community training to
prevention partners, child abuse prevention
councils, and community members to enhance
cooperation and collaboration across agencies.
? Dedicate one social worker & supervisor to the
Truckee area to explore and develop
collaborations increasing formal and informal
partnerships with eastern county organizations.
? The social worker will spend a minimum of one
and a half days a week in the Tahoe/Truckee
area.
? CPS’s Program Manager or a supervisor will
attend the monthly meetings of the Tahoe
Truckee Child Abuse Prevention Council.
? Work with local Foster Family Agencies and the
Nevada County Foster Parent Association on
increasing the number of foster homes available
in the Tahoe-Truckee area through outreach and
education.
? A staff member will attend and participate in
90% of Special Multi Agency Resource Team
meetings.
Objective:
Continue implementation of the Linkages program
between CPS and CalWORKs in Nevada County.
Performance Measures:
? 100% of CPS clients will be asked if they are
clients of CalWORKs.
? 100% of CPS cases transferring from a Family
Reunification to a Family Maintenance case will
be checked for eligibility for CalWORKs.
? Linkages team staff will meet once a month.
? Staff on the Linkages team will attend all State
mandated Linkages meeting.
? A policy and procedural manual for Linkages
will be completed.
Objective:
Ensure that children entering into a juvenile
dependency case are placed within Nevada County.
Performance Measures:
? 80% of the children placed in foster care will be
located in Nevada County.
? Collaborate with the local Foster Family
Agencies to increase the number of foster homes
by recruiting local foster parents through
outreach and education.
? Ensure that all in county placements are
exhausted before a child is placed out of county.
? Ensure that all efforts are made to locate
potential caregivers that are relatives or
Nonrelated Extended Family Members.
Objective:
Create a checks and balances system to ensure legal
mandates are met and Structured Decision Making
(SDM) is fully utilized for CPS’s Emergency
Response unit.
Performance Measures:
? The RED team will meet daily in order to make
a group decision on what the response will be
for the referral. (Immediate, 10-day, Evaluated
out).
? 100% of referrals will be handled within the
legal response timeframes.
? Monthly oversight using SafeMeasures will be
used to track response times.
? Weekly individual supervision between
supervisors and social workers to ensure that inperson
contacts are occurring within timeframes.
? 100% of cases will have utilized SDM.
Objective:
Retain all staff that currently work for CPS and fill
vacant positions.
Performance Measures:
? Create an organizational culture that is tailored
to the people who work at CPS to ensure that
90% of staff are retained.
? Individualized weekly training and support for
staff members.
? Redefine the process by which workers are hired
by:
o patience in finding quality workers,
o being organizationally specific to our
county when hiring, and
o finding workers that are invested in our
county.
Objective:
Successful implementation of Resource Family
Approval (RFA) which is legislation that states that
all foster caregivers including non-related, relatives,
and Nonrelated Extended Family Members
(NREFM) will be held to the same licensing
standards required to care for foster children.
Performance Measures:
? All relative and NREFM caregivers will receive
pre-approval and on-going training through a
contract with the Foster Family Association
(FFA) Environmental Alternatives (EA) (like the
training received by foster families).
? All criminal exemptions for non-related,
relatives, and NREFM caregivers will be
determined by the County.
? All potential foster caregivers will go through a
Permanency Assessment which means they will
be approved for guardianship or adoption up
front.
? All RFA approvals will be completed in 90 days.
? Implementation of RFA will be complete by
January 1, 2017, the timeframe mandated by the
California Department of Social Services.
Objective:
Implementation of AB 403 also known as
Continuum of Care Reform (CCR) which is
legislation created to increase the number of children
in family-like placements and to reduce the number
of youth in congregate.
Performance Measures:
? Increase the number of foster families in the
county by 30% through a recruitment contract
with Environmental Alternatives (a Foster
Family Agency).
Foster parent recruitment to focus on
children ages 11-17.
o Foster parent recruitment to focus on
sibling sets.
? Create a respite home that will take any
foster child any time of day for up to 30
days.
? Reduce the number of youth in congregate
care by 50%.
Objective:
Provide access to public assistance benefits for
qualified individuals and families, and process
applications and/or provide direct benefits within
mandatory time frames.
Performance Measures:
? Process 90% of CalFresh applications within 30
days.
Process 90% of Medi-Cal applications within 45
days.
? Process 90% of CalWORKs applications within
45 days.
? Process 90% of General Assistance applications
within 30 days.
? Process 90% of CMSP applications within 45
days.
? Create multiple new efficiencies in the above
application processes that both reduce the
workload for staff and more quickly allocate
benefits to individuals and families.
.
Objective:
Educate and provide outreach to families and
individuals to help them apply for and maintain
medical, nutritional, and financial benefits.
Performance Measures:
? Engage community partners resulting in
increased assistance for customers applying for
services.
? Continue to assign an outreach worker to
provide services at local community based
organizations.
? Track outreach efforts and benefit assistance
provided by community partners.
? Conduct program outreach and education at four
community events to educate the community
about services provided.
? Administer CalFresh program mailings to
approximately 10,000 Medi-Cal beneficiaries to
provide them with supplemental food benefit
opportunities.
Objective:
Increase participation in employment services
program so that families transition to self-sufficiency
more quickly.
Performance Measures:
? Place 30 participants in Subsidized Employment
positions in partnership with local businesses
and non-profit organizations.
? Serve 120 participants through the Family
Stabilization program in order to address their
barriers to participation in employment services.
? Apply for and receive CalWORKs Housing
Support funding for FY 16-17 in order to
continue to address homelessness for up to 40
CalWORKs families.
? Partner with employers and the One-Stop
Business and Career Center to provide
recruitment opportunities at the center.
? Engage and monitor job seekers that are required
to participate in employment services.
? Monitor program Work Participation Rates by
identifying activities with greater and lesser
success rates and analyzing where WPR can be
improved.
Objective:
Create and implement staff development strategies
to enhance the professional services to the residents
of Nevada County.
Performance Measures:
? Develop and utilize technology to distribute
policies and procedures based on Federal and
State legislative and regulatory changes.
? Develop and implement internal training
programs so employees can upgrade their skills,
knowledge, and abilities.
? Continue to utilize UC Davis training
opportunities to provide staff with updated
program knowledge.
? Begin creation of a Department Policies and
Procedures manual.
Objective:
Enhance Information Technology to provide for
program efficiencies and enhanced services to
clients.
Performance Measures:
? Educate the public and community based
organizations on the use of the
www.C4Yourself.com website to apply for and
maintain benefits.
? Enhance C-IV tools and other technological
support to efficiently process case data and
implement programmatic changes.
? Utilize Share Point to enhance communication
and information availability for staff including
policies and procedures.
? Utilize a Lobby Management System to reduce
customer wait times and improve program
efficiencies.
Objective:
Increase service integration for Eligibility Division
customers with services provided by other Social
Services programs, related Health and Human Services Agency programs, and community based
services.
Performance Measures:
? Co-location of services to be provided at
Brighton Greens with Child Welfare Services,
Children’s Behavioral Health, Women Infants
and Children, Veterans Services, Child Support
Services, and the One Stop Business and Career
Center.
? Identify and coordinate case plans for families
served by CalWORKs and Child Welfare
Services as well as CalWORKs and Probation
clients.
? Coordinate with other HHSA programs and
community service providers to enhance the
delivery of services to shared customers.
? Implement the HHSA-wide Warm Handoff
Policy to improve referral success and customer
service.
Objective:
Process applications and referrals so that
veterans and their families receive benefits
earned by serving their country.
Performance Measures:
? Complete 750 applications for compensation
and pension with a goal of 500 applications
being successfully awarded.
? Submit 250 applications for Veterans
Administration health care benefits with a
goal of 200 being approved.
? Refer 75 veterans to health and human
services programs in Nevada County.
? Successfully process 75 claims for
dependency education benefits.
Issue veteran identification cards to 200
veterans.
Objective:
Network with nonprofit and government
organizations that serve the veteran community
in Nevada County.
Performance Measures:
? Each calendar quarter, attend at least one
Board meeting for each organization
providing services to veterans in Nevada
County.
? Meet quarterly with county Veterans Service
Offices bordering Nevada County.
? Attend social events and fundraisers
coordinated by local veteran organizations.
Objective:
Increase knowledge of both state and federal
benefits that veterans are entitled to.
Performance Measures:
? Attend tri-annual training conferences
provided by the California Association of
County Veterans Services Officers.
? 100% of staff accredited by the California
Department of Veterans Affairs.
? When indicated, make referrals to other
HHSA departments and divisions, including
Eligibility, CalWorks, CalFresh, Behavioral
Health, Public Health, IHSS, and Child
Support.
? VSO staff will attend training opportunities
and other Department Management
Meetings, in order to gain knowledge
regarding HHSA services.
Objective:
Provide oversight and improvement of Behavioral
Health Department programs through continual
review of individual program fiscal status,
involvement with local and State organizations, and
maximization of revenue sources.
Performance Measures:
? Participate at both County and State level in
Behavioral Health associated organizations and
committees, including providing input regarding
the impact on Nevada County of proposed
changes in funding and programs.
? Continue to identify and obtain new revenue
sources as they become available, to support
underfunded populations and needs, e.g.,
housing for individuals with mental illness.
? Coordinate funding (existing, changing, and
new) to maximize effective use of fiscal
resources for Behavioral Health services to
County citizens.
Objective:
Provide sound personnel management for the
department through managing staff resources and
adhering to county policies.
Performance Measures:
? Review 100% of staff assignments for
appropriateness of skills and job descriptions
and revise staff assignments to best meet
program objectives.
? Review contracts and new projects to ensure
staff resources are available to effectively
implement and monitor.
? Review every internal vacancy for need prior to
requesting to refill the position.
? Ensure that productivity standards for billable
direct service for each position are kept updated
and that 100% of employees have written,
individualized productivity goals that will be
monitored throughout the year and reflected in
performance evaluations.
? Ensure that average adult clinician productivity
meets or exceeds 58%; average child therapist
productivity meets or exceeds 67%; and average
doctor productivity meets or exceeds 75%.
Objective:
Maximize the efficiency and effectiveness of the
Department through the provision of leadership for
departmental programs and fostering of partnerships
with community based organizations and
stakeholders.
Performance Measures:
? Director to meet monthly (at least 10 times per
year) with Local Mental Health Board.
? Director to meet at least 3 times in the FY with
the state, executive, or general membership of
the local chapter of the National Alliance on
Mental Illness (NAMI).
Director to participate regularly in monthly
meetings of the Forensic Task Force on Mental
Illness, the MHSA Steering Committee, the
Nevada County Continuum of Care, the Nevada
County Health Collaborative, the AB 109
Community Corrections Partnership, and the
Children’s System of Care Executive
Committee.
? Director or designee to participate regularly in
meetings of the California Behavioral Health
Director’s Association (CBHDA) and their
subsidiaries, e.g. Small Counties and Superior
Region to gather current information and
advocate on behalf of the interests of Nevada
County.
? Quality Assurance Manager or designee to
attend monthly meetings and the annual
conference of the Northern California Quality
Improvement Coordinators.
? MHSA Coordinator or designee to participate in
monthly conference calls/meetings of the
CBHDA MHSA Coordinators.
Objective:
Continue to implement the Mental Health Services
Act Community Services and Supports, Housing,
Prevention and Early Intervention (PEI), Innovation,
and Workforce Education and Training (WET)
Plans; as approved by the Nevada County Board of
Supervisors.
Performance Measures:
? Establish and implement tracking mechanisms
for program performance and data.
? Ensure that Latino outreach/engagement
activities outlined in the PEI plan occur as stated
in the plan.
? Submit and get approval for an additional
MHSA Shared Housing Loan.
? Write new MHSA Innovation Plans.
? Continue MHSA Steering Committee with new
goals and functions related to implementation,
integrated plan review and stakeholder
recommendation.
? Provide training to 250 staff, contractors, and
community services providers as detailed in the
MHSA WET Plan.
? Plan and update our integrated MHSA Plan as
directed by MHSOAC (Mental Health Services
Oversight and Accountability Commission) with
all major components represented.
? Continue to provide housing supports to at least
65 seriously mentally ill individuals.
Objective:
Ensure that accounts receivable and billing systems
and processes work efficiently and reliably and
provide accurate data for billing, reporting to the
Department of Health Care Services and
administrative management.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain a denial rate consistent with changing
Short-Doyle II and new EHR system; bring
denials for Medi-Cal services to less than 5%
and minimize Cost Report Audit paybacks.
? Review the following each quarter and take
appropriate actions:
o Regularly collect balances outstanding more
than 180 days—work with the California
Mental Health Directors Association and
DHCS on resolutions.
o Work with State Department of Health Care
Services to ensure that all Drug Medi-Cal
claims are paid 100%, and monitor related
contracts so that contractors are responsible
for all eligible and denied claims.
o Continue to expand and improve Short-
Doyle II Mental Health Medi-Cal billing,
tracking and reporting.
o Review a full complement of standing
reports, including acute inpatient utilization,
Institute for Mental Disease utilization, and
Board and Care costs.
o Continue to develop expertise in creation of
ad hoc reports.
Objective:
Ensure that the Quality Assurance (QA) Program
meets all state and federal requirements, including
appropriate review and analysis of quality measures
for services, and ensure measures are implemented
to cure deficiencies and improve quality. Ensure that
the Electronic Health Record planning and
implementation meets the detailed requirements of
the state and federal governments.
Performance Measures:
? Review and analyze results of annual External
Quality Review Organization (EQRO) and the
triennial DHCS review, provide results to QA committees and implement necessary changes to
practice.
? Prepare and implement the annual Quality
Improvement Work Plan in accordance with
state and federal requirements including the
following special projects for 2016/2017:
outcome measurement program; comprehensive
consumer survey; ongoing data collection and
analysis of access to services; collection and
analysis of penetration and retention data;
implementation of a psychiatric medication
reconciliation plan between mental and physical
health care; continue to implement the
participation of organizational contract providers
in the billing and clinical component of the
Electronic Health Record; successfully
demonstrate the meaningful use of the
Electronic Health Record.
? Attend Monthly State QA Meetings and Annual
QA Conference.

Objective:
Ensure access to individual, group, and family
therapy services through providing services at school
sites, the NCBH clinic, and other locations and
hours for the benefit of Nevada County’s
emotionally disturbed and mentally ill children.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain Behavioral Health school site presence
in Eastern and Western Nevada County schools
as follows:
o Provide School-based services at the three
elementary schools and alternative high
schools in Western County that have the
largest percentage of “free and reduced
lunch program” students.
? Increase availability of therapy services in the
schools in Eastern Nevada County.
? Provide evening hour treatment and Parent Child
Interaction Therapy (PCIT) services at the
Brighton Greens building in Grass Valley one
night per week.
? Continue training at least three to four interns.
Objective:
Ensure that mental health services are available to
youth in targeted populations.
Performance Measures:
? Continue to conduct a Mental Health Screening
and provide medically necessary treatment to
75% of children who are involved in the Child
Welfare system and become dependents of the
court. Treat 75% of the youth who are Probation
Wards of the court with Medi-Cal.
? Refer an estimated 120 of the neediest youth to
intensive treatment, or full service partnerships
that “do whatever it takes” for children’s
treatment: Victor Community Support Services
and EMQ/Families First.
Objective:
Strengthen prevention efforts through partnering
with local schools and other providers to develop
and implement programs supporting the mental
health of Nevada County youth.
Performance Measures:
? Offer suicide risk screening to all 10th graders in
the county.
? Continue to support and monitor the contract of
the Promotora Latino Outreach program.
Objective:
Gather outcome data from all children’s providers
and monitor the quality of work. Provide trainings
where needed.
Performance Measures:
? Obtain a data collection system that will pool all
of the outcomes gathered.
? At least 65% of the children will have decreased
symptoms and improved behaviors.
Objective:
Maintain clinical staff productivity to ensure that
staff are maximizing the amount of time spent
providing billable services.
Performance Measures:
? 90% of staff will continue to attain their
individual benchmark.
? Clinical supervisors to meet annually with
Clinicians to review productivity.
Objective:
Maximize opportunities for Nevada County
residents with substance abuse addiction to receive
effective Alcohol and Other Drug (AOD) outpatient
and residential treatment program services.
Performance Measures:
? Provide AOD services to an estimated 500 new
referrals.
? Complete an estimated 300 AOD assessments.
? Provide case coordination to an estimated 250
clients, ensuring that each is enrolled in
appropriate programs.
? Provide residential treatment for an estimated
170 clients.
? Continued implementation of project with
Community Recovery Resources, utilizing
MHSA Community Services and Support (CSS)
funds to provide evidence based Co-Occurring
Disorder Treatment to 10 adults and 15 juvenile
participants of Juvenile Drug Court within
community Integrated Health Care Model.
? Contract with a Substance Use Disorders
Treatment Provider to provide residential, detox
and housing services for citizens with a drug
and/or alcohol problem.
Objective:
Form healthy partnerships with and between Nevada
County youth by partnering with the Public Health
Department to provide opportunities and support to
mitigate the risk of engaging in the use of alcohol
and other drugs (AOD).
Performance Measures:
? Provide services to approximately 75-100 youth
per year through Friday Night Live and Club
Live Programs.
? Develop and conduct an AOD prevention
education presentation to approximately 900
ninth grade students as part of the NUHS Health
Education series.
? Conduct 3-5 adolescent health groups for at-risk
youth to reinforce healthy behaviors.
Objective:
Reduce underage and young adult drinking by
increasing adult awareness of and accountability for
youth alcohol use.
Performance Measures:
? Support and coordinate with two Drug-Free
Community Coalitions to complete and sustain
the “Parent Committed To Stop Underage
Drinking” campaign goal of gaining 400 parent
pledges.
? Expand the Athlete Committed (AC) campaign
by working with AC high school club
participants who will then present the AC
program to approximately 750 middle school
students. These peer presentations will
emphasize the importance of remaining AOD
free.
Objective:
Submit Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery System
(DMC-ODS) Implementation Plan to Department of
Health Care Services (DHCS).
Performance Measures:
? AOD Program Manager to participate in all
DHCS DMC-ODS preparation meetings and
trainings.
? AOD Program Manager will organize and
facilitate quarterly county advisory meetings for
community partners and stakeholders for both
western and eastern Nevada County to develop a
needs assessment for substance use treatment
services.
Objective:
Facilitate the implementation of a medication
assisted treatment for alcohol and opioid addiction in
Nevada County.
Performance Measures:
? Participate in planning meetings with other
community agencies such as Probation, FQHC
and Substance Use Treatment Providers.
? Facilitate partnerships between medical health
providers and substance use treatment providers
in the provision of services.
? Decrease the number of people who are
overdosing, admitted to emergency departments,
and dying from opioid overdose by increasing
the amount of treatment options. Explore
partnerships with substance abuse providers, law
enforcement, medical providers, and the Public
Health Department that might impact opioid use.
Objective:
Provide Medication Services, Therapy Services,
Case Management, Rehabilitation, and intensive
Case Management services within our department
and through contractors.
Performance Measures:
? Provide regular on-going Medication Services,
Therapy, and Rehabilitation and Case
Management to 714 clients, including intensive
case management services to 100 clients.
? Through the New Directions program, which
provides intensive case management, help 32
clients find their own housing, stay in housing,
maintain psychiatric stability, and improve or
sustain previous improved overall functioning.
? Coordinate SIL program with expansion of the
current homeless voucher program that utilizes
HUD and MHSA funding, expanding to 27
ongoing clients.
? The New Directions Saturday Adventures
program will serve 8-12 participants.
? Collaborate with the community to prevent and
reduce homelessness and participate in the
Nevada/Placer Continuum of Care.
Objective:
Continue WIC 5345 Assisted Outpatient Treatment
(AOT) or Laura’s Law.
Performance Measures:
? Serve at least 14 individuals in the Turning Point
Program under WIC 5345.
? Provide Education Program to the community
(including client and family advocacy
organizations), to increase access of these
services to clients who qualify for Laura’s Law.
? Conduct presentations both in and out of county
regarding the implementation of AOT programs,
outcomes, and funding strategies. Be available
for media interviews, consultation with other
counties, and advocacy at the state legislature.
Objective:
Ensure that individuals are receiving insurance
benefits for which they are eligible through
programs such as SSI and Medi-Cal, by providing a
monthly report of all uninsured individuals to BH
Supervisors. Collaboratively partner with other
departments and organizations to assist with
appropriate applications.
Performance Measures:
? Review 100% of uninsured clients with
collaborative team to identify potential
eligibility and coordinate application assistance.
? Continue to increase the proportion of adult
Medi-Cal clients to above 95% of total clients.
? Enroll 100% of eligible clients into a health
benefit program.
? Enroll 100% of relevant clinicians as providers
with private insurance networks.
? Successfully assist 10 disabled clients in
securing SSI/SDI benefits.
Objective:
Maintain consistency and quality of Medication
Services while managing costs.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain psychiatric staff and contract
psychiatrists, allowing for more stable and
consistent patient care.
? Continue biannual meetings among
psychiatrists, led by the Medical Director, to
improve coordination of services and to
facilitate communication.
Objective:
Continue to build on the relationship between
NCBH and local primary care clinics in order to
improve access to mental health care and integration
of mental health and physical health
services. Support additional resources for clients
who are unable to access medication services for
moderate mental illness by encouraging the
Managed Care Plans to meet the needs of these
patients.
Performance Measures:
? Facilitate increased role of the BH Navigator as
a referral resource for moderately mentally ill
patients either in linkage with a primary care
provider, or with a telepsychiatry or other
provider that provides medication management.
? Continue regular phone coordination of referrals
with Western Sierra Health Clinic and other
primary care clinics to maintain improved
communication, review cases, and coordinate
care.
? Increase Integrated Health Care caseload of
HOIT to 75 active clients as continued
implementation of the Mental Health Services
Act.
? Expand our coordination efforts with Chapa De,
including education about our referral and
acceptance process. Clarify and improve the
transition process back to primary care for
patients who have been stabilized and no longer
require specialty mental health care.
Objective:
Reduce psychiatric hospitalizations and use of
IMD/MHRC facilities, and improve overall care of
individuals in crisis in this county.
Performance Measures:
? Reduce psychiatric hospitalizations by 15%
through the effective utilization of the services
of the Insight Respite Center and Crisis
Stabilization Unit.
? Maintain the five clients now living
independently in the community (previously
IMD residents,) through use of the intensive
case management program using the ACT
Model. Transition seven more IMD clients into
unlocked placements in the community.
Objective:
Register all births and deaths that occur in Nevada
County according to California Health and Safety
Codes utilizing California Electronic Death
Registration System (EDRS) database for deaths and
Automated Vital Statistics System (AVSS) database
for births.
Performance Measures:
? Work with local hospitals to improve processes
so that we achieve the rate of 80% for
registering hospital live births within 10 days, as
per California regulations.
? Increase support and technical support provided
to mortuaries in an effort to decrease the number
of mistakes on death certificates as submitted by
the mortuaries. For example, Vitals staff will
distribute “quick step” sheets that include
attestation policy and appropriate Cause Of
Death (COD) policy.
Objective:
Continue to refine time study and invoice
methodology for the MAA Program to ensure
program compliance and increase revenues.
Performance Measures:
? Review time study results at the end of each
quarter and provide one-on-one training to time
study participants who have little MAA
reimbursable time included in their time studies.
? Increase time allocated in time studies to MAA
reimbursable codes by 10%.
? Increase claimable revenues by 15%.
Objective:
Register and Attest to Meaningful Use of the PHD
Electronic Health Record System (EHRS) in order to
take advantage of incentive payments before they
sunset.
Performance Measures:
? Successfully register eligible providers.
? Successfully download initial Attestation data
from the EHRS.
? Set up training for practitioners to ensure they
are charting correctly in the system in order to
demonstrate Meaningful Use Objectives and
Measures; monitor and improve performance on
core objectives throughout the stages of
meaningful use.
Objective:
Oversee the transfer of clinic and immunization
billing to a third party contractor.
Performance Measures:
? Work closely with selected contractor to ensure
the transfer has little to no negative effect on
revenue.
? Work to keep Practitioners up to date with the
latest coding changes so claims are submitted
clean.
? After establishing baseline data, develop a
system and monitor contractor performance
using the following indicators:
o Number of days charges are in accounts
receivable.
o The percent of claims denied on first
submission.
o The net collection rate.
o Average monthly revenue.
o Number of billing errors entered by
Practitioners.
Objective:
While simultaneously working on documentation
development/selection for accreditation purposes,
complete the recommended steps in the Public Health Accreditation pre-application phase and
submit an application to the Public Health
Accreditation Board (PHAB) in the Fall of 2016.
Performance Measures:
? Complete the CHIP, an accreditation application
prerequisite, by 12/31/2016.
? Conduct an internal branding survey with PHD
staff, and utilize the results to develop an
improved branding strategy.
? Complete a PHD strategic plan by 12/31/2016.
? Complete a department-specific workforce
development plan, which meets the criteria as
prescribed by the PHAB Standards and
Measures.
? Adopt and begin implementation of a
Performance Management System that allows
for the inclusion of measures for the CHIP,
Strategic Plan, and PHD programs.
Objective:
Implement Health in All Policies (HIAP) – a
collaborative approach to improving the health of all
people by incorporating health considerations into
decision-making across the Health and Human
Services Agency (HHSA) sectors and policy areas.
Performance Measures:
? Research and recommend for HHSA adoption a
formal HIAP policy (and corresponding
processes) that applies a health analysis to all
agenda items prior to Board of Supervisors
review.
? Align the HIAP policy and processes with the
Community Health Improvement Plan (CHIP)
so as to be responsive and accountable to
community-identified needs.
? Develop a HIAP cross-departmental team that
will help plan, manage and support the HHSA
HIAP initiative.
? Provide orientation to HHSA Department Heads
on the HIAP policy and processes.
? Develop, support and report on inter-sectoral
partnerships to promote health.
Objective:
Respond to emerging public health issues, including
those identified in our Community Health
Assessment (substance abuse, chronic disease,
access to healthcare and mental health services, and
adequate housing for all). Responses may include
data collection/reporting, convening of the local
public health system, and implementation of specific
strategies.
Performance Measures:
? Work with the Coroner’s Office to determine
actual number of opioid-related deaths in
Nevada County and to identify emerging trends.
? Determine the number of primary care providers
who screen for perinatal substance use, and of
those who screen, the number that refer women
who screen positive for follow-up care.
? Participate in the work of the Placer Nevada
County Medical Society’s Opioid Safety
Coalition, in support of the goal of safe and
improved opioid prescription practices.
? Promote awareness in the community of the
availability of naloxone from a pharmacy
without a prescription, and explore opportunities
for naloxone distribution to high-risk
populations.
Objective:
Prevent and reduce the sale and use of tobacco
products and second-hand smoke exposure among
children and adults through community education,
youth and adult engagement, media, and policy.
Performance Measures:
? At least one jurisdiction in Nevada County will
amend their existing tobacco retail licensing
policy to include a restriction on the sale of
single cigarillos/cigars and/or other new
emerging tobacco products.
? Staff will develop and disseminate two press
releases to local media describing the minimum
packaging campaign and/or highlighting
achievements related to the campaign.
? PHD Staff and Adult Tobacco Coalition (made
up of volunteer community members who are
concerned with tobacco-related issues) members
will provide 6-10 hours of technical assistance to
apartment managers/owners who voluntarily
adopt smoke-free policies.
? PHD Staff and Adult Tobacco Coalition
members will conduct two presentations to
educate community members about the smokefree
multiunit housing campaign and the health, community, and financial benefits of smoke-free
policies.
? The Tobacco Project Coordinator will work with
an external evaluator to complete a Health and
Wellness evaluation report that includes
achievements of shared program goals.
? PHD staff will lend support to the County’s
efforts toward smoke-free campus efforts. This
could include providing educational materials,
technical assistance and signs.
? Support all County smoke-free and tobacco-free
policy initiatives. Support may include technical
support, meeting facilitation or participation, and
educational information.
Objective:
Reduce the risk of underage drinking and drug use
by developing healthy partnerships with young
people, encouraging negative perceptions of peer
alcohol and drug use among youth, and partnering
with the community to reduce access to alcohol in
private settings.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain five active Friday Night Live and Club
Live chapters at middle and high schools in
Grass Valley and Truckee which focus on
engaging youth in substance use prevention.
? Implement additional Club Live Chapter in the
form of a Youth Council. Support the Youth
Council in its goal to prohibit fast-food
restaurants in Grass Valley from selling alcohol.
? Work with the CFDNC to develop a
sustainability plan for projects including the
Positive Community Norms Campaign and the
Committed Campaign efforts.
? Expand the Committed Campaign efforts by
supporting the Athlete Committed (AC) clubs’
presentation of the AC program in three middle
schools, educating up to 1,200 students on the
importance of abstaining from AOD and
maintaining healthy habits that promote peak
academic and athletic performance; gather at
least 500 Parent Committed parent pledges.
Objective:
Address the emotional health needs of teens through
community awareness and therapeutic group support
to decrease at-risk behavior.
Performance Measures:
? Provide support to 20 at-risk youth at Grass
Valley high schools through peer support, risk
behavior reduction, and stress reduction
techniques via Digital Storytelling and Chill
Factor stress groups.
? Facilitate a video voicing storytelling event,
showcasing DigiTales projects as social
advocacy tools to peers and the community.
Objective:
Promote individual, policy, and systems change
relating to the prevention of chronic disease and the
promotion of proper nutrition and exercise.
Performance Measures:
? Promote healthy, active living through direct
education and physical activity lessons to at least
1,000 CalFresh eligible residents, and indirect
nutrition education to 5,200 CalFresh eligible
residents, and demonstrate resulting behavior
changes including the increased consumption of
fruits and vegetables.
? Develop a countywide, three-year work plan that
includes a community assessment, local
objectives, intervention activities, implementing
agencies, a timeframe for completion, and
corresponding evaluation activities.
? Conduct trainings to at least 15 teachers,
multiple childcare providers, and the Interfaith
Food Ministry, thereby increasing the local
capacity to address nutrition education, physical
activity, and wellness polices.
? Organize and host the annual Fruit and Veggie
Fest; reaching 225 SNAP-Ed eligible individuals
to promote the consumption of and access to
healthy foods and increased physical activity.
Objective:
Continue to encourage healthy nutrition, support
breastfeeding, and make appropriate referrals to
community services by providing nutrition education
and WIC vouchers for nutritious food to low-income
pregnant women and young children.
Performance Measures:
? Provide monthly WIC healthy food vouchers to
1,400 WIC participants as directed by the State
WIC Program, and develop outreach to retain
participants through significant recertification
junctions after delivery and one-year birthday.
? Maintain or increase rate of fully breastfed WIC
infants (birth to age 1 year) at 55% of certified
participants.
? Increase rate of fully breastfed WIC infants at
six months to 50%.
Provide at least 60 onsite prenatal and
breastfeeding group classes annually and sustain
high rates of online prenatal education module
completion of greater than 1,000.
? Maintain quarterly individual nutrition education
quarterly contacts, utilizing on-line education at
wichealth.org and PowerPoint presentations with
staff to allow for greater client flexibility.
? Participate in implementing and further
developing the Health and Human Services
Agency’s Warm Handoff Policy at the Brighton
Greens facility.
Objective:
Test the implementation and effectiveness of our
Medical Countermeasures Distribution Plan.
(Medical countermeasures could include the delivery
of vaccines, antibiotics or antitoxins to a broad
population.) The Plan has numerous components,
including drug dispensing strategies.
Performance Measures:
? Provide at least one training to Environmental
Health Department staff, focused on policies,
procedures, and skills necessary for their
department to run a large warehouse of
medications. These skills include working with
a local pharmacy team, receiving supplies from
the Centers for Disease Control, and distributing
medications to various Points of Dispensing
(POD) located throughout the County.
? Conduct a POD exercise in Eastern County to
test how Public Health can best work with
Tahoe Forest Hospital to dispense medications
in a timely manner to local residents. Issues to
be addressed include easy/quick public access,
the increased number of people in the area
during holidays, and jurisdictional issues.
Objective:
Increase community emergency response
preparedness by working with the Nevada County
Superintendent of Schools Office on school safety
planning.
Performance Measures:
? Provide Community Emergency Response Team
(CERT) training to at least 25 students and staff
at Nevada Union High School.
? Conduct an emergency response exercise at
Nevada Union that allows the new CERT members to practice their skills and the
administration to practice using the team.
? Participate in the countywide evaluation of
facility security and implement changes as
recommended by the consultant.
Objective:
Refine the communication procedures within the
healthcare community to ensure a strong
infrastructure, in case of an emergency.
Performance Measures:
? Conduct three call-down drills using the Public
Health call-down list, with at least 70% of those
called responding affirmatively within the first
15 minutes.
? Conduct two call-down drills with Health Care
Facilities using the new Satellite Hotspots, with
at least a 70% response within 30 minutes.
Objective:
Refine protocols used for mapping an event (e.g.,
finding clusters during an infectious disease
outbreak) by using the ESRI mapping system.
Performance Measures:
? Using the ESRI GIS tools that Public Health
Emergency Preparedness has, we will map all
the healthcare facilities in both Eastern and
Western County.
? Test our disease surveillance plan to anticipate
spread of a disease by mapping one infectious
disease outbreak (using all the necessary buffers
to address HIPAA compliance) in either a school
or a long term care facility.
Objective:
The MCAH Program will improve the health of the
Nevada County maternal, infant, child, and
adolescent populations through direct client services,
facilitating access to health and human services, and
collaborating with targeted community members and
organizations.
Performance Measures:
? Provide home visiting services to 120 families
through the MCH PHN and CHVP services.
? Provide in-home cognitive behavioral therapy
services through Moving Beyond Depression
services to 40 eligible families.
Objective:
The Truckee Clinic will maximize operations to
serve uninsured and under-insured county residents who would otherwise have limited access to certain
health services.
Performance Measures:
? Conduct school and community outreach events
to provide health education and information
regarding Truckee Clinic services to 2,100 local
residents and conduct mass marketing events to
3,000 people
? Provide family planning services and education
to 860 clients, including at least 100 teens.
Objective:
The SONP will assess the health of senior and other
disabled clients through targeted nursing services.
Performance Measures:
? Conduct 500 in home visits to evaluate and
monitor the health of clients.
? Conduct three blood pressure clinics monthly in
both Western and Eastern County.
Objective:
Children’s Medical Services will ensure that
clients have adequate access to appropriate medical
care in order to prevent illness or injury, and
coordinate diagnostic procedures, treatment, and
therapy for children with specified disabling medical
conditions, and monitor and improve the health of
children in Foster Care.
Performance Measures:
? Conduct CCS eligibility and case management
services for approximately 340 children,
ensuring that 100% of active cases have a
medical home.
? Provide occupational and physical therapy for
approximately 55 clients, with an average of 145
treatments per month at the MTU.
? Process 3,500 reports from CHDP providers and
ensure that additional diagnostic tests or
treatment plans are implemented.
? Maintain Health Passports for 100 children in
foster care, collaborate with the Independent
Living Program, and conduct trainings for foster
parents and foster family agencies.
Objective:
Client Care Services will prevent and mitigate the
effects of communicable and chronic disease in the
community through the following: (1) promote and
provide immunizations for adults and children; (2)
maintain a system for surveillance, investigation,
and reporting of communicable diseases; and (3)
provide education to prevent lead poisoning and case
management for children with elevated blood lead
levels.
Performance Measures:
? Respond to 100% of communicable disease
reports according to state protocols, with
appropriate investigations, control measures, and
surveillance to minimize illness and death.
? Provide case management services to 100% of
clients with elevated blood lead levels according
to state protocols.
? Provide immunization clinics for infants and
children at least twice per month and adults once
per month in Western County; weekly for
children and adults in Truckee, twice per year in
North San Juan and Washington; and Back to
School and flu clinics seasonally.
? Hold at least three Immunization Coalition
meetings. This coalition (made up of school
staff/administrators, nurses, community clinic
staff, rotary representatives and a pediatrician)
works and strategizes collectively to increase
Nevada County’s childhood immunization rates.
? Actively participate in local and state efforts to
increase Nevada County’s rate of fullyvaccinated
entering kindergarten students to
80%, including the implementation of school
immunization requirements.
Objective:
The HIV Program will improve the health of HIV
positive residents by ensuring they have access to
confidential testing, health care, treatment, and
support services.
Performance Measures:
? Provide free and confidential HIV testing and
counseling to 20 at-risk individuals.
? Provide HIV case management services to 125
clients infected or affected by the HIV disease.
? Assist with short-term rent, mortgage and/or
utility payments for 20 low-income HIV positive
residents.
? Enroll 62 HIV positive clients into the AIDS
Drug Assistance Program to ensure access to
HIV medications.
Objective:
Administer HHSA - Housing operations by
managing the receipt and expenditure of dollars for
the department by continually monitoring financial
status.
Performance Measures:
? Develop a cohesive budget tracking report that
provides a big picture overview of the financial
status of HHSA – Housing programs as well as
drills down into the details to identify any areas
of financial concern.
? Submit invoices to state and federal grantors for
reimbursement within one month of the period
of expenditures ending or the loan being
executed.
? Monitor and manage cash flow in order to
reduce or eliminate negative interest accrual in
individual funds. Objective:
Apply for and manage grants applicable to HHSA -
Housing program activities including affordable
housing, first time homebuyer down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, public
improvements, community development, home
rehabilitation, and community services for lowincome
individuals and families.
Performance Measures:
? Research available funding opportunities and
submit applications for at least three new or
continuation grants.
? Provide timely and accurate grant and program
reports to the State Department of Housing and
Community Services, State Department of
Housing and Community Development, and
USDA – Rural Development.
Objective:
Continue to develop cost effective methods to
efficiently operate all programs within HHSA -
Housing and deliver superior service to the
community with maximum benefit to its low-income
residents.
Performance Measure:
? Increase staff capacity to manage the various
housing programs by making training
opportunities available to staff to enhance their
knowledge of the grant program and financial
guidelines in order to maintain compliance with
federal and state regulations.
? Maximize the use of allocated administrative
and activity grant dollars by:
o Utilizing contracted services to reduce
program operational costs while maintaining
a high-level of public service.
o Partnering with local non-profits to increase
program effectiveness and reduce costs.
Objective:
Provide excellent customer service to Nevada
County’s residents needing housing programs and
assistance.
Performance Measure:
? Monitor service delivery provided by contractors
to ensure timely delivery of program benefits.
? Update all service contracts to include customer
service benchmarks, including response time
and service delivery goals.
Objective:
Provide funding and specialized training to local
nonprofit agencies who deliver critical needs
services to the low-income community of Nevada
County.
Performance Measures:
? Provide annual funding to at least six local
nonprofit service providers by allocating funding
from the CSBG and CDBG programs.
? Facilitate the application process for $15,000 of
Community Initiative Funding and $60,000 of
CSBG funding to local nonprofit service
providers to assist with safety net services for
low-income residents.
? Provide technical assistance for grant and
reporting requirements to the nonprofit agencies
that are awarded CSBG or CDBG funds.
Network with local nonprofit organizations to
maximize CSBG and CDBG funding and avoid
duplication.
Objective:
Assure compliance with CSBG and CDBG
regulations.
Performance Measures:
? Conduct quarterly reviews of CSBG and CDBG
sub-recipients’ financial and reporting
documents.
? Report to the AFSC the status of awardees’
reports, expenditures to date, and compliance
with scope of work as detailed in agreements.
? Continue to develop and implement a subrecipient
monitoring protocol for nonprofit
agencies who receive funding through CSBG
and CDBG.
Objective:
Provide staff support to the Adult & Family Services
Commission (AFSC) and AFSC CSBG Committee.
Performance Measures:
? Review all updated CSD regulations and
guidelines with the AFSC and implement
changes as needed.
? Offer training to the AFSC to meet the Cal/Neva
CSBG Tripartite Board objectives and
regulations.
? Oversee the implementation of the 2016/17
Community Action Plan.
Objective:
Continue to implement and manage the 2014 HOME
grant from the California Department of Housing
and Community Development (HCD) through
collaboration with our community partners.
Performance Measures:
? Assist six low-income first-time homebuyers to
secure a low-interest deferred HOME mortgage.
? Provide one-time rental deposit assistance to 100
low-income families.
? Develop additional community partnerships to
provide assistance to individuals and families in
need of permanent housing solutions.
? Successfully market the program through
contacts with the local real estate companies,
mortgage brokers, and the banking community.
? Collaborate with HHSA and other community
partners to prevent and reduce homelessness,
within program guidelines.
Objective:
Refine strategy to ensure cash flow necessary to
provide the large initial program expenditures
associated with HOME down payment assistance
and avoid negative interest accrual while waiting for
reimbursement from funding agency.
Performance Measures:
? Collaborate with the Auditor/Controller and
CEO’s office to identify solutions to cash flow
issues.
? Continue partnering with the local Nevada
County Association of Realtors to secure a loan
to provide enough cash flow to fund loans to
low-income first time home buyers.
Objective:
Provide housing development and rehabilitation
services for low-income and moderate-income
households by securing and managing federal, state,
and other funds to subsidize mortgages.
Performance Measures:
? Issue four loans for the rehabilitation of singlefamily,
owner-occupied homes of low-income
households.
? Provide six Housing Preservation Grants to
very-low-income households for health and
safety related repairs of their existing homes.
? Continue to provide loan servicing for the
Housing Division’s outstanding loan portfolio.
Objective:
Promote affordable housing and public improvement
programs within Nevada County through
collaboration with community partners.
Performance Measure:
? Continue to research methods and opportunities
to support affordable housing.
? Conduct outreach to local agencies, community
leaders, coalitions, other community partners, and
the Board of Supervisors to seek opportunities,
direction, and objectives of the community.
? Track expenditures for the current Community
Development Block Grant (CDBG) award to
ensure that funds are distributed according tosuccessfully compete for additional funds for
future projects.
? Complete a Fire Flow Feasibility Study in North
San Juan and the majority of groundwork for the
Penn Valley sewer connection project.
? Collaborate with HHSA and other community
agencies to prevent and reduce homelessness.
Objective:
Work cooperatively with local Economic
Development agencies such as the ERC, private
sector, businesses, and local jurisdiction officials to
stimulate, enhance and promote the County’s
economic development, and achieve defined goals.
Performance Measures:
? Engage in consistent communication and
exchange of information with local economic
development agencies, businesses, and
jurisdictions to facilitate business growth and
development within the community.
? Continue efficient fiscal oversight and
management of the Economic Development
Community Partners program by conducting
quarterly reviews of contract expenditures and
reimbursements.
Objective:
Maintain business loan servicing. Monitor debt
service performance and implement timely
corrective action when required.
Performance Measures:
? Track and monitor prior BAP loans on a
monthly basis. Review current performance
status. Follow up with business owners as
needed.
? Restructure delinquent or under performing
loans on a quarterly basis and take appropriate
legal action as needed.
? Apply for additional funding as it becomes
available.
Objective:
To provide a superior level of fiscal and
administrative oversight and support to the
operations of the IGS Department.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain a master calendar for budget
development and financial management.
? Meet quarterly with managers to review budget
status.
? Document administrative procedures and
provide cross-training of staff to ensure
continuity of operations.
? Provide timely and accurate billings for IGS
services to County departments.
Objective:
To enhance customer care services through strategic
alignment, project management and communication
channels.
Performance Measures:
? Provide at least 50 technology training sessions
to County staff to raise the level of expertise on
desktop tools, new technology and productivity
techniques.
? Provide increased training opportunities through
self-service user groups and increased web and
video resources.
? Enhance public and county staff customer
communication with an updated Infonet site,
newsletters, tips and regular status meetings with
department staff.
? Update and maintain the IGS Service Directory.
? Update the three year Information and
Communication Technology plan.
Objective:
Support the initiation of the project to replace of the
Property Tax System through project management,
data conversion, and report development.
Performance Measures:
? Convert data from the old system to the new
system.
? In collaboration with the vendor and the enduser
offices (Assessor, Auditor-Controller, and
Treasurer-Tax Collector), install and test the
new software.
? Develop reports and interfaces in order to ensure
the new system meets all of the specified
requirements.
Objective:
The County’s current voice-over-internet-protocol
(VOIP) phone system is at the end of life and
requires replacement. Telephony replacement
options will be evaluated, the selected option will be
procured, and the replacement will be implemented
in two phases, each covering approximately half of
the County phone users.
Performance Measures:
? Pepare a request for proposals to select a vendor
for the new phone system by November 1, 2016.
? Implement phase one of the new system by June
1, 2017.
? Implement phase two of the new system in
Fiscal 2017-18. 
designated
Objective:
Improve the productivity of, and collaboration and
communication among, County employees and third
parties through implementation of technology
improvements.
Performance Measures:
? Deploy a system for tracking and allocating
Human Resources expenses that are charged
directly to to County departments.
? Implement an internal collaboration toolset such
as for chat and person-to-person video.
? Implment MySites.
? Train and empower users to use a new secure file
transfer solution to enable remote workers and
vendors to securely share County files.
Objective:
Design and launch a justice information exchange
platform to improve processes and secure
collaboration between all internal and external justice
partners.
Performance Measures:
? Automate several critical paper-based forms that
provide the foundation for information exchange
between all the justice partners.
? Coordinate the secure sharing and/or distribution
of case evidence among all justice partners.
? Expand and enhance enterprise reporting
cabability utilizing web-based dashboards.
Objective:
Encrypt data at rest for all servers in our central
virtual server environment in order to protect County
data from loss due to theft of hardware.
Performance Measures:
? Plan transition of storage from current hardware
to new encrypted disks.
? Complete implementation by December 2016.
Objective:
Refresh the MyNevadaCounty.com public website.
Performance Measures:
? Upgrade the technical platform to the vendor’s
latest version.
? Restructure the look and feel and usability to
increase public engagement.
Objective:
Improve the County’s overall cybersecurity posture
and assess IT related risks.
Performance Measures:
? Complete all NIST cybersecurity framework
category item assesments and complete an IT
risk registery.
? Preform quarterly network vulnerability testing.
? Update County IT security policies.
? Improve vendor remote support access processes
and policies. and guidelines in order to 
Objective:
Assist the Assessor’s Mapping Operation to utilize
new GIS Collaborative Tools
Performance Measures:
? Utilize a single standard and software to
maintain all parcel boundries.
Objective:
Rebuild and launch the Employee Map Portal into
the same software standard as MyNeighborhood web
tool.
Performance Measures:
? Provide GIS web tools that do not require third
party plug ins for any browsers or users.
Objective:
Expand GIS’s role in providing expertise for support
and processes with the new land management smf
property tax software.
Performance Measure:
? Successfully pair GIS reporting and querying
solutions with the land management software
suite and the new property tax system.
? Integrate the Parcel Report to complement tools
in the land management system.
Objective:
To maintain an Institutional Fiber Optic Network (INet)
that will provide high-speed connectivity for
data transmission and PEG broadcasting between
public institutions.
Performance Measures:
? Provide 100% operational support of I-Net
services.
? Maintain high levels of availability and
reliability of the I-Net.
Objective:
To provide a high level of franchise administration
and customer service for Cable TV subscribers.
Performance Measures:
? Achieve 100% citizen request follow-up and
ensuring local cable operator presence and
responsiveness.
Objective:
To ensure government business remains transparent
and is accessible to the public.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain 100% digital Internet live streaming
and video on demand services of the meetings
for citizens’ home access.
? Broadcast live government meetings.
? Support the partnership with NCDMC for
broadcasting government programs.
Objective:
To provide a high level of service hosting PEG
broadcasting and Internet streaming infrastructure.
Performance Measure:
? Maintain a 99% uptime and overall operational
performance level.

Objective:
Ensure excellence in Central Services mail services
provided to County departments by improving
operational procedures to increase efficiency.
Performance Measures:
? Provide training to County staff on how to
correctly use the US Postal Service and Nevada
County mail room service.
? Look for additional cost saving opportunities for
departments in mailing services.
Objective:
Ensure that high quality and cost- effective resources
continue to be available to meet the needs of all
County departments for document printing, copying,
scanning and faxing, including specialized printing
services.
Performance Measures:
? Promote effective business process improvement
through the use of scanning, workflow
automation and SharePoint integration with the
multi-function device fleet.
Objective:
Provide quality customer care through effective
communication and services.
Performance Measures:
? Review and update the IGS InfoNet portal page
as needed to educate County staff on products
and services.
? Provide a live voice to answer the main Nevada
County information telephone line to assist
members of the public.
? Maintain the Rood Center lobby greeter program
during peak hours to assist members of the
public for information related to all County
departments.
Objective:
Ensure continued funding to meet the emergency
preparedness and response needs of the Nevada
County Office of Emergency Services and its partner
agencies and organizations that are engaged in
preparedness and first-responder activities.
Performance Measures:
? Secure and administer emergency preparedness
grants, including those that have traditionally
been received by the County as well as applying
through the Pre-Disaster Mitigation Grant
Program for funding to update the current
Nevada County Local Hazard Mitigation
Program.
? Fulfill all the requirements of current grants,
including completion of 100% of all grant
purchases in accordance with appropriate grant
guidance.
? Collaborate with other agencies (public safety
and non-profit) with disaster preparedness
responsibilities to identify needed programs and
activities.
Objective:
Complete the update the Emergency Operations Plan
and initiate the update of the Local Hazard
Mitigation Plan.
Performance Measures:
? Seek Board of Supervisors approval of each
completed plan.
? Pursue Cal OES and FEMA approval of each
plan.
? Publish and distribute the approved plan to
jurisdictions located in Nevada County.
Objective:
Enhance neighborhood readiness to respond to
emergency evacuation orders.
Performance Measures:
? Planning and execution of a functional exercise
involving a selected County neighborhood.
? Coordinate the participation of local first
responder agencies and the American Red Cross.
? Activation of the EOC with associated County
personnel during the simulated evacuation.
Objective:
Improve the appearance of the exterior landscape of
County facilities to include drought tolerant plants
and irrigation system.
Performance Measures:
? Install water conservation measures at all
County facilities.
? Improve landscape and irrigation to provide for
an attractive, low maintenance, and drought
tolerant landscape.
Objective:
Develop a maintenance schedule and budget plan for
addressing deferred maintenance by prioritizing
projects and focusing on projects that can be
completed within this year’s budget.
Performance Measures:
? Compile a complete list of deferred maintenance
projects.
? Complete deferred maintenance items that can
be funded with any savings realized throughout
the year.
? Use PG&E on-bill financing to help reduce
deferred maintenance.
Objective:
Evaluate all County facilities to assess compliance
with the requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) and plan for ADA
improvements to be incorporated in current and
future budgets.
Performance Measures:
? In collaboration with the County Risk Manager,
develop an updated ADA facility self-evaluation
and transition plan.
? With the assistance of FREED, and a CASp
professional perform an ADA evaluation of all
County Facilities.
? Complete a transition plan to identify costs and
projected dates of completion.
Objective:
Support the Capital Facilities Subcommittee.
Performance Measures:
? Hold monthly Capital Facilities Subcommittee
meetings.
? Provide support for projects being brought to the
Committee for consideration.
Objective:
Advance the design and financial planning toward
development of the Nevada County Operations
Center.
Performance Measures:
? Determine property space allocation to end users.
? Complete the bid process and start construction.
? In collaboration with the County Executive
Office and the Community Development Agency,
develop a funding and financing plan for the
planned development.
Objective:
Relocate the Public Defender into the Probation
Building.
Performance Measures:
? Develop space planning for the departments.
? Perform necessary improvements.
? Relocate Public Defenders Office.
Objective:
Complete implementation of the County Energy
Conservation and Solar Energy Generation Project
Performance Measures:
? Implement the planned projects, which shall
include deferred maintenance projects.
Objective:
Promote the Airport to the aviation community and
the general public.
Performance Measures:
? Host at least four school field trips and showcase
the Airport in at least one local school event.
? Host twelve Airport-sponsored public “display
days.”
? Participate in at least one radio interview and
two presentations for community organizations.
? Submit at least one article to the local news
media.
Objective:
Manage and operate the Nevada County Airport in a
manner that ensures a financially viable and vital
future.
Performance Measures:
? Manage the Airport without General Fund
subsidy.
? Increase permanently based aircraft by 5% (6-7
aircraft).
? Increase transient aircraft visits by 3%.
? Solicit proposals for construction of 8 new
hangars.
Objective:
Manage and develop Airport property to provide
safe and enjoyable facilities for aviators and the
general public.
Performance Measures:
? Complete construction of the perimeter fence
and gate upgrade project no later than December
1, 2016.
? Secure funding for development of an Airport
café.
? Begin renovation of the Airport terminal and
construction of an Airport café to be operational
by October, 2017.
Objective:
Continue to meet or exceed user expectations with
the high quality of library materials and digital
offerings, while continuing to add new library users.
Performance Measures:
? Increase library card holders by 5% through
marketing and promotional efforts in
collaboration with the Friends of the Library
groups.
? Increase 2015/2016 circulation levels for
physical materials by 5%.
? Increase circulation of e-resources, including the
downloadable eBook and audio book collection
on OverDrive, by 20%.
? Increase user awareness of Library online
services through targeted marketing and
outreach efforts.
Objective:
Increase utilization of library services and
participation in library activities and programs.
Performance Measures:
? Market in non-traditional venues and methods to
draw in new library users.
? Complete a facility update to the lower level of
the Grass Valley Library to include a teen space
and improved usability of the children’s room.
? Create a strategic technology plan for the
Collaborative Technology Center and Mobile
Technology Center that will guide the allocation
of resources for technology and services.
Objective:
Cultivate a knowledgeable, productive and capable
patron-centered workforce providing quality
collections, literacy services, and programming,
meeting the public’s needs in a gracious and helpful
manner.
Performance Measures:
? Continue creating a cleaner and clearer staff
policy and process manual.
? Hold one in-house training for all staff during an
All Staff meeting on a topic of customer service,
new technology, or upcoming user needs.
? Encourage continuing education for staff
through free and archived library webinars.
Objective:
Identify and promote the historical resources of
Nevada County.
Performance Measures:
? Explore the use of social media to promote the
work of the Commission.
? Develop a cooperative relationship with the
South Yuba Land Trust to promote the work of
the Commission.
? Maintain and update the interactive map and our
website.
? Continue to distribute rack card flyers.
? Continue field trips to get first-hand look at
places of historical value.
Objective:
Obtain Landmark status for the historical resources
of Nevada County.
Performance Measures:
? Develop and install plaque at the Wolf Post
Office site.
? Work with the custodians of the historic Jewish
cemeteries to obtain landmark status.
? Participate in research leading toward historic
landmark designation and possible plaque
installation for Truckee Veterans Memorial
Building, and other sites.
? Devise a process for obtaining landmark
designation for historic mining communities.
Objective:
Continue transition of conflict cases from panel
attorneys to contracted attorneys.
Performance Measures:
? Increase participation of qualified contract
attorneys.
Objective:
Continue to review, analyze and assess appropriate
data and costs associated with the various County
insurance programs to insure they are the most cost
effective and beneficial plans available.
Performance Measures:
? Review all financial data pertaining to the
respective programs by 12/31/16.
? Identify any internal or external processes where
efficiencies or workflows can be improved.
Objective:
Continue to work with departments through the
County Safety Committee on safety related issues.
Performance Measures:
? In conjunction with the National Safety Council,
promote June as National Safety Month
benefiting employees and the public.
? Foster and promote meaningful safety training
by quality safety matter experts.
Objective:
Continue implementing smoke free campuses policy
at all County locations.
Performance Measures:
? Institute smoke free policy at Eric Rood
Administration Center by 12/30/16.
Objective:
Physically inspect County property in order to
accurately report and validate current value for
reinsurance purposes.
Performance Measures:
? Review current data on facility valuations and
prioritize for review by 9-30-16.
? Physically inspect higher priority properties and
assess accuracy of current valuation by
12-31-16.
? Make recommendations for changes as
appropriate within 30 days from inspection.
Objective:
Complete valuation of heavy equipment property
inventory.
Performance Measures:
? Classify all heavy equipment according to
CSAC’s guidelines.
? Determine replacement values based on State
procurement standards.
? Revise property schedules by 6-30-17.
Objective:
Focus efforts on injury prevention through safety
awareness of all County employees, especially new
hires.
Performance Measures:
? Continue to work with Nevada County Safety
Committee on training needs on a countywide
basis.
? Identify and analyze areas of training that need
enhancement or strengthening.
? Participate in new hire orientation.
? Provide ongoing support and resources to
departments in an effort to further strengthen
their safety programs.
Objective:
Maintain safe and secure facilities and work
environments for employees, customers/clients.
Performance Measures:
? Conduct county-wide safety inspections on an
annual basis.
? As requested, conduct employee ergonomic
evaluations with 72 hours of request.
Objective:
Evaluate the industrial injury claims for safety trend
development.
Performance Measures:
? Continue to review claim history on a monthly
basis to determine existence of safety issues and
what remedial efforts were undertaken to correct
risks.
? Monitor risk exposure and make
recommendations as needed.
Objective:
Evaluate all department safety protocols and security
procedures to determine if they are up to date and
compliant with OSHA regulations.
Performance Measures:
? Determine if there are any areas of the program
needing improvement or procedure updating and
make recommendations as needed by 12/31/16.
Objective:
Maintain safe and secure facilities for employees
and customers/clients.
Performance Measures:
? Conduct regular safety inspections on a
quarterly basis.
? Address any safety concerns & make corrections
or enhancements as needed within 30 days of
inspection.
Objective:
Address the lack of employment and vocational
training opportunities available to clients with felony
criminal record.
Performance Measures:
? Secure a contract with NCCT (Northern
California Construction Training).
? Perform risk/needs assessments on 100% of
adult supervision population.
? Based on needs assessment, refer 100% of
population to vocational training where
employment is a top three criminogenic need.
? Track the completion, employment and
recidivism outcomes of all clients participating
in vocational training.
Objective:
Address the lack of a high school diploma or
equivalency with our adult supervision population.
Performance Measures:
? Perform risk/needs assessments with 100% of
adult supervision population.
? Based on needs assessment, refer 100% of
population to Nevada County Adult Education
whether in or out of custody.
? Track the completion outcomes and recidivism
outcomes for all clients referred for their high
school diploma or equivalency.
Objective:
Address the need for essential Pro-Social
programming for juveniles under supervision and in
detention.
Performance Measures:
? Secure a contract with NEO (New Events and
Opportunities) for pro-social programming.
? Perform risk/needs assessments on 100% of
juveniles referred based on a law enforcement
citation.
? Based on needs assessment, refer 100% of
juveniles to NEO for a minimum of six prosocial
groups.
? Track the program engagement outcomes and
post law enforcement contacts for those referred
to NEO.
Objective:
Address the need for temporary transitional housing
for high risk adult offenders.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain contract beds for clients in need of
transitional housing.
? Perform risk/needs assessments on 100% of
adult supervision population
? Based on needs assessment, refer 100% of
population to transitional housing to stabilize
their housing needs.
? Track the recidivism outcomes for those referred
to transitional housing.
Objective:
Maximize the usage of the Juvenile Hall by
introducing a new and innovative approach to
rehabilitation for our youth.
Performance Measures:
? Apply for pilot program sponsored by Chief
Probation Officers of California to house 18-21
year old youth.
? Develop three programmatic strategies to target
18-21 year old youth.
? Collaborate with HHSA and Community Based
Organizations to develop reentry services in and
out of detention in the Juvenile Hall.
Objective:
Continue to address SB 124 Solitary Confinement
Performance Measures:
? Monthly check of room time policy by the
Policy Review Team.
? Monthly report of total number of room time
hours given.
? Monthly report of total number of room time
ordered by staff.
Objective:
Implement and maintain evidenced based practices
to give minors exposure to proven programming to
improve life skills, reduce ‘hands on’ incidents and
achieve academic milestones.
Performance Measures:
? 100% of youth receive an assessment and case
plan.
? Track 100% of minor’s programming
participation.
? Link data and statistical reports to track
programming success to behavioral incidents
and recidivism outcomes.
? Reduce “hands on” incidents by 25% over the
prior year.
? 100% of youth given a pre and post academic
test scores to track positive improvement.
Objective:
Facilitate a change of Department location to County
owned property.
Performance Measures:
? Work with the established team to plan and
implement the build out of the location.
? Work proactively with the move planning team
to resolve any logistical issues and
programmatic constraints early in the process.
? Collaborate with Information Systems staff on
technology improvement and implementation. Reduce, scan and purge archived files located
both in office and in outside storage facilities.
Objective:
Explore a closer working relationship with the
Health and Human Services Agency to improve
recidivism rates and fill gaps in services to indigent
members of the community.
Performance Measures:
? The department head will attend the HHSA
department head meetings as frequently as
possible but no less than once a month.
? Work with HHSA to identify gaps in services
and potential solutions.
? Work with HHSA to identify programs and
services that can be leveraged by the Public
Defender’s office to aid in reducing recidivism.
? Collaborate with HHSA regarding services and
solutions for our clients.
Objective:
Meet the standards and requirements of our
profession and the 6th amendment by providing
quality legal assistance to our clients timely and
efficiently.
Performance Measures:
? Continue to assign 100% of clients to an
attorney within 24 hours of discovery receipt.
? Continue to staff “in-custody” arraignment
calendars.
? Work with the court on staffing the “out-ofcustody”
arraignment calendar. The office has
recently begun having an administrative staff
member present at this calendar. It has already
proven to increase efficiency.
? Continue to schedule 75% of client interviews
with assigned attorney within 48 hours, if in
custody, and less than 3 weeks if out of custody.
? With changes in the misdemeanor caseload and
court calendar, we look forward to interacting
with the District Attorneys and the Courts to
resolve matters quickly. We continue to assert
appropriate protections for our clients, but also
join in efforts to fashion appropriate case
resolutions that protect our citizens and offer
paths for our clients to improve their lives.
Objective:
Promote education in the community regarding the
justice system and alternate courts.
Performance Measures:
? Public Defenders by nature desire to promote
alternatives to aberrant behavior. Reaching out
and educating our youth is most important, but
the Public Defender staff has shown an overall
commitment to help our clients and facilitate a
better direction. The playing field has changed
dramatically in the past couple of years, and we
hope to join with Probation to quantify the
impact of our supervisorial and rehabilitative
efforts.
? Continue participation in community activities
such as Law Day, Peer Court, Mock Trials, and
Veteran’s Stand Down.
? Continue with our outreach on Laura’s Law.
? Continue educating our community on the traffic
amnesty program and the Proposition 47
conviction reductions.
? Begin education outreach on the situations under
which felons can vote. It is widely believed that
a felony conviction prohibits one from voting.
While that is true in many states, in California,
most felons are eligible to vote.
Objective:
Improve the training of the attorneys on emerging
topics in indigent defense.
Performance Measures:
? Both forensic and behavioral sciences, as they
are utilized in a courtroom, have had dramatic
changes and advances. Attorneys must keep upto-
date in their field.
? Ensure that attorneys are sent to up-to-date
trainings. They can then bring the knowledge
they learn back to the office and educate their
colleagues.
? Many training organizations offer scholarships
to full time indigent defense lawyers. Attorneys
will be encouraged to look for and apply for
these scholarships to attend cutting edge
trainings.
Objective:
Continue to work on increasing alternative methods
for the public to access our services.
Performance Measure:
? Creation and implementation of Appointment
Scheduler for public to schedule their own
appointments for LiveScan, Concealed Weapons
Permits, and Registrants.
? Reduction of phone calls and direct personnel
time spent on scheduling appointments.
? Direct use of the PDF fillable forms by the
public to obtain the information they desire, and
reduction of the associated time spent by
personnel in providing those forms directly.
Objective:
Complete the DNA/Latent Print Project by
remodeling of the Sheriff’s Property Unit to
accommodate on site DNA testing and Latent Print
review.
Performance Measure:
? Complete Remodel of the Sheriff’s Property
Unit for DNA and Latent Print processing while
assuring standard evidentiary work practices and
work safety requirements.
? Purchase and install equipment identified by
staff as necessary for DNA and Latent Print
processing.
? Increase the efficiency and shorten time frames
from months or years for suspect identification
on criminal cases.
Objective:
Continue to increase awareness of abuse of
prescription medications, synthesized drugs, and the
manufacturing of butane honey oil labs in Nevada
County.
Performance Measure:
? Actively track incidents of illegal use, overdose,
sales and possession to establish a benchmark.
? Successfully establish a working partnership
with federal agencies.
Objective:
Continue to increase illegal drug awareness in local
middle and high schools.
Performance Measure:
? Continue to utilize the Narcotics Task Force
along with the School Resource Officers to
complete a minimum of one on-site presentation
for each local area middle and high school per
year.
? Successful collaboration with the Community
Recovery Resources and other local public
safety agencies to assist in making presentations.
Objective:
Increase awareness to illegal underage drinking in
local schools.
Performance Measure:
? Re-apply and obtain the ABC grant to offset
costs.
? Utilize School Resource Officers and deputies to
complete school presentations for all schools in
the County.
? School Resource Officers and deputies assist
CHP with presenting the “Every 15 Minutes”
program at NUHS and BRHS.
Objective:
Maintain the quality of service provided to the
community and reduce the call response time.
Performance Measure:
? Selection of 2 Neighborhood Watch deputies.
? Create a Unified SWAT team with other local
agencies.
? Track response times to calls for service and
reduce by 5%.
Objective:
Utilize the State maintained databases to aid in
major case management and ensure cases of a
sensitive nature are investigated thoroughly and
evidence is submitted within the new statutory
requirements.
Performance Measure:
? Completion of trainings geared towards crime
scene evidence identification and collection.
? Catalog, inventory and scan all homicide cases
(solved and unsolved) in the MCU records room
and publish the list for cross-reference purposes.
? Develop a list of cold cases ranked by priority
based on their solvability (e.g. suspect known,
DNA available etc.).
? Input all missing person’s cases over a year-old
into NaMUS system and collect biometrics,
dental and DNA from appropriate sources
(Phased Project).
Objective:
Identify the feasibility of adding an additional
console to the Regional Dispatch Center.
Performance Measures:
? Identify possible vendors capable of performing
the project.
? Complete the bid process from multiple vendors
from different disciplines to obtain pricing
guidelines.
? Demonstrate the need for funds to the Board of
Supervisors to obtain BOS approval.
? Develop a timeline for successful completion of
the project.
Objective:
Reduce the number of non-emergency business calls
coming into the Regional Dispatch Center, and track
those call types while improving customer service.
Performance Measures:
? Complete the reconfiguration of relevant phone
lines.
? Maintain monthly statistics to examine the call
volume on non-emergency business calls being
routed through from all participating agencies
within the Regional Dispatch Center.
? All non-emergency business calls are answered
by Sheriff’s Office Rood Building office staff
during normal business hours.
? Minimize the time callers are placed on hold,
freeing up 9-1-1 Dispatchers to handle
emergency calls.
? Continue work on the phone system with
County Information Services and AT&T.
Objective:
Recruit and staff current open positions.
Performance Measures:
? Complete the hiring process for two (2) new
Sheriff’s Dispatchers.
? Complete training for two (2) new Sheriff’s
Dispatchers.
? Reductions in overtime on shifts currently
covered solely by overtime.
Objective:
Purchase and replace a Battery Back-up for the
Sheriff Office Truckee substation to ensure radio
transmissions from going down in the event of a
power failure.
Performance Measures:
? Complete the installation, configuration and
testing of new Battery Backup system.
? Track seamless equipment use during power
failures, assuring all Field Units can
communicate with the Regional Dispatch
Center.
? Track seamless equipment use during power
failures, assuring the Truckee Jail does not lose
the ability to keep the facility secure.
Objective:
Maintain positive customer satisfaction for Dispatch
Services by continuing high levels of
communications with participants and the
community.
Performance Measures:
? Continue quarterly meetings with participant
agencies and addressing any concerns or issues
raised.
? Provide detailed information to participants on
bi annual reconciliations and the budgeting
process.
? Continue monitoring and responding to the
Customer Satisfaction survey system which has
been in place for over one year.
Objective:
Continue to provide clean, safe and humane
detention facilities that meet or exceed the California
Code of Regulations, Title 15 and Title 24
requirements as well as other applicable governing
codes and laws.
Performance Measures:
? Provide adequate levels of trained staff on all
shifts as determined by the Board of State and
Community Corrections.
? Provide inmate commissary consistent with
WBCF policies and procedures.
Objective:
Efficiently manage jail population to avoid jail
overcrowding in Truckee.
Performance Measures:
? Work closely with the local court and allied law
enforcement agencies to help manage presentence
inmates so as not to exceed 90%
capacity.
? All time sensitive and/or medically sensitive
inmates are transferred to the WBCF.
? No inmate to spend more than 4 consecutive
days (96 hours) in the Truckee jail.
Objective:
Continued effective and efficient monitoring and
resolution of suspicious, threatening or dangerous
activities within the courthouse.
Performance Measures:
? Have a minimal number of events that affect
security for the judicial and court staff as well as
the general public.
? Provide security for “high risk” trials to prevent
harm to judicial personnel as well as the public
and prevent attempted escapes.
Objective:
Eliminate the risk of violence to staff or inmates
while transporting prisoners.
Performance Measures:
? No incidents of violence to transportation staff
during transportation.
? No incidents of violence to inmates during
transportation.
? No incidents of violence to court staff or the
general public during movements of inmates.
Objective:
Reduce the amount of contraband entering the
facility from outside sources utilizing a monthly
tracking system to establish a benchmark within 6
months.
Performance Measures:
? Reduce incoming contraband by 10% from
established benchmark.
? Reduced number of incidents of under the
influence by the same 10% measure.
Objective:
Efficiently manage jail population to prevent jail
overcrowding.
Performance Measures:
? Effectively utilize and expand numbers of
inmates utilizing available out-of-custody
programs and keep total population below 85%
of the rated capacity.
? Work closely with the local courts to help
reduce pre-sentence population by 5%.
Objective:
Continue partnership with the US Marshals Service
to utilize our available bed space, as this nonguaranteed
revenue funding source has become an
essential component of balancing the Sheriff’s
Office budget.
Performance Measures:
? Maintain an average of 48 federal inmates
without limiting bed space available for local
and AB 109 prisoners.
? Ensure our facility meets or exceeds the
standards set forth by the US Marshal Service.
Objective:
Continue to provide safe, therapeutic, professional
quality health care that meets or exceeds the
California Standard Authority regulation, Title 15
mandates, and Institute of Medical Quality
Standards for Inmates incarcerated within the
Nevada County Jails.
Performance Measures:
? Remain free of medically based lawsuits for
2016-2017.
? Lessen the workload on the physician’s assistant
by 10%, through deferment of inmate long-term
and chronic care issues and assessment to the
staff physician.
? Through better communications with inmates,
decrease the number of medical grievances by
10%.
? Successful accreditation through the Institute of
Medical Quality Standards.
Objective:
Facilitate a smooth transition into the community for
our mentally ill population.
Performance Measures:
? Continue work with Sierra Nevada Memorial
Hospital’s mental health working group to help
transition all mental health patients coming into
and out of custody.
? CFMG to successfully develop and implement
the Aggressive Outpatient Treatment team to
ensure all patients are followed-up with upon
release.
Objective:
Review and recommend updates to the County
Codes for Animal Control.
Performance Measures:
? County Codes accurately reflect State law.
? County Codes accurately reflect the needs of the
County and the citizens.
Objective:
Create “Hobby Breeder” as an alternative to
Commercial Breeder permits and requirements, in
cooperation with the Planning Department.
Performance Measures:
? Establish a definition of Hobby Breeder.
? Establish overall needs for Nevada County.
? Present a Resolution to the Board of
Supervisors.
Objective:
Increase training and education for all Animal
Control Officers.
Performance Measures:
? Successful attendance of one Animal Control
Officer at the Animal Care Conference.
? Successful attendance of two Animal Control
Officers at the Advanced Animal Law Academy.
Objective:
To efficiently and effectively provide collection,
custody, investment, and cash management services
to the County Departments, schools, and special
districts.
Performance Measures:
? Deposit 100% of checks received within 24-
hours.
? Manage cash flow needs daily and align
investment durations as needed to ensure that
cash is available 100% of the time.
? Secure investments that are in compliance 100%
of the time to avoid potentially costly premature
selling of securities.
Objective:
Provide exemplary service to all County taxpayers,
and businesses through education and assistance in
regards to secured and unsecured property tax billing
and the collection process.
Performance Measures:
? Monitor and update the website daily for 24/7
timely and accurate information provided to the
public.
? Respond to all taxpayer inquiries within 24-
hours.
? Process 95% or more of daily incoming tax
payments within 24-hours.
? Offer and promote payment plans to all
taxpayers who qualify.
? Provide continued education on property tax
laws through tax time press releases and mailers.
? Provide in-person tax payment services to
Eastern County residents during peak tax times.
? Make site visits to the business communities for
business owners to personally inquire about the
tax process.
Objective:
Bring in a more robust electronic payment
processing vendor in order to increase the number of
payments received electronically, countywide, thus
reducing staff time processing payments and
allowing more customer payment options.
Performance Measures:
? Work with county departments wanting
electronic payments means to determine specific
needs.
? Develop and issue a Request for Proposal to
effectively select the optimum solution.
? Implement new electronic payment system by
Fall 2016.
Objective:
To continue to pursue new and clean up legislation
in the areas of treasury management and property tax
collection to improve upon outdated practices and
allow for more streamlined, technologically
advanced processes and procedures.
Performance Measures:
? Pass legislation that allows other means of
timely payment besides a US postmark as so
many taxpayers are using electronic means of
payment.
? Pass legislation that allows for internet
publication to decrease costs of publications.
? Monitor current legislation and September 2016
roll out of the Senior Property Tax
Postponement Program to assure that it best
serves the need of our taxpayers.
Objective:
To successfully implement the new property tax
system in order to better serve county taxpayers with
a more efficient and effective property tax
administration process.
Performance Measures:
? Provide staff with proper training to effectively
use and understand the functions of the property
tax system
? Collaborate with Assessor, Auditor-Controller
and Information Systems staff on the
functionality and performance of the new system
to provide more efficiency.
? Fully utilize the advanced technology by
eliminating current manual processes and
expanding tax bill processing options to include
remittance processing and electronic billing.
