The base budget represents a 14% NCC reduction compared
to the FY 2011-12 NCC limit.
The Orange County District Attorney's Office (OCDA) has
been in a glide down mode and has implemented significant
reductions over the last three years including layoffs, temporary
layoffs, furloughs, pay cuts, and deleting a total of 76
positions: 15 prosecutor, 33 investigative, and 28 support
positions. Significant increases to the base budget were
avoided through a minor restructure of staffing and workflow.
Continued evaluation of the restructure of staffing in
business processes enables the Office to function with fewer
prosecutors and investigators. As a result of higher than
anticipated Prop 172 revenue, pension prepayment savings,
continued cost cutting measures by deferring and reducing
expenses in services, supplies, and equipment, and eliminating
non-essential travel and training, the NCC request for
FY 12-13 is 14% lower than the FY 2011-12 NCC limit at
$2.1M.
The FY 2012-13 Budget with augmentation request represents
continued operation at the FY 2011-12 reduced level of
staffing and cost cutting measures by deferring and reducing
expenses in services, supplies, and equipment and eliminating
non-essential travel and training. Staff of the OCDA are
interdependent and integrated. As a result of additional staff
losses through attrition, the OCDA has reached a tipping
point where further cuts are unsustainable and could
directly impact public safety. To meet the FY 2012-13 NCC
limit, the OCDA submitted one augmentation request of $2.1
million to restore approximately 19 positions to meet basic
prosecution demands and provide Orange County residents
and visitors with a safe community.
The OCDA continues to handle approximately 80,000
criminal cases each year. To avoid significant increases
to the base budget, the OCDA implemented an officewide
restructure changing the manner by which some
cases are prosecuted including workflow and business
process changes to enable the Office to function with
fewer prosecutors and investigators.
¦ The advance of DNA technology is bringing an unprecedented
number of cold hit DNA cases into the criminal
justice system. OCDA receives approximately 60 cold hit
cases per month requiring significant resources to
review and investigate. These cold hits often identify
violent offenders and may implicate statute of limitations
so that immediate attention is paramount for public
safety. As DNA technology expands, the number of
perpetrators identified by DNA cold hits will continue to
increase.
¦ Continue to evaluate staffing levels to ensure sufficient
resources are available to address both the volume and
complexity of caseloads. Caseload demands are managed
through staff rotations and in some instances use
of volunteer staff. The Office has successfully utilized
volunteer attorneys through the Trial Attorney Partnership
(TAP) program whereby experienced private attorneys
are trained and deputized to prosecute certain
types of misdemeanor cases while temporarily assigned
to the Office.
¦ Continue to exercise fiscal prudence and closely monitor
revenues and expenses. The OCDA has implemented
significant reductions over the last three years to offset
Prop 172 revenue shortfalls and mitigate NCC required.
The FY 2012-13 budget includes a transfer out of 100%
of the Office’s Fund 14J FBA or $4.4 million to fund
existing positions. Further, the Office endured additional
staff losses through attrition. To cope with the
loss of staff, the OCDA has implemented a variety of initiatives
to reduce the resources required to prosecute
certain type of cases.
¦ Continue to work collaboratively with CEO/Budget
Office and highlight variances and issues, which may
impact budget requirements.
OCATT continued to experience a large number of
investigations involving identity-theft and fraudulent
credit applications to purchase lease vehicles at dealerships.
¦ OCATT also continued to investigate and prosecute
"chop shops" (locations where stolen vehicles are
stripped and dismantled, and/or identifying numbers
are changed); vehicle insurance fraud; and cases involving
stolen motorcycles.
Continued foreclosures, even at a lower level than in FY
2009/2010 will likely result in allegations of fraud by so
called loan modification specialists. Most of these entities
are fraud mills that generate illegal upfront fees
from victim distressed homeowners.
The FY 2012-13 Proposed Budget for Grand Jury services
includes $514,026 in appropriations offset by net county
cost, which is $85,214 less than FY 2011-12 modified budget
of $599,240. The reduction in the Grand Jury Budget is due
to a reduction in administrative support staff from two position
to one as requested by the Orange County Superior
Courts. The OC Superior Courts will provide staffing support
during the absence of the dedicated administrative staff support
position. The budget includes appropriations to cover
partial staffing cost during the year.
The base budget includes the $85,214 technical augmentation
rolled into base to reduce the Grand Jury budget.
As per the Memorandum of Understanding between the
County and OC Superior Courts, the County reimburses
the Court for costs incurred for this program. The FY
2012-13 Proposed Budget for Grand Jury services
includes $514,026 in appropriations offset by net county
cost.
FY 2012-13 Proposed Budget for Juvenile Justice Commission
services include $166,431 appropriations and net
county cost, which is $6,863 more than FY 2011-12 modified
budget of $159,568. The increase in Juvenile Justice Commission
Budget is due to anticipated increase and reallocation
of resources by Orange County Superior Courts.
The base budget includes the $6,863 technical augmentation
rolled into base to increase Juvenile Justice Commission
budget.
As per Memorandum of Understanding between the
County and OC Superior Courts, the County reimburses
the Court for costs incurred for this program. FY 2012-
13 Proposed Budget for Juvenile Justice Commission
services include $166,431 appropriations and net
county cost.
FY 2012-13 Proposed Budget for Detention Release services
include $1,482,919 appropriations, $9,000 revenue, and
$1,473,919 net county cost. The FY 2012-13 Proposed Budget
is $60,316 more than FY 2011-12 modified budget of
$1,413,603. The increase in Detention Release Budget is due
to anticipated increase and reallocation of resources by
Orange County Superior Courts.
The base budget includes the $60,316 technical augmentation
rolled into base to increase Detention Release Services
budget.
As per Memorandum of Understanding between the
County and OC Superior Courts, the County reimburses
the Court for costs incurred for this program.
¦ FY 2012-13 Proposed Budget for Detention Release services
include $1,482,919 appropriations, $9,000 revenue,
and $1,473,919 net county cost.
Probation's base budget includes many initiatives to ensure
NCC requirements are met. Through the new mandates presented
by the state in Public Safety Realignment commencing
this year, the Department successfully added sixty sworn
staff positions during FY 11-12. This action has positioned
the Department well to meet FY 12-13 requirements.
Uncertainty brought about by state funding changes continues
as we move to the coming year. Pending State budget
issues could have a dramatic, as yet unknown, impact on
Departmental operations. Probation continues to deliberately
and necessarily evolve its operations model in accordance
with best practices in Juvenile detention and
Probation field supervision. Quantitative measures within
the Balanced Scorecard help reinforce Probation personnel to focus on the right activities to reduce recidivism and
achieve the Department's mission. The Department is, with
proposed staff of 1,446 for FY 12-13, at the leanest level of
personnel possible to achieve its goals. Further detail can be
found in the Staffing Highlights section.
Ensure the most efficient and effective use of staff
resources by continuing to review and modify commitments
of existing resources. The Balanced Scorecard
and Evidence-Based Practices initiatives are being used
as measures in this effort.Continue to manage budget
shortfalls without compromising the level of services
needed to ensure public safety, as well as the health and
security of juveniles in the custody of the Probation
Department. Service delivery business models have
been and may continue to be changed accordingly. The
Department continuously pursues opportunities to
integrate smoothly with the Courts, other County agencies
and community law enforcement and stakeholders.
¦ Continue to migrate from Probation's aging technological
infrastructure to ensure ongoing compatibility with
collaborative state, county, and local agencies. Probation
has taken a leadership role in the County IT "Enterprise
Forest" and depends on this relationship to reduce
IT cost of its business operations.
¦ Continue to devote the necessary resources to continue
progress toward the department's strategic plan to support
its Integrated Case Management System (ICMS).
¦ Pursue grant opportunities to help fund needed department-
wide services.
The Public Defender requests reduce and restore augmentations
in the amount of $2.4m in order to continue to maintain
our current level of service. This is necessary in order
for the department to continue to accept appointment of
cases from the Superior Court of Orange County.
During FY 2009-10 and 2010-11 the department deleted 22
attorney positions and 24 support staff positions for a total
of 46 deleted positions. The department currently requests a
reduce and restore augmentations for FY 12-13. These augmentations
involve 28 positions (14 attorneys and 14 support
staff) to reduce and restore. These 28 positions are
separate and distinct from the 46 positions previously
deleted over the past few years. If the augmentation were not
restored, the Public Defender would be required to declare
unavailability on approximately 5,850 cases which would
then be referred to private counsel at a higher rate for service.
The Public Defender has also included a separate augmentation
for the 5% VLF reduction plan. This reduction plan
would include an additional 36 positions (17 attorney and 19
support staff) to be deleted if the VLF reduction plan were to
be implemented. If the augmentation were not restored, the
Public Defender would be required to declare unavailability
on approximately 7,100 additional cases which would then
be referred to private counsel at a higher rate for service.
Public Defender services are core business functions mandated
by law. The Public Defender has one function which is
to represent clients under appointment by the courts. The
Public Defender budget is approximately 92% salaries and
benefits; therefore, any reductions would result in further
staff reductions throughout the department. The Offices of
the Public Defender cannot continue to accept appointment
of cases unless attorney staff and support staff are available
to adequately and effectively represent these clients. If these
staff reductions were to occur, the department would have to
begin reducing caseloads immediately. The Public Defender
would become unavailable on as many as 13,000 cases. The
court would then be obligated to appoint private attorneys at
County expense which would far exceed the savings estimated
in this reduction plan.
Background
The Public Defender has a legal and ethical obligation to represent
clients who lack the resources to hire an attorney, as
appointed by the courts. All persons charged in criminal
cases are entitled to be represented by counsel at all stages of
proceedings as guaranteed by the Sixth and Fourteenth
Amendments to the United States Constitution, Article I,
Section 15 of the California Constitution, and Penal Code
section 987. Indigent defendants are entitled to courtappointed
counsel, and the courts are required to appoint
the Public Defender unless the Public Defender is unavailable
(Pen. Code Section 987.2(d).) Thus, Public Defender
services are mandated. If the Public Defender becomes
unavailable, the courts are required to appoint other counsel
at County expense (Pen. Code Section 987.2).
"To render reasonably competent assistance, an attorney in a
criminal case must perform certain basic duties... Generally
the Sixth Amendment and article I, section 15 requires
counsel's 'diligence and active participation in the full and
effective preparation of his client's case.'" (People v. Pope
(1979) 23 Cal. 3rd 412,424-425). Section II of the California
State Bar Guidelines on Indigent Defense Service Delivery
Systems (2006) deals with standards of representation. To be "reasonably competent" staff attorneys must "discharge[d]
the following responsibilities in a timely manner: (1) thoroughly
interviewing the clients; (2) obtaining discovery; (3)
conducting an in-depth factual inquiry (including an investigation
if called for); 4) performing all necessary legal
research; (5) preserving evidence; (6) securing the appointment
of and utilizing necessary expert witnesses; (7)
informing the client of critical developments in the preparation
of the case; (8) bringing proper legal motions and doing
whatever else is necessary to protect each client’s legal rights;
(9) otherwise preparing for trial or disposition; (10) being
aware of and exploring alternatives to sentencing as well as
possible and probable sentences; (11) being aware of and
investigating direct and collateral consequences of various
dispositional alternatives (including but not limited to
immigration consequences) and accurately advising the client
of such alternatives; and (12) advising clients of appellate
rights and maintaining clients’ confidences in compliance
with Rule 3-100 of the California Rules of Professional Conduct."
To meet the requirements of "reasonable" competence
the number of cases an individual deputy public defender
can handle is finite, and the caseloads of staff attorneys are
already at or very near that limit.
Section VII of the State Bar Guidelines states: "Indigent
defense providers shall not accept nor be burdened with
excessive workloads that compromise the ability of the provider
to render competent and quality representation in a
timely manner, without the risk of damaging the mental/
physical health and motivation of the providers." Subsection
B of section VII states in part: "Chief Defenders bear the
responsibility for assuring that workloads are not excessive
in volume for any institutional public defender employee."
Later it states: "Chief Defenders are responsible for causing
the health of the workforce to be monitored to avoid burnout
and damage to employees. ...Should a Chief Defender determine
that the combination of the existing and incoming
workload exceeds the capacity of institutional defender
employees (all of them not only lawyers) to provide necessary
services in a competent fashion in a timely manner and
without unduly risking the health of the defender workforce,
it is incumbent upon such Chief Defender to secure the additional
resources necessary or to refuse to accept that portion
of the incoming workload that exceeds the capacity of the
defender program. Failure of a Chief Defender to effectively
address workloads may result in personal liability for an
adverse civil judgement and jeopardize the right of the Chief
Defender to practice law in any capacity."
The Offices of the Public Defender provide high quality
legal representation in a cost effective manner. People
who come before the court in criminal, juvenile, dependency,
and mental health matters are entitled by law to
have counsel appointed to represent them when they
lack the resources to hire an attorney. This right arises
from the United States Constitution, the California Constitution,
Penal Code Section 987, and other statutes.
¦ The Public Defender is under directive of the Board of
Supervisors to continue to accept cases appointed by
the courts and not to declare unavailability (or unavailability
based upon excessive caseloads) without first
notifying the CEO and Board of Supervisors.
¦ The Public Defender remains committed to the mission
and goals set out in the department's Business Plan.
The services provided continue to be based upon the
ethical, practical, and efficient values that are consistent
with the County policies and procedures under the
direction of the strategic initiatives and sound business
practice guidelines.
Negotiated Salary and Benefits adjustments and rate
increase in Worker's Compensation Insurance and Property
& Liability Insurance.
Prop 172 Public Safety Sales Tax revenue, the largest
single funding source for the Department, has recently
indicated signs of improvement compared to the last
three years. However, the slight increase in Prop 172
revenue is not significant enough to offset the following
expenditure/revenue shortfalls:
? Operational costs continue to increase in the areas of
Salaries and Employee Benefits, Workers' Compensation
Insurance, Property & Liability Insurance, fuel,
and food as well as other Services and Supply contracts.
? A decrease in Immigration & Customs Enforcement
(ICE) and the U.S. Marshal revenues, due to lower
than anticipated contracts and decrease in bed occupancy
as a result of AB 109 realignment.
? The 4th Floor of the Central Men's Jail was re-opened
during the beginning of FY 2011-12, due to the
increase in inmate population and the relocation of
AB 109 prisoners to County jail facilities.
? The Central Women's Jail was re-opened in early April
2012.
? Elimination of the Vehicle License Fee Revenue, as a
result of the State budget cuts, affected the County's
General Fund and reduced 060 Net County Cost by
approximately $8 million.
¦ To mitigate the financial challenges, the Department
will continue to search for ways to reduce expenditures
without impacting public safety, as well as to enhance
revenues by providing services for a fee using existing
resources.
Emergency Management is increasingly reliant on
information systems to produce detailed information
during disaster response, such as automated detection
for radiation plumes, rapid damage assessment tools
and the ability to produce a common operational picture
for all levels of government. Technical support is
now required to manage the informational systems
used in everyday emergencies. Moving forward, high
tech solutions will be required to address catastrophic
emergencies.
¦ Emergency Management is leading the effort to improve
emergency planning for people with disabilities, access
and functional needs through a collaborative effort,
which includes the building of partnerships with private,
non-profit and advocacy groups.
¦ Emergency Management continues to work on planning,
preparing and training for yearly emergency exercises,
including those related to the San Onofre Nuclear
Generating Station.
¦ Emergency Management continues to improve current
Emergency Plans (County and Operational Area Emergency
Operations Plan, Hazard Mitigation Plan, San
Onofre Nuclear Generating Station (SONGS)) and
Annexes (Weapons of Mass Destruction, Aviation
Disaster) and develop new Annexes (Mass Evacuation,
Volunteer Management, County/Operational Area
Recovery).
¦ Emergency Management continues to lead the County/
Operational Area on the implementation of the National
Incident Management System for all Emergency Plans
and training for all County staff.
¦ Emergency Management is responsible for maintaining
the County/Operational Area Emergency Operations
Center in a constant state of readiness (per County
Board Ordinance) for activation and exercises.
¦ Emergency Management continues to receive a high
number of requests for public education and preparedness
expos, which fall into an unfunded area. There is
no staff dedicated to working with the unincorporated
County area residents and community groups. This is
an area in which requests will continue to increase as
incidents and emergency situations increase.
The Sheriff's Department Court Operations Division
continues to experience growth in the public's demand
for services in the Warrants and Civil Process activities
even while available General Fund monies have diminished.
Over the last three fiscal years, clerical staff in
both Warrants and Civil Process have been reduced by
three and four positions respectively. As of March 2011,
there are 154,730 active warrants in Orange County.
Warrant staff struggles to meet statutory due diligence
requirements for the increased workload and staffing
reductions. Likewise, due to the current economic condition,
wage garnishment and eviction cases on the civil
side have increased by close to 25% in the same period
that support staffing has been reduced by nearly 20%.
While the Warrant Services Unit will be transferred to
Homeland Security for FY 12-13, Court Operations
Division is hoping to restore Civil Process clerical positions in the coming fiscal year and to assign those positions
to ensure there is not a recurrence of process
backlogs and client complaints.
¦ Assembly Bill 118, effective July 1, 2011 made certain
changes to the manner in which Court Security services
are funded. Funds for Court Security come directly to
the County from the State and have been deposited in a
unique Trial Court Security Account. This account will
be "billed" each month for reimbursement of all allowable
security costs as detailed by the Sheriff ’s Department.
State funding for Court Security is stable for the
next four fiscal years. Superior Court and the Sheriff
will continue to negotiate a staffing and security plan, in
which the Court is no longer in the middle of the flow of
funding.
¦ The Sheriff's Court Operations Division continues to
maintain a working partnership with the Superior
Court and will seek to maximize security services while
working within available funding levels.
Interoperable communications for First Responders.
Digital audio and video recording systems and services.
¦ Video conferencing/visitation and distance learning.
¦ Federal Communications Commission (FCC) required
Narrowbanding project.
¦ System life extension program to extend useful life of
the 800 MHz CCCS network and subscriber fleet.
FY 2012-13 grant funding reduced 92% or $630,609 from FY
2011-12.
Orange County and Southern California continue to be
the pipeline for major drug trafficking organizations
(MDTO’s) bringing their methamphetamine into the
United States. Once in the Southern California area, the
methamphetamine is sometimes cleaned up with a process
called "Icing" which involves the washing of the
methamphetamine with solvent. This process allows
the methamphetamine to be sold for a better price. The
presence of methamphetamine manufacturing labs in
Southern California has dropped; however, the Meth
Lab Team continues to find several of these "Icing" labs
in and around Orange County. The drug cartels have
moved some of their production down into Mexico,
where they can access the precursor chemicals needed
for the manufacture of methamphetamine.
¦ During 2011, PROACT continued to focus on disrupting
the drug trafficking organizations in the facilitation,
manufacturing and distribution of methamphetamine.
PROACT has worked extensively with Federal agencies,
as well as local law enforcement in establishing a wiretap
investigation (OLVERA), which involves a large
Mexican drug trafficking organization. Through our
investigative and enforcement efforts, the Department
has identified several members of this organization
which is connected to the La Familia gang in Mexico.
This organization is involved in transporting large
amounts of methamphetamine from Mexico and distributing
it to northern California, Kansas, Nevada and
Texas. PROACT has seized 6.5 lbs. of methamphetamine
and $35,000 in U.S. currency from this group and
expects to Federally indict over 20 people related to this
investigation.
The County Automated Fingerprint Identification Fund is a
self-balancing budget with restrictive revenue from Court
Fines and from Fund 14D - CAL-ID Operational Costs. The
base budget includes a transfer in from Fund 14D to Fund
109 in the amount of $660,000 as a contingency to fund
operational costs in Fund 109 when revenue is insufficient to
offset the expenditures for that year.
The trend continues to shift from traditional fingerprint
identification databases to multi-modal biometric identification
systems, capable of storing several types of
physical features for identification. Fingerprints, facial
images, iris patterns, and voice patterns are among the
biometric modalities being considered by local law
enforcement to maximize the ability to identify criminals.
¦ The inability of disparate local, state, national, and
international identification systems to communicate
with one another is no longer the obstacle it once was.
The momentum is in the direction of interoperability,
being able to search an incompatible system and allowing
incompatible systems to search our local data.
¦ These trends will impact the Cal-ID operation, resulting
in more technically skilled staff with a more diverse skill
set.
The Regional Narcotics Suppression Program (RNSP) fund
is a self-balancing budget with restricted revenue. The Base
Budget includes a balancing entry to reflect over-financing
to match anticipated Fund Balance Available at year-end.
This budget is intended to fund services and supplies and to
reimburse overtime costs worked by participating agencies.
The FY 2012-13 Budget is higher than the FY 2011-12 yearend
projections, as a result of fund balance available carry
forward that will be used in the future to replace equipment
and to fund new items to fight the war on drugs.
Escalating violence along the southwest border area of
Mexico continues as the control of narcotic trafficking
routes into the United States strengthens. This violence
has a direct impact on the domestic market. Seizures of
methamphetamine and cocaine have stabilized as the
market shows an increase in heroin and marijuana seizures.
RNSP continues to impact these organizations in
the areas of narcotic and U.S. currency seizures targeting
both narcotic and money laundering organizations.
Mexican Drug Trafficking Organizations (DTO) continues
to be the primary large-scale drug traffickers in the
Southern California Region.
¦ In addition to the violence in Mexico, RNSP continues
to experience resistance from drug/money couriers, as
well as the shift to female drivers/couriers in an effort to
deceive border patrol and local surveillance teams.
¦ RNSP continues to experience and investigate major
drug trafficking/money laundering organizations utilizing
electronic money transfers as a means of transporting
currency across state and international lines.
The Sheriff's Narcotics Program (SNP) fund is a self-balancing
budget with restricted revenue. The Base Budget
includes a balancing entry to reflect over-financing to match
anticipated Fund Balance Available at year-end. This budget
is intended to fund services and supplies, overtime reimbursements,
equipment and lease cost for part of the Brad
Gates Forensic Science Building. The FY 2012-13 Budget is
higher than the FY 2011-12 year-end projections, as a result
of fund balance available carry forward that will be used in
future years for costs to fight the war on drugs.
In 2011, the Sheriff ’s Narcotics Program continued to
lead the County in the area of storefront marijuana dispensary
investigations. The continued success of these
investigations and prosecutions has resulted in a significant
decrease in marijuana storefront operations.
Additionally, these efforts have attracted the attention of
the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) who
recently joined in the enforcement regarding marijuana
storefronts. Based upon the information gathered
through the countless hours of enforcement actions
taken, the DEA has recently begun a series of actions
which has resulted in over 90% reduction of operating
marijuana dispensaries in the Sheriff ’s jurisdiction.
¦ The continued high demand for marijuana has maintained
a high volume of illegal marijuana trafficking. A
by-product of this activity is indoor marijuana growing
operations. Sheriff ’s Narcotics Details have seen a continuous
countywide rise in the number of indoor marijuana
growing operations, bringing with them a list of
dangerous hazards to law enforcement personnel. Electrocution,
fire, carbon dioxide and mold are the most
significant threats to law enforcement, as they attempt
to reduce the number of these dangerous high profit
clandestine operations.
¦ Another significant trend is the trafficking of narcotics
through parcel, freight and mass transit carriers.
Recently, the Sheriff ’s Narcotics Program has been
working with the United States Postal Service, the
United Parcel Service, the Department of Homeland
Security, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the
Drug Enforcement Administration in an effort to
increase enforcement in these areas. Due to the high
volume business in these areas and increased law
enforcement efforts in more traditional locations of
trafficking, the Sheriff ’s Narcotics Program has seen an
increase in narcotics trafficking in this area. Through
increased efforts at John Wayne Airport, the Sheriff ’s
Narcotics Program has seized over ten pounds of
cocaine and almost a half million dollars in currency in
the past six months. These enforcement efforts have
also seen similar success in their interdiction related to
U.S. mail, parcels and freight. This trend has a direct
effect on narcotics and their proceeds trafficked
through Orange County.
The Orange County Jail Fund is a self-balancing budget with
restricted revenue. This budget is intended to assist in jail
operational costs. Annually, it reimburses $1.2 million to
Budget Control 060 to partially offset positions added in
1989 for expansion of the Theo Lacy Branch Jail and when
additional funds are available, it reimburses one-time jail
expenditures. The FY 2012-13 Base Budget includes transfers
of $2 million to Budget Control 060 in support of the revenue
shortfall.
The Traffic Violator fund is a self-balancing budget. The
Base Budget includes a balancing entry to reflect overfinancing
to match anticipated Fund Balance Available at
year-end. This budget is intended to fund services and supplies
and reimburse personnel costs associated with the
Traffic Violator Apprehension Program.
The Sheriff's SCAAP Fund is a self-balancing budget with
restricted revenue. This budget is intended to fund costs for
correctional purposes. In the past, reserves were estimated
in anticipation of future revenue shortfalls. All reserves or
unallocated funds have been expended to partially offset the
reduction in Immigration Customs and Enforcement (ICE),
U.S. Marshal and other revenues.
SCAAP funding is subject to annual budget approval by
the Federal Government. In past years, there has been
discussion at the Federal level of discontinuing this
funding source. However, in each of the years, the Federal
Government did approve the funding at a reduced
level. Since this funding source could be eliminated, in
prior years the Department had kept fund balances sufficient
to cover ongoing costs for five years. As a result of
the economic challenge that has negatively impacted
Budget Control 060, the Fund Balance Available in Budget
Control 13P has been utilized to offset the revenue
shortfall in the Sheriff's Main Operating Budget. Therefore,
fund balances are no longer available to offset
future year's anticipated costs.
The Sheriff-Coroner Replacement and Maintenance Fund is
a self-balancing budget with restricted revenue. The Base
Budget includes a balancing entry to reflect anticipated Fund
Balance Available at year-end. The FY 2012-13 budget is
higher than FY 2011-12 projections, due to the planned
replacement and major maintenance requirements of key
Department equipment scheduled to occur following FY
2011-12.
The key trends in mobile computing are the enhancements
to connection speed, reliability, coverage and
security. The Mobile Data Computer (MDC) Project will
continue to remain in the forefront of these advancements.
¦ The Department will continue to plan strategically and
to identify any other major equipment replacement and
maintenance items to be included in this Fund, in order
to maintain future operational needs of the Department.
The Sheriff's Substation Fee Program is a self-balancing
budget with restricted revenue. The developer deposit fees
received will be used for the future construction of a Sheriff's
substation. The FY 2012-13 budget is higher than the FY
2011-12 year-end projection, as the construction has been
deferred to future years.
The existing substation is severely overcrowded. Future
population growth in South Orange County will exacerbate
the need for additional space.
The Jail Commissary Fund is a self-balancing budget with
restricted revenue. This budget is intended to fund commissary
product and operational costs. The FY 2012-13 budget
is higher than FY 2011-12 year-end projections, as a result of
fund balance available carry forward to be utilized for the
purchase of commissary product and operational costs in
future years.
The decrease in revenues related to the reduced inmate
population and the economic downturn continued during
the first few months of FY 2011-12. Recently, the
number of County inmates and Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE) Detainees has increased
slightly and State Realignment AB 109 agreements were
implemented. These occurrences have resulted in
increased Jail Commissary profits.
The Inmate Welfare Fund is a self-balancing budget with
restricted revenue. This budget is intended to fund inmate
program and operational costs. The FY 2012-13 budget is
higher than the FY 2011-12 year-end projection, as a result
of fund balance available carry forward to be utilized for
inmate program and operational costs in future years.
The decrease in revenues related to the reduced inmate
population and the economic downturn continued during
the first few months of FY 2011-12. Recently, the
number of County inmates and Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE) Detainees has increased
slightly and State Realignment AB 109 agreements were
implemented. These occurrences have resulted in
increased telephone commissions, profit transfer from
Jail Commissary and education contracts related to the
additional inmate/detainee population.
The CAL-ID Operational Costs Fund is a self-balancing budget
with restricted revenue. The Base Budget includes a balancing
entry to reflect anticipated Fund Balance Available
that will be used for future operating costs for CAL-ID. The
budget is intended to fund operational costs in Fund 109
when revenue is insufficient to offset the expenditures for
that year. The FY 2012-13 budget includes a transfer to Fund
109 from Fund 14D in the amount of $660,000 as a contingency
to fund operational costs in Fund 109.
The trend continues to shift from traditional fingerprint
identification databases to multi-modal biometric identification
systems, capable of storing several types of
physical features for identification. Fingerprints, facial
images, iris patterns, and voice patterns are among the
biometric modalities being considered by local law
enforcement to maximize the ability to identify criminals.
¦ The inability of disparate local, state, national, and
international identification systems to communicate
with one another is no longer the obstacle it once was.
The momentum is in the direction of interoperability,
being able to search an incompatible system and allowing
incompatible systems to search our local data.
¦ These trends will impact the Cal-ID operation, resulting
in more technically skilled staff with a more diverse skill
set.
The CAL-ID System Costs Fund is a self-balancing budget
with restricted revenue. The Base Budget includes a balancing
entry to reflect anticipated Fund Balance Available at
year-end which will be used in the future to replace, expand
or upgrade the CAL-ID System.
The trend continues to shift from traditional fingerprint
identification databases to multi-modal biometric identification
systems, capable of storing several types of
physical features for identification. Fingerprints, facial
images, iris patterns, and voice patterns are among the
biometric modalities being considered by local law
enforcement to maximize the ability to identify criminals.
¦ The inability of disparate local, state, national, and
international identification systems to communicate
with one another is no longer the obstacle it once was.
The momentum is in the direction of interoperability,
being able to search an incompatible system and allowing
incompatible systems to search our local data.
¦ These trends will impact the Cal-ID operation, resulting
in more technically skilled staff with a more diverse skill
set.
The Sheriff's Supplemental Law Enforcement Services Fund
is a self-balancing budget with restricted revenue. This budget
supplements jail operations and construction costs, as
well as supports front-line law enforcement in the unincorporated
areas of Orange County.
This funding source is subject to State budget approval
each year. It is anticipated that the State will continue to
approve these funds in the future, but unknown as to
the level of funding.
FY 2012-13 Proposed Budget for Alternate Defense services
include $6,889,218 appropriations, $188,000 revenue, and
$6,701,218 net county cost. The FY 2012-13 Proposed Budget
is $18,035 more than FY 2011-12 modified budget of
$6,683,183. The increase in Alternate Defense services Budget
is due to anticipated increase and reallocation of
resources by Orange County Superior Courts.
The base budget includes the $18,035 technical augmentation
rolled into base to increase Alternate Defense services
Budget.
As per Memorandum of Understanding between the
County and OC Superior Courts, the County reimburses
the Court for costs incurred for this program. FY 2012-
13 Proposed Budget for Alternate Defense services
include $6,889,218 appropriations, $188,000 revenue,
and $6,701,218 net county cost.
FY 2012-13 Net County Cost (NCC) for Trial Court 081 is
$38,102,402, which is $434,775 less than NCC limits due to
ongoing revenue increase ($1.8M) from State Audit findings
offset by ongoing increase in State AB233 MOE payment
($0.9M), increase in supplemental judicial benefits ($0.4M),
and increase in earthquake insurance($0.1M).
FY 2012-13 $65,687,943 Appropriations include (1)
$54,449,487 AB233 MOE payment to the State, (2)
$4,632,785 SB1732 County Facility Payment (CFP) to State,
(3) Excess AB233 MOE payment to State $1,000,000, (4)
Supplemental Judicial Benefits $2,139,900, and the balance
$3,465,771 consist of Victim Witness Services, County share
of cost for Laguna Hills Lease and insurance, and earthquake
insurance cost for court facilities.
California State Controller completed the Court Revenue
Audit for FY 2003-04 through FY 2008-09. These actual
audit findings were implemented in FY 2011-12. These audit
findings did not address incorrect allocation of revenue during
FY 2009-10, FY 2010-11, and FY 2011-12. The total
impact of the prior year audit findings will result in one-time
revenue increase of $10.2 million and one-time appropriation
increase by $7 million in FY 2011-12. The ongoing
impact of these audit findings will increase ongoing revenue
by $1.8 million offset by ongoing increase in Excess MOE
appropriations by $0.9 million.
Orange County has experienced a substantial decrease
in Court statutory fines, fees, and penalty revenue in
Trial Court Fund 081. FY 2010-11 actual revenue was
$11.7 million less than FY 07-08 actual. FY 2011-12
actual revenue is estimated to be higher due to the
implementation of the $10.2 million correction of prior
year revenue allocation to Trial Court Budget 081. The
County is monitoring these impacts closely.
OC Community Resources has complied with zero-growth
Net County Cost limits as well as the 5% Net County Cost
VLF reduction contingency plan augmentation by reductions
in Services and Supplies costs and by maximizing the
use of existing Federal Workforce Investment funding, Measure
M2 funding, and State Department of Aging funding
sources. To address potential reductions as the result of the
elimination of Redevelopment, the baseline budget includes
a technical augmentation to transfer of one Administrative
Manager I position from 15G to 100-012.
OC Animal Care's appropriations include $100,000 for
design and development costs of the new animal shelter.
The FY 2012-13 OC Community Resources' budget continues
to face the economic challenges of increased
costs of maintaining services while utilizing existing
services and decreases in Net County Cost funding. As
the result of increasing salaries and employee benefits
and services and supplies costs, OC Community
Resources reduced expenditures where possible and
consequently will be subsisting on a lean budget.
Fund 106 Budget for FY 2012-13 decreased by $614,222
compared to FY 2011-12, owing primarily to decrease in
budget for services and supplies.
For FY 2012-13 it is anticipated that it will not be necessary
for Fund 106 to budget an operating transfer in
from OC Parks Operating Fund, 405 in order to fund
capital projects or operating expenses in Newport Tidelands.
¦ In past years, OC Parks has budgeted similar operating
transfers from Fund 405 to Fund 106 in order to pay for
capital projects and operating expenses in Fund 106. In
current years, operating transfers from Fund 405 to
Fund 106 were not required due to decrease in capital
projects and operating expenses.
Library capital improvement projects are contingent upon
available funding. Capital projects budgeted in FY 12-13
include the San Clemente branch remodel and expansion
project, Los Alamitos HVAC (Heating, Ventilation, and Air
Conditioning) replacement project, and the Costa Mesa/
Donald Dungan roof beam replacement project.
Funding provided for the San Clemente Branch expansion is
primarily from Library Fee Developer Deposits, San Clemente
Friends of the Library Group, and from the City of San
Clemente.
Library branch facilities will continue to be maintained
and upgrades and enhancements will be provided contingent
upon available funding. In FY 12-13, building
improvements and energy efficiency upgrades will be
carried out to increase energy conservation and productivity.
Facilities maintenance costs are continued to be maintained
at the reduced level since FY 10-11. Priority will be given to
health and safety issues, standing maintenance contracts
and facility preservation.
The Radio Frequency ID project was on a three year deployment
schedule and is continued to be deferred since FY 10-
11. The deployment will commence contingent upon available
funding.
Under the guidance of the Library Advisory Board, OC Public
Libraries is directed to establish a general reserve equal to
10% of the operating budget. OC Public Libraries has also
historically contributed to reserve balances for equipment
refresh and vehicle replacement. The FY 12-13 recommended
base budget does not include contribution to the
general reserve; however, it includes $500,000 contribution
to the equipment reserve to prepare for a replacement of
public-use computers scheduled in FY 13-14.
Library services to County residents continue to expand
and improve. Non-traditional library materials such as
electronic reference tools, ebooks and e-audiobooks are
being utilized to meet the changing demands of the
community.
¦ OC Public Libraries will undertake major actions in
almost every area of operations to increase and improve
customer services. Citizen access to information (both
printed and in electronic format), branch physical
improvements, and service program improvements are
all planned to be the subject of significant changes and
enhancements.
¦ Full integration of the enhanced OC Public Libraries
automated system with state of the art technology such
as the capability for users to download audio books will
be continued, and online access to a historical images
database of digitized historical photos of Orange County
will be expanded in addition to direct text database
access 24/7 for Internet users via the OC Public Libraries'
website and online reference assistance. At the same
time, the collection of print materials will be expanded
to meet the continuing public demand for new books.
¦ Internal operations and efficiency will be improved by a
series of actions, including the expansion of a comprehensive
training program for staff members utilizing
existing County programs, OC Public Libraries initiatives,
and library professional programs. These would
be linked to individuals' performance goals to meet
departmental objectives. The contributions of OC Public
Libraries' Friends of the Library groups will continue
to enhance and expand County funded library services.
¦ Work with the Library Advisory Board will proceed to
achieve the maximum amount of involvement and input
from member cities and develop a long-range strategy
for specific future service enhancements.
¦ In coming years, OC Public Libraries will be required to
deal with changes in user demographics, technological
advances and the resulting issues that accompany the
booming technology, including varying the methodology of information retrieval. The library as it stands
today cannot rely on the standard statistical harvesting,
but must find other measures to describe productivity.
OC Public Libraries has the facilities, the material
resources, and more importantly, the resourcefulness
and talent of our staff to meet current and future challenges.
The FY 12-13 budget reflects approximately $230,000
decrease from the Modified FY 2011-12 Budget. This is due
to decreases in court fees anticipated in FY 12-13 based on
actual revenue receipts in FY 2011-12.
The FY 2012-13 baseline reflects a decrease of approximately
$1 million from the FY 2011-12 Modified Budget. This is due
to the fund no will longer receiving revenues from HCA
starting FY 2012-13 as this program is in the process of
winding down.
The FY 2012-13 budget reflects a decrease of $722,646 from
the Modified FY 11-12 budget as the fund is not expected to
receive any additional Federal department of Labor grant
funding in FY 2012-13. This fund will be requested to be
closed during FY 2012-13.
The Workforce Investment Act budget reflect a $2.1 million
increase compared to the FY 2011-12 Modified Budget. This
increase is due to additional Federal Workforce Investment
Act revenues that are projected to be received in FY 12-13.
Fund 15F was established during FY 2010-11 to separately
recognize Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) revenues and expenditures for rental assistance
programs. Positions and appropriations were
previously budgeted and recognized in OC Housing fund
15G. Fund 15F also includes over $120 million recognized
for Housing Authority Payments (HAP), which was previously
processed and disbursed through an external bank
account. In FY 2012-13, the baseline budget in fund 15F includes
approximately $14.3 million for Housing Assistance Payments
to other Housing Authorities - the Portability program,
which was not budgeted in FY 2011-12. This increase
is part of the continuing transition of the establishment of
15F as a separate entity of the OC Housing Authority.
Between 2000 and 2003, the Housing Assistance Division
successfully competed for and received over 2,200
additional Housing Vouchers and expanded its rental
assistance capacity by 30% to over 9,600 households.
Since that time, there have been no opportunities to
apply for additional Housing Choice Vouchers for waiting
list clients nationwide. Funding for the program has
also changed from an actual cost to a budget based
methodology. Budget limitations in 2005 and 2006 limited
Orange County Housing Authority's ability to maximize
lease-up. However, the Division continued to
exceed HUD's high performer lease-up standards of
97% and was over 98% over the past two years.
¦ Appropriations for 2012-13 will be sufficient to maintain
optimum lease-up with a goal to exceed 98% (at
least 9,582 families).
¦ The Shelter Plus Care program has continued to expand
since 1999 and now includes 13 grants targeted to assist
approximately 485 disabled households with more than
$5 million in annual rental assistance funding for the
homeless. The program is expected to assist 20 to 25
additional families annually as the Division applies for
at least one new grant each year and applies for annual
renewal grants for those expiring after five years. By
March 2012, the program was assisting over 600 households.
¦ During 2009, HUD invited OCHA to apply for 70 Housing
Choice Vouchers dedicated to the Veterans Affairs
Supportive Housing (VASH) Program. Case Managers at
the Long Beach Veterans Affairs center select eligible
veterans participating in a five year program for supportive
services and refer them to OCHA for rental
assistance. OCHA was awarded VASH Vouchers in October
2010 and an additional 75 Housing Choice Vouchers
in 2011. By April 2012, a total of 218 veterans were
receiving housing assistance using VASH Vouchers and
OCHA has the capacity of assisting up to 370 veteran
households.
The FY 2012-13 baseline budget reflects an increase of $94
million for Redevelopment activities consistent with the
Board-approved Amended Enforceable Obligation Payment
Schedule (EOPS). Final Redevelopment activities will be
determined by the approval of the final Recognized Obligation
Payment Schedule (ROPS).
The FY 2012-13 baseline budget assumes that Federal funding,
including Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG) and HOME funding will decrease a combined total
of approximately 26% from FY 2011-12 budgeted levels. OC
Community Resources/OC Community Services plans to
address these decreases by reorganizing funding in
impacted areas including reallocating costs, shifting positions
and resources to other areas with OC Community
Resources, reducing services and supplies, and deferral of
discretionary expenditures.
The FY 2012-13 OC Housing budget continues to face
the economic challenges of increased costs of maintaining
services and decreases in Federal funds and elimination
of Redevelopment funding. As a result, OC
Community Services reduced expenditures where possible
including the transfer of positions.
The baseline budget reflects $45,480 increase from the Modified
2011-12 Budget. This increase is due to the carryover of
unused Fund Balance Available funds that are re-budgeted
in FY 2012-13.
Fund 15K has approximately $109,000 available, from interest
earnings, to pay for maintenance of the wetlands mitigation
area established in Limestone Regional Park.
No major changes are being proposed in the FY 2012-13
budget. However, this fund will begin the process of being
closed during FY 2012-13 as there will no additional transactions
will be processed in this fund and the fund is no
longer needed by OC Housing Authority.
No major changes are being proposed in the FY 2012-13
baseline budget. This budget remains consistent with the FY
2011-12 Modified Budget.
$700,000 decrease in Fund 405 object 1402 minor park
maintenance projects budget for FY 2012-13 compared to FY
2011-12.
$1.3 million increase in Fund 405 object 1400 budget for
park landscape maintenance contract costs in FY 2012-13,
compared to FY 2011-12. This is a result of OC Parks plan to
establish new landscape maintenance contracts at five existing
park facilities.
$800,000 decrease in Fund 405 object 4000 equipment budget
for FY 2012-13 compared to FY 2011-12, primarily due
to reduction in purchase of replacement vehicles.
The FY 2012-13 Fund 405 Budget is expected to have
sufficient funds to pay for OC Parks staff, maintenance
contracts, facility repairs, and other expenses required
to operate all OC Parks facilities for public use and
enjoyment.
¦ For FY 2012-13, OC Parks forecasts that its primary
source of funding, property tax revenues, will be $49.6
million which is roughly equal to the amount received
for each of the previous two fiscal years.
¦ In addition, OC Parks forecasts to have funding to construct
several priority capital projects required to maintain
and repair OC Parks facilities for the next two to
three years.
OC Parks decreased the expenditure budget for Fund 406 by
approximately $4 million in FY 2012-13, compared to FY
2011-12, due to decrease in funding for capital projects.
Per Board of Supervisors direction in mid-FY 2008-09,
OC Parks Fund 405 resumed paying 55% (approximately
$7.1M in 08-09, $6.7M in 09-10, and $6.8M in
10-11) of Sheriff's annual Harbor Patrol operating costs.
This funding requirement may negatively impact OC
Parks' ability to rehabilitate the infrastructure at its
assigned facilities in future years.
The federal and state allocations for CSS are expected to
remain flat for FY 2012-13. Net County Cost Contribution is
$275,000 with anticipation of $550,000 in County Wide Cost
Allocation Plan (CWCAP) charges for FY 2012-13. Our FY
2012-13 base budget is consistent with our FY 2011-12 level.
CSS has also included a transfer in of $3.8 million from Fund
12C to balance the budget.
CSS continues to exceed federal performance measures
in percent of collections on current support and percent
of cases with arrears collection. The success of CSS plays
a key role in assisting families in achieving and maintaining
self-sufficiency.
¦ Through strategic planning, CSS continues to evaluate
existing program and processes and when possible
implement new technologies to achieve efficiencies,
improve performance, and increase effectiveness of
programs.
Base budget includes a transfer out of $3.8 million to General
Fund Department 027 to balance the budget. The primary
revenue source is from interest earnings.
The base gross budget increases $14.6 million primarily
related to increased costs in the MSI program. These
increases are offset by increased categorical revenues in Low
Income Health Plan (LIHP). Reductions and cost containment
measures implemented in prior years are carried forward
into the FY 2012-13 requested budget in order to align
Agency expenditures with available funding levels. During
FY 2011-12, 61 positions were deleted.
An ongoing challenge facing HCA is providing needed
and required health services at reduced funding levels.
HCA's State 1991 Realignment related base remains
more than $20 million lower than for FY 2006-07. Additionally,
Net County Cost funding for FY 2012-13 is
reduced by $21 million from FY 2008-09 adopted budget
levels.
¦ While the economy is experiencing a slow recovery,
funding often lags behind the economic recovery at the
same time demand for health care services remains elevated.
At State and Federal levels, legislative measures
aimed at budget reduction could have a significant
impact on local funding for health care services. One
such impact implemented in FY 2011-12 was AB 109/
AB 117. These Assembly Bills, which became effective
on October 1, 2011, realign to counties a broad array of
health and social service programs under the umbrella
of "public safety." Among other effects, these bills
change the jurisdiction of specified inmate populations
from State to local control to complete their sentences.
The Orange County Jail system is expected to increase
its daily census up to 1,400 additional inmates within
the next fiscal year, and projections are that the Realignment
revenue dedicated to HCA for serving this population
does not cover the costs of providing medical care
within the jail setting. Additionally, as the OC Jail system
houses more "AB 109" inmates, the capacity for
housing Federal detainees (ICE) is diminished. Replacing
fully cost-offset detainees with the AB 109 inmates,
who are not fully cost-offset, will have a budgetary
impact to the Agency.
¦ In FY 2009-10 HCA began a major upgrade to its
Agency-wide integrated records information system
(IRIS). The next phase of development for the IRIS system
will be the development of an Electronic Health
Record. Funding for the next phase of this effort will
continue during FY 2012-13. The American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009 included provisions
to help reimburse Eligible Professionals (EP) and
hospitals for implementation of Electronic Health
Records (EHR). The Health Care Agency is exploring
options to seek reimbursement under ARRA. In addition,
the legacy correctional health medical records system
(CHART) will be replaced with a new EHR system.
Vendor selection for the CHART replacement will be
brought to the Board for consideration by the end of the
current fiscal year.
¦ There will be continued emphasis within HCA on
implementing new Mental Health Services Act (MHSA)
programs in FY 2012-13, funded through available Prop
63 revenues. The new MHSA funded mental health
campus at 401 S. Tustin officially opened during FY
2011-12. This campus will be home to three new programs
that will be fully staffed during FY 2012-13.
¦ The 2011 State Budget shifts responsibility for educationally
related mental health services, including outof-
home residential services, from local mental health
and county welfare departments to school districts.
HCA entered into agreements with all Orange County
school districts to provide these mental health services
(previously referred to as AB 3632) at full cost recovery
during FY 2011-12. During FY 2012-13, the staff that
was providing these services will be transitioned into
funded positions.
Federal Coverage Initiative (CI) historically provided
funding of approximately $17 million per year to augment
the Medical Services Initiative (MSI) program.
These federal matching funds are available due to a
Medi-Cal Waiver granted by the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services (CMS). The new 1115 Waiver continues
the funding for the ten counties currently funded
and expands it to other counties throughout the State
for the period September 1, 2010 through December 31,
2013. HCA will potentially have the opportunity to
claim additional Federal funding of up to $32.3 million
for the first year of the new Waiver and $42.3 million for
the subsequent years through December 31, 2013.
¦ Beginning in 2011, HCA implemented a Balanced
Scorecard planning and management system. The
Scorecard identifies four core services, 18 mission critical
services, and 48 performance measures. The Balanced
Scorecard will provide ongoing reporting of what
we are doing and how well we are doing it, thereby
improving accountability and outcomes.
Workload Projections - As the economy continues to struggle
and the State budget situation becomes more difficult,
SSA is experiencing increases to workload at a time when
resources are being reduced.
Adult Protective Services (APS) caseloads are projected to
increase by 3.8%.
IHSS caseloads are projected to increase by 4.7% and hours
are projected to increase by 7.2%.
Medi-Cal caseloads are projected to increase by 3.8% in continuing
cases.
CalFresh anticipates a 10.2% increase in intake applications
and a 17.5% increase in continuing cases.
General Relief caseloads are expected to increase by 37.9%.
CalWORKs caseloads are projected to decrease by 10.7%.
Children and Family Services caseloads are projected to
increase approximately 5.8%.
Foster Care caseloads are projected to decrease approximately
1%.
Most Federal and State program allocations are projected to
be level with a small increase projected in Medi-Cal. Assistance
payments are increasing based on increasing caseload
projections.
Increased Costs of Doing Business and Funding Limitations
- Costs associated with increasing benefit costs, electronic
data processing, and added workload resulting from continuous
program mandate changes are not fully funded by Federal
and State program allocation funding. The lack of
funding for increased cost of doing business is aggravated by
unfunded program mandate changes, which result in additional
workload and/or higher performance standards. In
turn, this increases the risk of fiscal sanctions being
imposed for non-compliance due to existing inadequate program
resource levels.
SSA continues to consider all opportunities for continuous
quality improvement and assurance measures through innovative
strategies and streamlining business processes. The
program impact of the large reduction to the SSA workforce
in FY 2008-09 was partially mitigated as SSA was able to
rehire Medi-Cal and CalWORKs employees as well as utilize
extra help and temporary help workers in order to maximize
increases in funding. Several areas within SSA, however, are
still experiencing reductions, and SSA continues to assess
and modify the optimization of staff deployment in order to
avoid the degradation of services and maximize Federal and
State program allocations. SSA will return to the Board in
the CEO's FY 2012-13 1st Quarter Budget Report to make
any necessary budgetary and staffing adjustments based on
the finalization of the FY 2012-13 State budget and the
receipt of FY 2012-13 program funding allocation confirmations.
The Social Services Agency (SSA) is legislatively mandated
to administer and provide a number of human
service programs to the residents of Orange County.
While the costs for providing these services have
increased, reimbursable funding levels for the cost of
doing business for these numerous programs has
remained at 2001 cost levels which has led to a growing
funding disparity exacerbated by increasing performance
standards and fiscal sanctions when such standards
are not met. SSA diligently reviews the budget
and operating costs to ensure maximization of the dollars
received and operates the programs efficiently. State
budget reductions to local agencies such as SSA may
further limit the ability to meet the needs of clients. A
reduction in County revenue may limit SSA's ability to
match available State and Federal funds. As an Agency,
the expectation is that spending reductions be absorbed
while ensuring that services continue to be provided to
the clients and their families. Budget reductions at a
time of increased caseloads directly impact the ability
to meet mandates. During times of economic downturn,
SSA serves more residents and families in the
County.
Medi-Cal provides health care coverage for California
residents who have limited resources and income. To be
eligible for Medi-Cal, an individual or family must meet
asset, income, institutional status, residence, and citizenship/
alien requirements. SSA Program and Operations
have continued efforts to maintain mandated
performance standards for application and renewal
processing. This should keep dispositions at an elevated
level. The Social Security Administration has been transitioning
Medi-Cal applications from their own offices
to the appropriate county agencies via referrals. This
may temporarily boost intake dispositions in the near
term, but is unlikely to have a significant impact on long
term trends. The Benefits CalWIN system now allows
residents to apply online. Currently, a growing number
of applications are coming through the system with
continuing growth expected moving forward.
¦ The weakening of the job market in Orange County the
past few years has coincided with a large increase in
General Relief caseloads.
¦ In-Home Supportive Services provides services to aged,
blind, or disabled persons limited in their ability to care
for themselves which enable them to live safely in their
homes instead of a costlier facility. In December 2011, a
temporary restraining order halted the Governor’s "trigger
cut" to implement a 20% reduction in recipients'
hours that was scheduled to take effect January 2012.
This reduction, which was not included in the projection,
is still awaiting a final decision.
¦ Operation Santa Claus is a member of the Orange
County Toy Collaborative and a Board of Supervisors
approved toy collection and distribution program for
foster/underprivileged children. There has been a significant
decrease in donations and monetary funding
with an increased demand for services. To counteract
this, fund raising efforts have been increased as well as
enhanced solicitation for increased awareness to the
community, businesses, and volunteer organizations.
Ongoing funding for the IHSS Provider Payments - SSA has
budgeted a total County cost share amount of $37.6 million
based on continuation of the current State program funding
participation, the provider wage at $9.30 and $0.60 benefits.
The mandated County share of cost is offset by $11.3 million
realignment revenue and $9.0 million in Federal/State revenue
for benefit cost reimbursement.
Caseloads are projected to increase 4.7% and hours
7.2% over FY 2011-12 levels.
CalWORKs caseloads are expected to experience a decline of
10.7% in FY 2012-13 from FY 2011-12 levels.
CalWORKs caseloads are projected to experience a
decline of approximately 10.7% due to policy changes
implemented by the State in July 2011.
Group Home rates projections include a 3.23% COLA
increase which is based on information received from the
California Department of Social Services (CDSS) 2011
November Subvention report.
Foster care caseloads are projected to decrease from FY
2011-12 to FY 2012-13 consistent with downward
trends experienced since 2008. The current declining
trend is expected to continue, but at a slower rate due to
the implementation of Assembly Bill 12 which was
effective January 2012. This legislation allows qualifying
non-minors to stay in Foster Care up to age 19 effective
January 1, 2012, and up to age 20 effective January
1, 2013.
¦ Overall Wraparound caseload is projected to increase,
while Federal cases are anticipated to see a slight
decrease.
Refugee caseloads are anticipated to experience a decline of
approximately 25.21%.
Refugee caseloads are anticipated to experience a
decline of approximately 25.21%.
Caseloads are projected to increase by 37.9% in FY 2012-13
over FY 2011-12 levels. This is due to the current state of the
economy, continuing unemployment rates, and program
changes easing eligibility requirements.
Caseloads are projected to increase by 37.9% in FY
2012-13 over FY 2011-12 levels. This is due to the current
state of the economy, continuing unemployment
rates, and program changes easing eligibility requirements.
The FY 2012-13 budget was developed with the continuation
of a 56% State allocation reduction originally implemented
in FY 2009-10 and not anticipated to be restored.
OC Public Works Fund 080 FY 2012-13 Base Budget Request
of $56,247,947 is $1,753,379 (3.22%) higher than the FY
2011-12 Modified Budget through 2nd Quarter Adjustments.
The significant differences are due to: Salaries & Benefits
decrease totaling $984 thousand for deleted positions
and pension prepayment discount; Services and Supplies
category increases totaling $5.9 million which primarily
includes Demolition costs for El Toro totaling $3.5 million
and increase in professional services for $1.5 million; Capital
Project reduction by $1.2 million; and increased reimbursable
offsets totaling $1.6 million.
OC Facilities/Facilities Operations will continue an
effective Preventive Maintenance (PM) Program to
allow for scheduled preventive maintenance of County
facilities, reduce emergency repair costs, avoid costly
building/system shutdowns and be proactive regarding
the stewardship of public buildings and use of public
funds.
¦ OC Facilities/Facilities Operations will implement-evaluate
mid- and long-term options of the Strategic Energy
Plan with proposals solicited and a contract awarded for
development of an updated Strategic Energy Plan and
began lighting retrofits in County facilities with DOE
Grant funds. Over 90% of the buildings planned for the
retrofits are complete. OC Facilities/Facilities Operations
is continuing the work in additional County facilities,
utilizing available grant funding.
¦ OC Facilities/Corporate Real Estate will continue to
focus its energies on the most effective cost reducing
and revenue enhancing initiatives consistent with the
County Facilities Master Plan and Board directives augmenting
that plan. While some initiatives requiring
extensive investments will be deferred, primary efforts
for FY 12-13 are to secure historic low lease rates and
occupancy costs for as many agencies as possible for the
long term, while increasing the revenue generated from
County real estate assets and enhancing asset value to
benefit the County's real estate portfolio.
¦ OC Facilities/OC Property Development will continue to
evaluate and pursue the energy and other sustainability
strategies that will provide the greatest cost savings and
benefit to the County and will continue to pursue appropriate
property development initiatives on behalf of the
County's goals.
¦ OC Planning/Agricultural Commissioner will continue
its programs of training staff, educating the public,
seeking State funding and cooperatively partnering
with the State to achieve its goals.
¦ OC Planning/Community Development will continue its
programs of training staff, educating the public, and
providing the best and most efficient customer service.
OC Watersheds FY 2012-13 budget decreased approximately
$6.4 million compared to FY 2011-12. This includes $4.5
million in pass-through grant funded projects that no longer
require budgeted entries. In addition, maintenance, planning
and capital projects totaling $1.9 million were deferred
or transferred to OC Flood.
Regulatory mandates continue to increase in number,
scope, and complexity. The Santa Ana and San Diego
Regional Water Quality Control Boards reissue municipal
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permits for the County, cities, and OC Flood
Control District every five years. In each renewal cycle,
mandates are added and expanded to increase protection
of the drinking water supply, fishing, swimming,
and other uses of Orange County’s streams, bays, harbors,
and beaches.
¦ In addition to NPDES requirements, state and federal
regulators periodically assess the health of waterways.
When data show pollution levels are impairing the uses
of those waters, they are added to a list of water quality
impairments under the federal Clean Water Act. In the most recent update, the list of impairments in Orange
County increased from 122 to 130. New regulations
called Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDLs) are then
developed to correct each impairment. To date, 33
TMDLs have been adopted that impose corrective measures
on the County, OC Flood Control District, cities,
and other public and private entities. Both the currently
adopted mandates and the growth trend in this regulatory
arena are expected to outpace our resources to
address the problems and sustain compliance.
¦ The County has taken a leadership role in crafting regulatory
approaches as well as investing in science and
regulatory development to bring forward TMDL and
other regulations for adoption by the Regional Boards.
In collaboration with Riverside and San Bernardino
Counties, regulators, and other stakeholders, a major
revision to the Santa Ana Regional Board’s basin plan
was developed to rationalize recreational water quality
standards for streams and channels. Once approved, it
will retain strict standards for those streams where people
actually recreate and adjust standards in flood control
channels to reflect the actual risk to human health
based on usage; will modernize the water quality objectives
used to measure bacterial contamination; and will
suspend the requirement to meet recreational standards
during dangerous storm conditions in engineered channels.
As a result, cities and counties could invest their
limited resources in protecting those streams where recreation
occurs and human health may be at risk. Initiatives
are underway for improvements to existing
TMDLs for bacteria, sediment, nutrients, and toxics.
¦ Integrated Regional Water Management Plans have
been completed for all three Watershed Management
Areas to develop collaborative water management strategies
and prioritize implementation projects for funding.
The plans identify solutions to meet regulatory
mandates and other water needs, and establish a context
for multiple agencies to collaborate on implementation.
The plans also position Orange County agencies
for grant funding opportunities from state bond measures
and other sources. Work with Orange County
Transportation Authority has resulted in two water
quality grant programs funded by the Measure M Environmental
Cleanup Program.
One (1) Senior Civil Engineer position was moved into Budget
Control 071 Building and Safety General Fund from Budget
Control 080 OC Public Works. The total number of
budgeted positions is increased to 17 for FY 2012-2013.
OC Public Works Budget Control 071 Building and Safety
General Fund FY 2012-2013 Base Budget request of
$6,460,174 is $688,034 (11.92%) higher than the FY 2011-
2012 Modified Budget through 2nd quarter adjustments.
Salaries and Employee Benefits increased by $93,945. Services
and Supplies increased by $596,273 primarily resulting
from increased costs for Professional Services relating to
plan check services based on anticipated increase in Building
and Safety activity for FY 2012-2013.
The overall increase is offset by an increase of $687,466 in
revenues due to anticipated increases in Building and Safety
Permit activity and Charges for Services.
OC Public Works/OC Planning will continue to monitor
workload levels and take appropriate mitigating actions
as necessary. This includes a review every twelve
months of the Fee Ordinance.
¦ OC Public Works/OC Planning continues to work with
the building industry on further improvements in its
provision of services, principally through the Development
Processing Review Committee (DPRC) appointed
by the Board of Supervisors and through the Local Governmental
Affairs Committee of the Building Industry
Association (BIA) of Orange County.
Road Fund 115 budgeted approximately $500K Transfer Out
to the FCPP Fund 148 as contingency for change orders/mitigation
for the Alton Parkway project. The funds will be
transferred only if there is a need in the FCPP Fund.
Interest revenue was reduced to account for the lower interest
rate and cash balance. Pending payments for awarded
projects coupled with the new projects budgeted will reduce
the cash balance substantially.
Charges for Services and Intergovernmental Revenue is
reduced based on the mix of reimbursable (Road Fee, Developer
and Grant funded) projects budgeted.
Services and Supplies (Professional Services) budget was
increased due to implementation of the MicroPAVER System,
required by OCTA for Measure M2 Local Fair Share and
grant qualification, which requires a much more intensive
investigation of road condition for maintenance resulting in
higher expense.
Other Charges budget is reduced based on City Lead projects
which require the transfer of funds to the cities for completing
pending projects for which the obligation existed prior to
incorporation.
Capital Projects and Land budget amounts were increased
by a total of approximately $26 million due to the mix of
projects budgeted as compared to FY 11-12.
Gas tax funds are used to leverage available federal,
state, and local grant funds to allow project implementation
to proceed as permits and approvals are completed.
¦ OC Road staff continues to monitor State and Federal
legislation for potential impact on future funding and
projects.
Interest revenue was reduced to account for the lower interest
rate and cash balance. SARI Line construction cost coupled
with Prado Dam land acquisitions will reduce the cash
balance.
Capital Project budget was increased by approximately $28.5
million due to the mix of projects budgeted as compared to
FY 2011-12. One project alone in FY 12-13 is estimated to
cost $44.0 million.
Equipment expense was increased to replace the aging
equipment since purchases for the past few years have been
tightly controlled and replacements delayed.
Securing regulatory permits is frequently the longest
activity and therefore the critical path for getting a capital
project prepared for construction. In addition, permit
conditions for mitigation measures discussed
earlier, now cost as much as the project construction.
Delays of several months, and in some cases years, have
been experienced.
¦ Incorporate Water Quality and Habitat Enhancements
into the Flood Control Infrastructure:
¦ Orange County's channels are currently being designed
with a much broader vision beyond the safe conveyance
of floodwaters, including environmental habitat, instream
sediment stabilization, erosion protection, water
quality treatment and recreational uses. The challenge
for OC Public Works is to find engineering and maintenance
solutions to accommodate multiple uses, while
providing for a specific level of flood capacity. These
multiple uses sometimes compete, and accommodating
them requires additional planning, permitting, mitigation,
construction, operation, and maintenance costs.
¦ Complying with Two Regional Water Quality Control
Board permits and the new State Water Quality Construction
Permit.
¦ Compliance with these new requirements will result in
increased project costs.
The Fiscal Year 2012-13 expense budget includes appropriations
for the architecture and engineering contract related to
the landside portion of Revitalization. The revenue budget
includes reimbursement from the Department of Boating
and Waterways for engineering costs related to the waterside
portion of Revitalization.
The safety of the public and environment is the priority
for OC Dana Point Harbor. Staff continues to facilitate
and oversee maintenance projects and restoration of
public facilities to ensure compliance with Federal and
State safety requirements as well as meet the needs and
expectations of the public using the harbor.
¦ With approval by the California Coastal Commission for
the Harbor Local Coastal Program Amendment for the
Revitalization Project, OC Dana Point Harbor will be
actively pursuing steps towards implementation. This
includes the development of a financing strategy and
acquisition of the required Coastal Development permits.
Supplemental Assessment filed by the developer reduced the
assessment value for the real properties in the El Toro Redevelopment
areas.
In FY 2009-10, the Irvine Redevelopment Agency filed an
appeal to reduce prior year assessed values for the El Toro
parcels. This resulted in a reduction of assessed values and
negative supplemental property taxes for the El Toro parcels.
The Agency has requested no refund but will offset future
incremental property taxes. As a result of the withholdings,
Fund 15T received no incremental property tax revenue in
FY 2010-11, received lower $413,999 revenue in FY 2011-12,
will receive lower ($673,863) revenue in FY 2012-13, and is
expected to receive $1,154,639 for FY 2013-14.
FY 12-13 revenue is budgeted at $518,075, which is less than
the $673,863 amount in the Recognized Obligation Payment
Schedule (ROPS) because we anticipate less increase in the
assessed value growth. We will monitor actual receipts
closely and may make budget adjustments during FY 12-13.
As per County Implementation Agreement No. 1, Fund 15T
receives revenue within 30 days after the close of the fiscal
year, which creates one year lag time in revenue recognition
if we do not accrue revenue at the year-end.The FY 2012-13 Budget includes $1,935,732 in Appropriations
for improvements of the El Toro Parcel. In addition,
projected reserve balance at the end of FY 2012-13 is
$1,056,030.
In December 2011, the California Supreme Court
upheld Assembly Billx1 26 dissolving redevelopment
agencies effective February 1, 2012. The City of Irvine
elected to become Successor Agency to the Irvine Redevelopment
Agency.
¦ The City Council of the City of Irvine as Successor
Agency to the Irvine Redevelopment Agency approved
the ROPS on March 29, 2012, which included
$368,216,807 for County Implementation Agreement
No. 1 to Fund 15T for FY 2011-12 (Year 6) through FY
2051-52 (Year 46). Payment obligations for the period of
January 1 through June 30, 2012 and an administrative
budget July 1 through December 31, 2012 were
approved on the ROPS by the Oversight Board on March
29, 2012. Although this obligation was approved, the
ROPS also requires approval by the Department of
Finance. The approved ROPS shows $673,863 FY 2011-
12 estimated revenue for the County Implementation
Agreement to El Toro Improvement Fund 15Tand
$1,154,639 for FY 2012-13. FY 2011-12 revenue is projected
to be lower due to the prior year assessed value
reduction impact. FY 2012-13 projected revenues reflect
an increase in assessed values. As per the County
Implementation Agreement, Fund 15T receives a certain
percentage of incremental property taxes, which
changes with changes in assessed value each year. Fund
15T annual revenue is expected to increase to $7.3 million
by FY 2020-21 when all developments are complete.
After FY 2020-21, revenue is expected to grow at 2%-3%
annually.

The revenue budget is $119.1M, a decrease of $7.8M compared
to the FY 2011-12 modified budget. A decrease of
$10.0M in Misc. Revenues is due to the FY 11-12 1st Quarter
FBA adjustment. This decrease is partially offset by
increases of $1.2M in Charges for Services (airline fees) and
$350K in Intergovernmental revenues.
The expense budget is $117.8M, a decrease of $40.6M compared
to the FY 2011-12 modified budget. The decrease is
due to lower transfers out to other John Wayne Airport funds
by $52.2M and decreases of $188K in Salaries and Benefits
and $500K in Depreciation. This decrease is partially offset
by increases in Special Items of $6.2M, and Services and
Supplies of $6.1M. The increase in Services and Supplies
reflects operating expense of Terminal C for the first full
year.
The FY 2012-13 Budget Priorities are to carefully manage
operating and other expenses; maintain a viable
diversification of revenue sources to provide quality airport
operations in Orange County; and appropriate Airport
cash reserves, Public Facility Charge revenues,
bond proceeds and other financing sources for Airport
Improvement Program capital projects.
¦ The Finance and Operating Priorities are to conserve
financial resources during the current period until
growth in passenger traffic resumes by controlling
operating expenses and other cash outlays, sustaining
Airport revenue streams and planning for growth in
future fiscal years. Keys to the revenue streams are that
compensatory airline rents and fees are based on cost
reimbursement, while concession and other rents have
Minimum Annual Guarantees.
¦ Additional priorities include continuing major Airport
Improvement Program projects, providing adequate
wherewithal to maintain Terminals A and B in good
condition and exceeding bond rate covenant indenture
requirements.
Expenditures in this fund are financed by transfers from the
Airport Debt Service Fund (Fund-Department 283-280),
Federal and State grants and by interest earnings on the cash
balance in the Fund.
All key trends for the Airport are contained in the narrative
for Airport Operating Fund 280.
JWA will utilize bond proceeds from the 2009 bond issuance
and PFC revenue to effect transfers to the JWA Capital
Projects Fund (Fund-Department 281-280). Operating
transfers from Airport Operating Fund (Fund-Department
280-280) will be used to defease the Series 2003 bonds.
All key trends for the Airport are contained in the narrative
for Airport Operating Fund 280.
Operating costs increased by a net $22.9 million primarily
due to an increase in transfer to OC Waste & Recycling Capital
Project Fund 273 and depreciation, equipment, landfill
gas maintenance contracts, heavy equipment maintenance,
multi-disciplinary engineering support contracts and AB939
outreach programs; decrease in salaries and employee benefits
and payment to the City of Brea.
OC Waste & Recycling will continue to support the
County General Fund in FY 12/13 with an estimated
transfer of $5.2 million for bankruptcy recovery debt
obligations.
¦ OC Waste & Recycling continues to integrate disposal
capacity and strategic financial and operational planning,
maintains a competitive disposal rate, and continues
to manage risk/liability through diligent
administrative practices.
¦ OC Waste & Recycling continues with its ongoing habitat
mitigation efforts.
¦ OC Waste & Recycling operates and maintains state of
the art environmental control systems and continues to
work towards increasing the beneficial reuse of landfill
gas at the landfills.
Expenditures in this fund will be financed by a combination
of transfers from OC Waste & Recycling Operating Fund
(Fund-Department 299-299) and by interest earnings on the
cash balance in the Fund.
The Base Budget includes a $9.2M technical augmentation to
transfer funds from Fund 279 to Fund 038 ($7.5M for
PTMS) and Fund 014 ($1.7M for CAPS+ BRASS) offset by a
corresponding decrease in Fund 279 Reserves.
In order to meet the Net County Cost limit, the Auditor-Controller’s
Office defunded two vacant positions and deleted
two vacant limited-term positions.
The Auditor-Controll’s Office has been able to continually
meet established Net County Cost limits through
careful analysis, planning and limiting our requests to
those that are essential to the mission and goals of the
department.
FY 2012-13 Base Budget includes a $1.7M Technical Augmentation
to transfer funds from Fund 279 for CAPS+
BRASS Updgrade Project.
County business needs are driving an increasing
demand for more information capabilities. Examples
are the need to automate transactions, thereby increasing
productivity to keep up with an increasing workload,
and the need for more ad-hoc capabilities to
access information for analysis and trending purposes.
The COB submitted a base budget request that meets the
NCC limit of $3,247,357. This budget is very lean and
includes a vacancy factor that the department may not be
able to achieve because it is based on history that includes
several staff leaves of absence and turnover of high level
management. The budget may also be impacted if assessment
appeal workload requires additional resources in order
to resolve appeals within the statutory 2 year deadline.
With the continued down turn in real estate values, the
number of assessment appeals have increased from an
annual norm of 7,500 to an anticipated 17,000 in FY
2011-12. It is also expected that the trend for increased
business/commercial appeals will continue. These hearings
are more complex than residential appeals and
their hearings take longer and require more preparation
by COB and Assessor staff.
Changes included in the FY 2012-13 Recommended Base
Budget meet the Net County Cost (NCC) limit and include
the deletion of three positions transferred to other Budget
Controls. Two of the positions were transferred to the Auditor-
Controller 003 to permanently support the CAPS+ System.
The third was transferred to the Information and
Technology Internal Service Fund 289 to align the position
with work assignments. Other changes include the transfer
of the Alert OC contract along with associated Services and
Supplies appropriations and Net County Cost of $380,000 to
the Emergency Management Division of the Sheriff's
Department to enhance efficiency and consolidate emergency
operations and the transfer of appropriations for contingencies
and Net County Cost of $500,000 from
Miscellaneous Budget Control 004 to Budget Control 017.
The latter action proposes to establish a reserve account to
address potential timing issues and ensure continued operations.
The County continues to follow fiscal policies implemented
in 2007 under close collaboration between the
CEO and Board to trend the County’s budget downward.
Net County Cost reductions of 5% for each of Fiscal
Year’s 2008-09, 2009-10, 2010-11, and 2011-12 had
enabled the County to achieve its goal of developing a
structurally balanced budget that does not rely upon
reserves to support ongoing expenditures. This goal
became more challenging when in June 2011, the State
balanced part of the State budget shortfall by reallocating
49.5 million of Orange County Vehicle License Fee
(VLF) receipts for other State purposes the same day
the Board had approved a balanced FY 2011-12 budget,
which included this funding. In October 2011, the
County adopted FY 2011-12 Mid-Year Budget Adjustments
that effectively reduced General Fund Department
Net County Cost by $49.5 million to address the
potential shortfall.
¦ After the State reallocated the County’s VLF funding
and efforts to restore this funding through the Legislative
process were unsuccessful, the Board of Supervisors
explored the County’s options. Through a careful
legal analysis, it was determined the County was actually
due an additional $73.5 million dollars in property
taxes in FY 2011-12. A lawsuit was filed by the State in
April 2012 asking the court to order the county to recalculate
what it pays the state to help finance schools
based on the State official’s interpretation of state law. It
is unknown at this time how the court will rule on this
key issue that could have a critical impact on the future
financial position of the County of Orange. The County
will continue its efforts to retain its fair share of property
taxes in response to the State taking of VLF
resources.
¦ In October 2011, Assembly Bill (AB) 109 took effect and
began the historic shift of responsibility for supervision
of former prison inmates from the State to the local
level. This shift came with the promise of funding to
handle the additional costs associated with the shift, but
local governments are not certain when the State will
pay Counties for providing these services, even though
the shift of services has already taken place. The County
will continue its efforts to obtain adequate funding for
the provision of "realigned" services from the State.
¦ The State Supreme Court ruled in December 2011 the
constitutionality of challenged Assembly Bill 1x 26, ruling
that the Legislature had the authority to seize $1.7
billion in local redevelopment money to help balance
the budget, and struck down a related bill (AB 1x 27)
that would have allowed redevelopment agencies to continue
operating if they agreed to turn over a large chunk
of their funding to the State. The ruling prevents local
redevelopment agencies from engaging in new business
and would lead to their eventual dissolution. Board
Goals for 2012 include appointing oversight members,
assuring proper handling of funds by the Auditor-Controller,
and evaluation of the remaining County projects.
Representatives from the CEO are playing a role in the
redevelopment wind-down.
¦ The CEO's office has developed strategies to identify
alternatives and financial options for the Board to minimize
impacts. CEO staff continues to monitor our
expenditures and has maintained a limited hiring freeze. The State's fiscal challenges and pending lawsuit
and the impacts of a stagnant real estate environment
continue to be a major challenge. There are a variety of
issues and projects that continue to be addressed. These
include continued implementation of the Assessment
Tax System, Property Tax Management System (PTMS),
implementing a plan that addresses breakdowns in the
PTMS project, development of the County's IT Sourcing
Strategy, transitioning to "Managed Services" model for
IT, including a Countywide converged voice and data
network, Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity
Planning, and continued rollout of the County Performance
Scorecard Management process (Balanced
Scorecard) to additional departments; future development
of a new facility for Animal Care Services, the
impacts of various legislative items, support by CEO
staff of the Dana Point Harbor revitalization project,
and collaborative efforts aimed at the annexation of
County unincorporated areas continues in 2012 where
possible. CEO staff continues to analyze and recommend
strategies for long-term debt reduction while
meeting the County's financing needs.
¦ Despite the budget challenges of FY 2011-12, the
County continues to progress toward resolving a number
of issues. The proposed FY 2012-13 State budget
presents major challenges to the County of Orange to
resolve the property tax revenue dispute, begin receiving
revenue for realigned services, and to transition
redevelopment services as appropriate. This year’s State
budget process will be both lively and challenging and
our efforts will focus on fully supporting the Board of
Supervisors during their deliberations and voice County
concerns to Sacramento concerning potential impacts
to the County budget and services. An outline of last
year’s accomplishments is included with this document.
Planning and preparation ensure that the CEO’s Office
will proactively meet challenges and fulfill its mission.
¦ John M.W. Moorlach, Chairman of the Board of Supervisors,
identified his goals for the County in his January
2012 "State of the County" address. The Chairman’s
2012 goals are available online at http://egov.ocgov.com/
vgnfiles/ocgov/BOS2/doc/
2012%20Board%20Goals.pdf. The 2012 goals for the
CEO’s Office will support the implementation of the
Board’s policy directives. Each of us has a proactive role
in "making things happen" in support of the Board and
the County.
¦ On June 7, 2011 the Board approved the termination of
the appointment of the Public Administrator as the
Public Guardian and appointed an "Interim" Public
Guardian to act as Public Guardian while a recruitment
for a permanent Public Guardian was conducted. On
July 26, 2011, the Board appointed Lucille Lyon to the
position of Public Guardian. The position will report
directly to the County Executive Officer under the new
structure. The Public Guardian’s role is to assume
responsibility for care of individuals who are unable to
properly provide for their personal needs and who may
be at risk of undue influence by others, or whose property
is subject to loss, injury, waste or mismanagement.
These individuals are usually elderly or are gravely disabled
due to mental illness. This change in oversight of
the Public Guardian function is anticipated to better
serve residents in need. Ms. Lyon also serves as Assistant
Public Administrator; voters will determine
whether or not the Public Administrator continues as
an elected position on June 5, 2012.
¦ Pension reform remains a key topic statewide and
nationally and Orange County is actively moving forward
to lead the way in this important endeavor. Orange
County has already taken the first steps in the pension
reform process. A new 1.62 at 65 pension formula is
offered to new employees represented by several bargaining
units. Efforts are underway to resolve IRS Revenue
Ruling 2006-43 and obtain a favorable ruling so
that existing employees will be allowed the opportunity
to select the new 1.62 at 65 pension formula which
includes a County matching contribution to a Defined
Contribution Plan. Chairman Moorlach, in his Goals for
2012, also seeks legislative action to eliminate unique
restrictions on Orange County regarding pension offerings.
It is going to take a coordinated and cooperative
approach between employers, employees, and employee
representation groups to come up with the long-term
solutions that will reduce unfunded pension liabilities.
Change will be essential to ensuring that the public
employee retirement programs are secure and adequately
funded.
Local government audit organizations are increasingly
expanding their responsibilities from traditional compliance
and financial audits to include complex performance
and operational reviews. Conducting these
audits requires auditors to possess a broad range of
skills, including strong analytical skills, strategic acumen,
communication skills, and operational experience
across functions such as information technology,
accounting, and finance. The Office has followed this trend, recruiting candidates with public administration,
public policy, and business administration graduate
degrees, and candidates with backgrounds in management
consulting and finance.
¦ The auditing profession requires that auditors are
trained and updated on new standards, regulations, and
trends. As a result, auditors' ability to complete Continuing
Professional Education is critical. In a challenging
fiscal environment, it can be difficult to find the
time and financial resources to complete this important
training. The Office continues to be selective in how it
completes its training requirements, looking for low
cost opportunities such as online courses.
The Human Resources Department (HRD) absorbed an
Administrative Manager II position in FY 2011-12 and will
receive partial funding from Public Administration - Public
Guardian Department. The remaining salary is absorbed by
HRD.Today’s workforce has an increasing desire for professional
development and recognition of excellence in the
workplace. Today’s workforce also expects to use cutting
edge technology and work for an organization that
operates with employment policies that permit a greater
work/life balance. The majority of new workforce
entrants expect to have multiple careers and employers
in their lifetimes.
¦ The cost of living in the County, particularly the cost of
housing, reduces the availability of skilled staff. Often
they are attracted to other parts of the state and country
where the relationship between compensation and cost
of living is more favorable. HRD continues to research
alternative means of attracting skilled talent through
such avenues as the use of social media.
¦ The Human Resources Department faces a legal environment
that is dynamic and rapidly changing. Health
care mandates continue to evolve with the Federal legislation
requirements.
The FY 2012-13 Base Budget exceeds the NCC Limit of
$1,803,948, by $124,148. A Reduce Level of Service Augmentation
has been submitted to meet NCC Limit.
The Revenue Budget is $10,886,565, which is a decrease of
$1,319,752 from the FY 2011-12 Modified Budget primarily
as a result of the following: "Lower Charges for Services" revenue
due to the reduction of Investment Administrative Fee
revenue to align revenues with expenditures.
The Expense Budget is $12,690,513, which is a decrease of
$1,313,238 from the FY 2011-12 Modified Budget and is primarily
attributed to the following: A reduction of $800,308
in total Salaries & Employee Benefits; a reduction of
$519,369 in total Services & Supplies; a Reduce Level of Service
Augmentation, in the amount of $124,148, which was
submitted to meet NCC Limit.The Treasurer-Tax Collector continued its efforts to
reduce costs within its Department and within the
County by doing the following:
Added several new Pool Participants and reduced costs
of investment to all Pool Participants.
Added invoice collection services for OCPW, reducing
overall costs to them and streamlining payment processing.
IAD's Net County Cost limit for FY 2012-13 remains
unchanged and the proposed budget maintains the current
level of operations. However, due to non-discretionary cost
increases in salaries/benefits and services/supplies and a
small decrease in audit service revenue, our base budget has
a shortfall of $29,019. Therefore, IAD submitted a reduce
augmentation to meet the NCC limit.
IAD is not requesting a restore augmentation for the shortfall
and will absorb the reductions primarily by continuing
the voluntary work furlough program in FY 2012-13.
Dynamic Financial Environment of the County: This
includes managing decreased revenues caused by State
deficits or economic conditions beyond our control.
Such an environment requires flexibility in the annual
Audit Plan. As such, the Internal Audit Department
(IAD) must be ready to respond to unscheduled assignments
from the Board of Supervisors majority. We estimate
hours required for Board of Supervisors' requested
reviews based on history and reserve hours in the Audit
Plan specifically for this purpose.
¦ Staff Retention and Replacement: Because the IAD is a
small department, each of our staff is significant to the
accomplishment of the Audit Plan. All members including
the Audit Director perform original work and are
involved in numerous audits. Due to budget constraints,
IAD has been unable to replace any positions when staff
separates from our department due to job transfer or
retirement. Subsequently, these vacant positions were
deleted; this affects the flexibility in our audit plan.
¦ Information Technology (IT) issues: The pace of technological
advancement and the benefits to be realized
by implementing these advances to improve County
business operations is increasing at an accelerating
speed. As such, Information Technology (IT) Audits
continue to be an important part of our audit efforts.
The IT audit process compliments and may integrate
with the Internal Control Audits (ICA). ICAs are audits
that determine whether controls and processes are in
place over critical business processes, and include an
evaluation of the adequacy and integrity of internal
controls. We also perform computer assisted audit techniques
(CAAT). CAATs are automated queries applied to
large amounts of electronic data searching for specified
characteristics in the areas of duplicate vendor payments,
employee-vendor match, multiple direct deposits for payroll checks, and working retiree thresholds. In
2008, we hired an IT Audit Manager to enable us to
address IT issues and perform audits of information
system controls and processes. However, budget constraints
have not allowed us to hire, on an as-needed
basis, expert consultants with recognized industry
expertise to provide IT audit assistance, consulting and
in-house training.

The requested 036 budget Net County Cost (NCC) for FY
2012-13 is $10,596,967, which includes:
1. $7,878,338 for carryover capital projects from FY
2010-11,
2. $1,952,143 for new capital and critical maintenance
repair projects,
3. $766,486 for mid-year contingencies and change
orders
The requested 036 budget for FY 2012-13 is $2,529,726 over
NCC limit of $8,067,241. The NCC overage is due to increase
in carryover projects and $1 million loss of revenue transfer
from Criminal Justice Facilities Fund 104. Fund 104 ongoing
revenue is reduced by $1 million for correction of revenue for
State Controller Court Revenue Audit findings. Budget Control
036 submitted $2,529,726 Reduce level of service augmentations
to meet NCC limit and equivalent amount of
Restore level of service augmentation submitted to restore
funding for critical capital and maintenance repair projects.
The following projects will be funded from the restore level
of service Augmentation $2,529,726:
¦ Facilities Master Plan $111,097
¦ Sheriff- Design to Repipe HVAC Hot & Chilled Water Sys
CMJ/CWJ - (MRP) $ 482,776
¦ Bldg 10- Replace Card Access System $99,252
¦ Bldg 12 - Replace Card Access System $129,962
¦ Comprehensive Building Assessment-HVAC, Roof, Electrical
$202,893
¦ Gates-Replace HVAC Pneumatics $180,210
¦ MOB - Replace VAV Boxes – HVAC $136,128
¦ Bldg 12 - Replace Exterior Doors Design & Construction
$42,836
¦ Sheriff - Musick -Rehab East Kitchen $188,086
¦ Sheriff -Theo Lacy- Correct Inmate Clothing Storage
System $40,000
¦ Sheriff - CJX & HQ- Replace water pumps & regulators
$40,000
¦ Sheriff -Loma Ridge- Re-design HVAC system $30,000
¦ Sheriff -Theo Lacy- Fire Access Road $150,000
¦ Sheriff- Aliso Viejo Station-Security Improvements to
Lobby $30,000
¦ Contingency Projects $666,486
Base Budget includes key Information Technology initiatives
that are recommended for FY 2012-13 by the IT Investment
Review Board.
The FY 2012-13 Base Budget also includes a $7.5 million
Technical Augmentation to transfer funds from Fund 279 for
continuing support of the Property Tax Management System
(PTMS).
Continue to follow the new Countywide IT Governance
model to ensure collaboration, transparency, accountability,
and business alignment of Countywide IT decisions.
¦ Provide County Agencies and Departments with technology
to meet their business goals and objectives.
¦ Continue strategic planning, operations and policy
review, and process standardization.
¦ Implement best practices to increase efficiency.
FY 2012-13 Budget includes projects from the Probation
Capital Improvement Plan developed by the Facilities
Assessment Reports, which include Joplin Youth Center
$461,676, Juvenile Hall $520,059, and Youth Guidance Center
$653,809. The Los Pinos Conservation Camp does not
hold any juveniles.
FY 2011-12 Approved Budget included $2 million one-time
transfer to Probation Budget 057 for reimbursement of facilities
maintenance cost related to the juvenile retention facilities
and $1 million transfer to Capital Project Budget 036 for
Sheriff's facilities projects. Fund 104 FY 2011-12 2nd Available
Financing projection reduced the $2 million Probation
transfer to $1.5 million and eliminated $1 million transfer to
Capital Project Budget 036. FY 2012-13 base budget includes
no transfer from Fund 104 to Probation Budget 057 or Capital
Project Budget 036.
The State Controller has completed the Orange County
Court Revenue Audits for FY 2003-04 through FY 2008-09,
which resulted $450,320 court revenue loss to the Criminal
Justice Facilities Fund 104 for the audit period. The audit
found that Fund 104 received incorrect revenue allocation
since January 2009, which was corrected in December 2011.
The correction did not address the erroneous revenue allocated
in FY 2009-10, FY 2010-11, and part of FY 2011-12.
The Orange County Superior Courts provided $10.5 million
estimated total revenue correction amount for these three
subsequent years, which will result in a reallocation of an
additional $3.8 million revenue from Fund 104 to Trial Court
Fund 081. The excess revenue collected in Fund 104 for those prior four years were used for capital and maintenance
repair projects in Probation and Sheriff detention facilities.
Fund 104 will not be able to absorb the projected total $4.3
million revenue loss impact in FY 2011-12. The County
Executive Office submitted 3rd Quarter Budget Adjustment
for the Board consideration to receive $2 million from Trial
Court Facilities Fund 081. The court audit findings reduced
the amount of funding available for Probation and Sheriff
capital projects, consequently the funding for Probation
projects were reduced in FY 2012-13.
FY 2012-13 proposed Budget is $6,550,664, which
includes $2,626,852 for Sheriff's debt service payment
on the Forensic Science Building, $2,026,903 for rebudgeted
capital projects, $1,635,544 for new capital and
maintenance repair projects, and $261,365 for contingency
and emergency projects for mid-year needs and
change orders.
¦ FY 2012-13 proposed budget revenue is $4.6 million,
which is $0.9M less than FY 2011-12 adopted budget to
reflect ongoing reduction in revenue for implementation
of State audit findings.
The primary use of these court penalties, fines, and fees is to
make $4.7 million Debt Service payments on Juvenile Justice
Center Bonds and Civic Center Expansion COP, which will be
paid off in June 2019.
The State Controller has completed the Orange County Court
Revenue Audits for FY 2003-04 through FY 2008-09, which
resulted in $450,320 court revenue loss to the Courthouse
Construction Fund 105 for the audit period. The audit found
that Fund 105 received incorrect revenue allocations since
January 2009, which were corrected in December 2011. The
correction did not address the erroneous revenue allocated
in FY 2009-10, FY 2010-11, and part of FY 2011-12. The
Orange County Superior Courts provided $10.5 million as an
estimated total revenue correction amount for these three
subsequent years, which will result in a reallocation of an
additional $3.8 million of revenue from Fund 105 to Trial Court Fund 081. The portion of excess revenue collected in
Fund 105 for those prior four years was used for the debt service
payments. The majority of the excess revenue is available
in the Fund 105 to address the $3.8 million projected
revenue adjustment, but it will not be sufficient to absorb the
total $4.2 million projected impact from the revenue loss.
The County will discuss the year-end cash and fund balance
shortfall with the State and review all available options during
FY 2011-12 and FY 2012-13. After payment of Juvenile
Justice Center Bonds in June 2019, all available funds in
Fund 105 will be transferred to the State. The negative fund
balance in Fund 105 should decrease each year considering
savings from the refunding of Juvenile Justice Center Bonds
and projected increase in Court revenue. The County will
review all available options to address negative fund balance
situation in FY 2012-13.
The 800 MHz Countywide Coordinated Communications
(CCCS) fund is a self-balancing budget with restricted revenue.
The Base Budget includes a balancing entry to reflect
over-financing to match anticipated Fund Balance Available
at year-end. This budget is intended to fund 800 MHz CCCS
equipment and infrastructure costs. The FY 2012-13 budget
is higher than FY 2011-12 year-end projections, as a result of
fund balance available carry forward that will be used in
future years for 800 MHz CCCS equipment purchases and
radio site development.
System life extension program to extend useful life of
the 800 MHz CCCS network and subscriber fleet.
¦ Interoperable communications for First Responders.
¦ Federal Communications Commission (FCC) required
Rebanding project.
¦ Technical and operational development for a migration
path to the next generation system.
The County is currently in the process of refunding its 2002
Juvenile Justice Center Bonds for an annual debt service savings
of approximately $1 million, a savings of approximately
$0.2 million when completed. The Capital Acquisition
Financing Recommended Budget does not currently reflect
these savings. The budget will be adjusted mid-year to
reflect the final savings.
The base budget requested reflects a $432,085 decrease from
the FY 2011-12 adopted budget. The difference was a onetime
augmentation for additional support and cost
increases.
Mainframe budget has been decreasing each year since its
establishment in FY 08-09, and the budget has been supporting
both the mainframe and new server platform operating
costs.
CEO/IT continues to provide support to the mainframe
operating system as legacy systems transition to new
server
The FY 2012-13 Recommended Base Budget includes a $5.0
million reduction to the General Fund Reserves for Capital
Projects in accordance with the FY 2011-12 Third Quarter
Budget Report. The $5.0 million will partially fund the construction
of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) Court Modular project.
In addition, the FY 2012-13 Recommended Base Budget
includes a $5.0 million increase to General Fund Strategic
Indirect overhead rate increasing from 12% to 12.5%, primarily
due to an increase in CWCAP charges.
Most rates increasing by approximately 2.7% due to reduction
in customer demand and potential cost increases.
New Identity and Access Management pass-through service
rate which provides single, authoritative Countywide directory
of all County IT system users.
New (optional) Mobility services rate which provides mobile
device service management to County Agencies/Departments.
Complete Request for Proposal (RFP) process for the
Countywide IT Sourcing initiative, including Countywide
network upgrade and Voice over Internet Protocol
(VoIP) implementation. This is a significant undertaking
that will change IT service delivery model for the
County.
¦ Complete implementation of the eGovernment Replacement
System.
¦ Continue to roll-out Countywide Identity & Access
Management to all Agencies/Departments.
¦ Implement Countywide Employee Portal.
¦ Provide County Agencies and Departments with technology
to meet their business goals and objectives.
¦ Continue strategic planning, operations and policy
review, and process standardization.
¦ Implement industry best practices and standards to
increase efficiency.
Medical inflation (trend) nationwide continues to rise causing
an increase in medical, hospital, and prescription drug
costs. These rising costs are reflected in an increase in health
plan premiums.
Medical inflation (trend) continues to rise causing an
increase in medical, hospital, and prescription drug
costs. These rising costs are reflected in an increase in
County health plan premiums as well as for other
employers.
¦ Employee Benefits staff will continue to monitor the
cost impact implemented PPACA changes have on
health plan claims costs and health plan rates for the
2013 plan year and beyond.
The Unemployment rate charged to Departments remains at
0.27% of payroll.
Due to the economic downturn, layoffs and the Federal
extension program, the number of claims and amount
of benefit paid significantly increased in FY 08-09 and
again in FY 09-10. The Federal legislation increased the
benefit from 26 to 46 weeks and weekly maximum benefit
from $450 to $475. To assist the Departments with
their NCC budget targets no premiums were charged
from July 2009 through February 2010. In FY 10-11, the
claims experience improved slightly from FY 09-10
which enabled the Unemployment rate charged to
Departments to be reduced in FY 11-12 from 0.28% to
0.27% of payroll. The claims experience in FY 11-12 has
improved slightly from FY 10-11 and has allowed the
Unemployment rate charged to Departments to remain
unchanged in FY 12-13.
Medical inflation (trend) continues to rise and has been
causing an increase in medical and prescription drug claims
within the PPO plans. Plan design changes have been implemented
for the Retiree PPO plans, effective January 1, 2012.
These changes are expected to result in a decrease in overall
medical and pharmacy claims expenses for retirees from the
prior year budget. The overall medical and pharmacy claims
expenses for employees are expected to continue to rise with
medical inflation.
Medical inflation (trend) continues to rise and has been
causing an increase in medical and prescription drug
claims within the PPO plans. Plan design changes have
been implemented for the Retiree PPO plans, effective
January 1, 2012. These changes are expected to result in
a decrease in overall medical and pharmacy claims
expenses for retirees from the prior year budget. The
overall medical and pharmacy claims expenses for
employees are expected to continue to rise with medical
inflation.
¦ Employee Benefits staff will continue to monitor the
cost impact implemented PPACA changes have on
health plan claims costs and health plan rates for the
2013 plan year and beyond.
Priority Reserves. systems.
Workers' Compensation charges to program participants
will increase in FY 2012/13 as a result of a strategic funding
decision to increase program reserves.
Workers' Compensation claim costs are increasing due
to rising medical costs, however, the County's loss rate
and claim frequency are significantly below the benchmark
average for other California counties.
Property & Casualty Risk charges to program participants
will increase in FY 2012/13 as a result of a strategic funding
decision to increase program reserves.
Defense costs continue to increase as does the complexity
of litigation.
¦ Employment litigation involving agencies throughout
the County is increasing.
¦ Property Total Insured Value (TIV) is increasing as
appraisals are completed.
¦ Commercial insurance premiums are leveling and
insurance market conditions are currently stable.
Publishing Services Budget decreased by $44,627 from FY
11-12.
Publishing Services rates will increase by 6% for FY 12-
13 in order to help offset costs. However, the rates will
still be lower than FY 08-09 and lower than market
rates.
Currently, the dental and salary continuance expenses
exceed the premium revenue. Beginning in 2012, the dental
rate is being increased over several years so that the rate will
eventually sustain the projected expenses. In 2013, the dental
rate will be increased by 7%.
Beginning in FY 12-13, the salary continuance rate is being
increased over several years so that the rate will eventually
sustain the projected expenses. In FY 12-13 the salary continuance
rate is being increased by 8%.
To assist the Departments with their NCC budget targets
and to reduce the excess reserve, the dental and salary
continuance rates were reduced by 50% in FY 08-09.
Currently, the dental expenses exceed the premium revenue.
Beginning in 2012, the rate is being increased
over several years so that the rate will eventually sustain
the projected expenses. In 2013, the dental rate will be
increased by 7%.
¦ The salary continuance rate reduction was sustained
through FY 11-12. Beginning in FY 12-13, the salary
continuance rate is being increased over several years so
that the rate will eventually sustain the projected
expenses. In FY 12-13 the salary continuance rate is
being increased by 8%.
The Premium Deposit Account (PDA) held by Standard
Insurance was being used to offset the reduction in the life
insurance premiums. As the PDA balance declined, the portion
of premium that was paid by the County departments
and the employees has been gradually increased over the last
two years to offset the reduction of the PDA. The budget
assumes that the PDA will be exhausted at the end of 2012
and the County departments and the employees will paid the
full premium beginning in 2013.
Effective January 2012, there was 10% reduction in AD & D
premiums.
Life insurance premiums charged to County departments
were reduced by 15% for calendar year 2009. The
reduction in the premiums were sustained through
2011.
¦ Employee premiums for voluntary and dependent life
were reduced by 30% for calendar year 2009. The reduction
in the premiums were sustained through 2010.
¦ The Premium Deposit Account (PDA) held by Standard
Insurance was being used to offset the reduction in the
County and employee life insurance premiums. As the
balance of the PDA has reduced, the portion of premium
that was paid by the County departments and the
employees has been increased gradually over the last
two years to offset the decline in the PDA. The budget
assumes that the PDA will be exhausted at the end of
2012 and the County department and the employees
will paid the full premium beginning in 2013.
¦ Effective January 2012, there was 10% reduction in AD
& D premiums.
