The revenue base budget is $119.3M, a decrease of $86.3M
compared to the FY 2013-14 modified budget. The decrease
is primarily due to operating transfers of $87.1 from other
JWA funds included in the FY 13-14 1st Quarter adjustment.
Most of the remainder was due to an increase of $2.3M in
concession revenue from reimbursement-based airline rents
that was offset by a 1) a decrease of $.5M in Intergovernmental
Revenue from one-time proceeds of Newport Beach Settlement
and 2) a decrease of $.9M in airline landing fees,
RON, and Gate Use fees.
The expense base budget is $144.2M, a decrease of $57.1M
compared to the FY 2013-14 modified budget. This is primarily
due to a decrease of $59.7M in operating transfers to
other JWA funds. The decrease is offset mostly by increases
of $.6M in Salaries and Benefits, $.2M in Services and Supplies,
$1.5M in equipment and $.2M in depreciation
expense.
The base budget includes a $1.6 million NCC reduction compared
to the FY 2013-14 NCC limit.
The Orange County District Attorney's Office (OCDA) has
implemented significant reductions and introduced a variety
of initiatives to reduce the resources required to prosecute
certain type of cases over the past years. Significant
increases to the base budget were avoided through a continued
restructure of staffing in business processes. As a result
of higher than anticipated Prop 172 revenue, pension prepayment
savings, continued cost cutting measures by deferring
and reducing expenses in services, supplies, and
equipment, and eliminating non-essential travel and training,
the NCC request for FY 2014-15 is $3.8 million lower
than the 2013 SFP's NCC request for FY 2014-15.
The FY 2014-15 Budget with augmentation request represents
continued operation at the FY 2013-14 reduced level of
staffing. To meet the FY 2014-15 NCC limit, the OCDA submitted
one augmentation request of $8.9 million to reduce
approximately 74 positions including Deputy District Attorneys
and Investigators responsible for prosecuting murderers,
rapists, child molesters, child abusers, spouse abusers,
and other felons to meet basic prosecution. The operations
of the OCDA are integrated and interdependent. A restore
augmentation of $8.9M is requested to fund 74 existing positions
vital to upholding public safety and to effectively represent
the People of the State of California and provide Orange
County residents and visitors with a safe community.
Although the OCDA continues to handle approximately
80,000 criminal cases each year, 2013 marked another
year of growth in felony cases. To avoid significant
increases to the base budget, over the past years the
OCDA introduced a variety of initiatives to reduce
resources required to prosecute certain types of cases
and continued cost cutting measures by deferring and
reducing expenses in services, supplies, and equipment,
and eliminating non-essential travel and training.
¦ The advance of DNA technology is bringing an unprecedented
number of cold hit DNA cases into the criminal
justice system. These cold hits often identify violent
offenders and may implicate statute of limitations so
that immediate attention is paramount for public safety.
As DNA technology expands, the number of perpetrators
identified by DNA cold hits will continue to
increase.
¦ Continue to evaluate staffing levels to ensure sufficient
resources are available to address both the volume and
complexity of caseloads. Caseload demands are managed
through staff rotations and in some instances use
of volunteer staff. The OCDA has successfully utilized
volunteer attorneys through the Trial Attorney Partnership
(TAP) program whereby experienced private attorneys
are trained and deputized to prosecute certain
types of misdemeanor cases while temporarily assigned
to the Office.
¦ Continue to effectively utilize the Fellowship Program to
provide the Office with additional legal personnel who
have helped in all facets of misdemeanor prosecutions
in Orange County.
¦ Continue to exercise fiscal prudence and closely monitor
revenues and expenses. The OCDA has implemented
significant reductions for the past years to offset Prop
172 revenue shortfalls and mitigate NCC required. The
FY 2014-15 budget includes a transfer out of 100% of
the Office’s estimated Fund 14J OFB or $3.1 million to
fund existing positions.
¦ On February 4, 2014, the Board of Supervisors adopted
Ordinance #14-001 to consolidate the Office of the Public
Administrator with the Office of the District Attorney
effective March 7, 2014.
¦ Work collaboratively with CEO/Budget Office and the
Auditor-Controller to implement the Board approved
consolidation of the Office of the Public Administrator
with the Office of the District Attorney.
A technical adjustment was processed to move the Net
County Cost related to County Counsel services for the Public
Administrator to budget control 029.
On February 4, 2014, the Board of Supervisors adopted
ordinance #14-001 to consolidate the Office of the Public
Administrator with the Office of the District Attorney.
The Task Force has experienced a large number of
investigations involving identity-theft and fraudulent
credit cards to acquire vehicles at local car rental agencies.
These crimes have been linked to the manufacturing
of fraudulent credit cards and associations with
criminal gangs.
¦ The Task Force also continued to investigate and prosecute
"chop shops" (locations where stolen vehicles are
stripped and dismantled, and/or identifying numbers
are changed); vehicle insurance fraud; and cases involving
stolen motorcycles.
Continued foreclosures, even at a lower level than at
height of real estate crisis, will likely continue to result
in allegations of fraud by so-called loan modification
specialists. Most of these entities are fraud mills that
generate illegal upfront fees from victim distressed
homeowners. Increased reporting of fraud involving
short sales as well as an increase in allegations of real
estate investment fraud by those offering high returns
on investments in distressed real estate are also trends
that will likely result in additional allegations of criminal
fraud. Increased initiation of mortgages will likely
result in increases in loan fraud schemes which could
include forged income verification and other schemes to
increase the likelihood of someone qualifying for a
mortgage.
FY 2014-15 Requested Budget for Grand Jury services
include $509,549 Appropriations and Net County Cost,
which is $9,617 less than FY 2013-14 adopted budget of
$519,166. The decrease in Grand Jury budget is due to transfer
of $20,000 transcript cost to Trial Court Budget Control
081, which was approved by the Board.
FY 2014-15 $509,549 Budget include:
1) $305,135 for reimbursement of mileage claims and
stipend (per diem) for Grand Jury members
(assumes no change in stipend from FY 13-14)
2) $163,260 for reimbursement of Grand Jury administrative
support cost to OC Superior Court
3) $39,193 for County Information Technology cost for
Grand Jury members
FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for Juvenile Justice Commission
services include $171,457 Appropriations and Net
County Cost, which is $3,362 (2%) more than FY 2013-14
adopted budget of $168,095.
FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for Detention Release
services includes $1,617,700 Appropriations and $1,607,700
Net County Cost, which is $119,042 more than FY 2013-14
adopted budget of $1,488,658. The increase in Detention
Release budget is due to projected increase in administrative
support cost and services. The OC Superior Court provides
administrative support to Detention Release and receives
reimbursement from the County. The base budget includes
$89,269 technical augmentation rolled into base budget to
transfer funds from Alternate Defense Budget 073.
Probation's base budget includes the loss of $2.1 million in
Title IV-E due to the suspension of a portion of the probation
claiming by the Federal Government, which is impacting all
California counties. In order to meet the Net County Cost
(NCC) limit, Probation increased the budgeted vacancy rate
from 9.5% to 12%. Carrying a vacancy rate of this level is
only possible due to the historically low population levels in
the Department’s juvenile institutions. In the event these
populations rise, the Department will not be able to hold to a
12% vacancy. Probation's base budget also includes the use
of $9.5 million in prior year unspent Youthful Offender Block
Grant (YOBG) revenue.
Probation continues to focus on the efficient and effective
use of staff resources by reviewing the deployment
of existing resources. Performance Metrics and Evidence-
Based Practices initiatives are being used in this
effort. The Department continues to manage with limited
resources to ensure public safety, as well as the
health and security of juveniles in custody. Probation
will continue its joint efforts with the Courts, other
County agencies, and community law enforcement and
stakeholders, especially as it relates to AB109 activities.
Probation continues to make priority improvements to
its infrastructure to increase efficiency, while ensuring
compatibility for data sharing with state, county, and
local agencies. Probation continues to look for grant
opportunities to help fund needed department-wide
services consistent with its use of best practices.
To meet the FY 2014-15 NCC limit, the Public Defender submitted
a reduce augmentation in the amount of $6,363,830
requiring the deletion of 58 positions. As the Public
Defender budget is comprised of approximately 86% salaries
and benefits, it is likely that any reductions to the base budget
would result in staff reductions and the Department
could have to begin reducing caseloads, potentially becoming
unavailable on as many as 11,594 cases. In order to
maintain current levels of service, the Public Defender submitted
an augmentation request to restore $6,363,830 in
General Funds and all 58 positions.
The Office continues to provide quality service on
approximately 77,073 cases per year and is proactive in
addressing workload impacts resulting from the complexity
of casework, realignment, revocation hearings,
parole violation hearings, the three strikes law, changes
in Proposition 36, changes in how some juvenile offenders
are prosecuted, expansion of attorney responsibilities
in delinquency matters, laws mandating increased
sentencing, expanded filing of "cold cases" arising from
advances in the use of DNA evidence and other impacts
of the evolving legal environment.
¦ The Office of the Public Defender in partnership with
the Community Correction Partnership and other
County Departments and Agencies, continues to evaluate
and employ best practices to ensure successful
implementation of services required as a result of
AB109.
¦ During the last several years, the Office of the Public
Defender has worked with the County Executive Office
to address serious budget constraints and challenges.
Throughout this period, the Department has remained
committed to provide quality services based upon ethical,
practical, and efficient values that are consistent
with the County's mission, vision, and strategic initiatives.
The base budget includes an $8.8 million Net County Cost
(NCC) reduction compared to the FY 2013-14 NCC limit. To
meet the FY 2014-15 NCC limit, the Orange County Sheriff ’s
Department (OCSD) submitted six reduce augmentations
totaling $32 million which represents a reduced level of service
and a reduction of 164 positions. The Department has
requested full restoration of the 164 positions and $32 million
in funding. Restoration is vital to upholding Public
Safety and to properly staff and maintain inmate capacity at
the County’s Correctional Facilities.
Prop 172 Public Safety Sales Tax Revenue (Prop 172)
remains a significant funding source for the Sheriff ’s
Department, but fluctuated with the economy and
declined significantly in the past years. Although Prop
172 revenue has experience growth, it is not significant
enough to offset the ongoing operational costs increase
in the areas of Salaries & Employee Benefits, Workers’
Compensation Insurance, Property & Liability Insurance,
fuel, food and other Services & Supplies.
¦ In response to overall operational costs increase and the
decline in State and Federal grants as well as other revenues,
the department is focused on reducing the budget
without impacting public safety. One of the measures
has been to delay in filling vacant positions in order to
save costs. In addition, the department reduced/
deferred facility maintenance and equipment purchases.
¦ The Department faces challenges to accommodate the
increasing jail population. Increases in Correctional
Work Programs (CWP) and Electronic Monitoring may
offset the increase. A reduction of ICE beds may also
offset the increase however it will negatively impact ICE
revenue.
Emergency Management is increasingly reliant on
information systems to produce detailed information
during disaster response, such as automated detection
for radiation plumes, rapid damage assessment tools
and the ability to produce a common operational picture
for all levels of government. Technical support is
now required to manage the informational systems
used in everyday emergencies. Moving forward, high
tech solutions will be required to address catastrophic
emergencies.
Emergency Management is leading the effort to improve
emergency planning for people with disabilities, access
and functional needs through a collaborative effort,
which includes the building of partnerships with private,
non-profit and advocacy groups.
¦ Emergency Management continues to work on planning,
preparing and training for yearly emergency exercises,
including those related to terrorism response,
earthquakes, flooding, and the San Onofre Nuclear Generating
Station spent fuel pools.
¦ Emergency Management continues to improve current
Emergency Plans (County and Operational Area Emergency
Operations Plan, Hazard Mitigation Plan, San
Onofre Nuclear Generating Station (SONGS)) and
Annexes (Weapons of Mass Destruction, Aviation
Disaster) and develop new Annexes (Mass Evacuation,
Volunteer Management, County/Operational Area
Recovery).
¦ Emergency Management continues to lead the County/
Operational Area on the implementation of the National
Incident Management System for all Emergency Plans
and training for all County staff.
¦ Emergency Management is responsible for maintaining
the County/Operational Area Emergency Operations
Center in a constant state of readiness (per County
Board Ordinance) for activation and exercises.
¦ Emergency Management continues to receive a high
number of requests for public education and preparedness
expos, which fall into an unfunded area. There is
no staff dedicated to working with the unincorporated
County area residents and community groups. This is
an area in which requests will continue to grow as incidents
and emergency situations increase.
The Sheriff's Department Court Operations Division
continues to experience growth in the public's demand
for services in the Civil Process activity. Four Civil Process
Technician positions that were deleted in FY 2008-
09 and FY 2009-10 were restored in FY 2011-12 and
several other positions are in the process of being
reclassified as part of an organizational "overhaul" of
this activity.
¦ Assembly Bill 118, effective July 1, 2011 made certain
changes to the manner in which Court Security services
are funded. Funds for Court Security come directly to
the County from the State and have been deposited in a
unique Trial Court Security Account. This account will
be "billed" each month for reimbursement of all allowable
security costs as detailed by the Sheriff ’s Department.
State funding for Court Security should be stable
through FY 2014-15. Superior Court and the Sheriff will
continue to negotiate a staffing and security plan.
¦ The Sheriff's Court Operations Division continues to
maintain a working partnership with the Superior
Court and will seek to maximize security services while
working within available funding levels.
Orange County and Southern California continue to be
the pipeline for Major Drug Trafficking Organizations
(MDTO’s) bringing their methamphetamine into the
United States. Once in the Southern California area, the
methamphetamine is often cleaned with a process
called "Icing" which involves the washing of the drugs
with solvent, which allows it to be sold at a higher price.
The presence of methamphetamine manufacturing labs
in Southern California has dropped; however, the team
continues to encounter these "Icing" labs in and around
Orange County. The drug cartels have moved some of
their production into Mexico where they have more
access to the precursor chemicals needed for production
and less of a presence from law enforcement.
¦ During 2013, PROACT continued to focus on disrupting
drug trafficking organizations in the facilitation, manufacturing
and distribution of methamphetamine. Since
the aggressive movement of production to Mexico, the
PROACT has experienced a shift in trend from production
to smuggling. PROACT continues to identify laboratories
throughout the region as well as the
identification of leads related to the transportation of
methamphetamine in liquid form.
¦ Methamphetamine critical incidents occurring in
Orange County have continued to significantly impact
law enforcement resources. Methamphetamine is also
the primary drug investigated by law enforcement agencies
within the boundaries of Orange County. These law
enforcement critical incidents include buy/bust operations,
enforcement investigations, clandestine laboratories
and search warrants.
The County Automated Fingerprint Identification Fund is a
self-balancing budget with restrictive revenue from Court
Fines. The base budget for Fiscal Year 2014-15 includes
$921,699 transfer in from Fund 14D to fund operational
costs in Fund 109 when revenue is insufficient to offset the
expenditures for that year.
The trend continues to shift from traditional fingerprint
identification databases to multi-modal biometric identification
systems, capable of storing several types of
physical features for identification. Fingerprints, facial
images, iris patterns, and voice patterns are among the
biometric modalities being considered by local law
enforcement to maximize the ability to identify criminals.
¦ The inability for disparate local, state, national, and
international identification systems to communicate
with one another is no longer a permanent obstacle.
The momentum is in the direction of interoperability,
being able to search an unlike system and allowing
unlike systems to search our local data.
¦ These trends will impact the Cal-ID operation and will
result in more technically skilled staff with a more
diverse skill set.
The Regional Narcotics Suppression Program (RNSP) fund
is a self-balancing budget with restricted revenue. The Base
Budget includes a balancing entry to reflect over-financing
to match anticipated Fund Balance Available at year end.
This budget is intended to fund the services and supplies of
the RNSP and to reimburse overtime costs worked by participating agencies. The FY 2014-15 Budget is higher than the
FY 2013-14 year-end projections, as a result of fund balance
available carry forward that will be used in the future to
replace equipment and to fund new items to fight the war on
drugs.
The Regional Narcotics Suppression Program (RNSP)
continues to maintain a key role in targeting Major
Drug Trafficking and Money Laundering Organizations
throughout the region. As these Organizations continue
to use Orange County as a major thoroughfare for their
transportation and trafficking activities, RNSP’s continued
status as an active initiative of the Los Angeles High
Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA), provides the
Program access to the critical intelligence necessary to
maintain the innovative and far reaching approach carried
throughout many of its active investigations.
¦ Mexican Drug Trafficking Organizations continue to be
the primary large-scale drug traffickers in the Southern
California Region. As a result, there has been no change
to the violence experienced along the southwest border
area of Mexico while the different cartels compete to
control the drug trafficking routes into the United
States. This violence has a direct impact on the domestic
market. While RNSP has experienced a decrease in
the price of methamphetamine due to the increase in
product, seizures of all major drugs (methamphetamine,
cocaine, heroin, marijuana) continue along the
border as well as other parts of California. Drug trafficking
organizations are not only using land routes to
smuggle their drugs into the United States, but also continue
to utilize cross border tunnels and air routes to
include ultra-light aircraft. As the violence in Mexico
lingers, RNSP also continues to experience resistance
from drug/money couriers as well as the persistent shift
to female drivers/couriers in an effort to deceive border
patrol and local surveillance teams.
¦ In addition, RNSP has experienced an increase in
Money Laundering investigations, ultimately leading to
legitimate businesses throughout the Los Angeles garment
district area. As a result, RNSP continues to target
and impact both narcotic and money laundering organizations
throughout the Southern California area.
The Sheriff ’s Narcotics Program (SNP) fund is a self-balancing
budget with restricted revenue. The Base Budget
includes a balancing entry to reflect over-financing to match
anticipated Fund Balance Available at year-end. This budget
is intended to fund services and supplies, overtime reimbursements,
equipment and lease costs for part of the Brad
Gates Forensic Science Building. The FY 2014-15 Budget is
higher than the FY 2013-14 year-end projections, as a result
of fund balance available carry forward that will be used in
future years for costs to fight the war on drugs.
In calendar year 2013, the Sheriff ’s Narcotics Program
continued to investigate and eliminate the Sheriff ’s
operational area of illegal marijuana storefront operations.
With the continued partnership of the DEA,
enforcement efforts have resulted in the closure of all
marijuana storefronts in the Sheriff ’s jurisdiction. However,
the closure of marijuana storefronts created a vacuum
for marijuana supply. The result has been an
upsurge of mobile marijuana dispensaries. The investigation
of mobile dispensaries is more problematic and
labor intensive than marijuana storefronts due to their
mobility.
¦ The continued high demand for marijuana both locally
and nationwide, has raised the volume of illegal marijuana
trafficking in Orange County. This activity is
apparent through the high number of indoor marijuana
growing operations and in the continued rise in both
marijuana and narcotic currency seizures through parcel
and airport interdiction. The investigation of indoor
marijuana growing operations creates dangerous hazards
to law enforcement personnel. During these investigations,
the risk of fire, electrocution, carbon dioxide,
and exposure to mold pose the greatest threats to law
enforcement personnel.
¦ Another noteworthy trend is the increase in Tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) extraction labs within the County.
Due to the volatility of the chemicals used in THC
extraction, THC labs pose a substantial threat to the
suspects, the public and law enforcement. An explosion
at a THC lab in Dana Point in 2013 resulted in the
destruction of one home, significant damage to a neighboring
home and the death of one suspect.
¦ The increase in prescription narcotics and heroin use
resulting in overdose and overdose deaths continues to
be a significant trend in the County, especially among
young adults and teens. The abuse of these two drugs is
usually intertwined, resulting from the user switching
between the uses of the two types of narcotics and a
change in the consumption of heroin, from inhaling
heroin vapor to injection into the body by use of a
syringe. Enforcement efforts into this movement have
seen an increase in seizures of prescription narcotics and especially heroin. Sheriff ’s personnel have
increased the number of investigations regarding prescription
drug and heroin sales and distribution.
¦ Another substantial trend, and of significant concern to
the safety of law enforcement personnel, is the increase
in the amount of drug dealers and narcotics traffickers
in possession of firearms. The number of firearms
seized in 2013 was 55, nearly double the amount seized
in 2012.
¦ The continued partnerships with the United States
Postal Service, United Parcel Service, Department of
Homeland Security, Federal Bureau of Investigation and
Drug Enforcement Agency, and a new partnership with
the Santa Ana Police Department, has been successful
in the interdiction of narcotics and narcotics proceeds
through parcel, freight and mass transit carriers. The
Sheriff ’s Narcotics Program has significantly increased
narcotic and narcotic currency seizures at the John
Wayne Airport and United States Postal Service though
increased enforcement efforts. These efforts have
resulted in the combined seizures of over $1,197,000 in
U.S. currency, $30,000 in assets,12.9 pounds of heroin,
271 pounds of marijuana, 13.2 pounds of synthetic cannabinoids
and various amounts of mushrooms, methamphetamine,
LSD and prescription narcotics.
The Orange County Jail Fund is a self-balancing fund with
restricted revenue. This budget is intended to assist in jail
operational costs. Annually, it reimburses Budget Control
060 to partially offset positions added in 1989 for expansion
of the Theo Lacy Branch Jail and when additional funds are
available, it reimburses one-time jail expenditures. FY 2014-
15 Base Budget includes Transfers Out of $950,000 to Budget
Control 060.
The Traffic Violator fund is a self-balancing fund, intended
to fund/reimburse personnel costs and services and supplies
associated with the program. No major funding changes are
anticipated in FY 2014-15.
This fund is a self-balancing fund with restricted revenue,
intended to fund costs for correctional purposes. A portion
of unassigned fund balance is being allocated to partially
offset revenue shortfalls in Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE), U.S. Marshal and other revenues.
SCAAP funding is subject to annual budget approval by
the Federal Government. In past years, there has been
discussion at the Federal level of discontinuing this
funding source. However, each year the Federal Government
continued to approve funding at a reduced level.
In prior years, the Department had kept fund balances
sufficient to cover ongoing costs. However, as a result of
economic challenges that have negatively impacted
Budget Control 060, the Fund Balance Available in Budget
Control 13P has been utilized to offset the revenue
shortfalls in the Sheriff's Main Operating Budget.
Therefore, due to declining revenues, the fund balances
are no longer available to offset future year's anticipated
costs.
This fund is a self-balancing fund with restricted revenue.
The base budget includes planned replacement and major
maintenance requirements of key Department equipment
scheduled to occur following FY 2013-14.
The key trends in mobile computing are the enhancements
to connection speed, reliability, coverage and
security. The Mobile Data Computer (MDC) Project will
continue to remain in the forefront of these advancements.
¦ With the increase in cyber-threats, OCSD is in the process
of improving security with a combination of new
equipment, better applications and the eventual implementation
of multi-factor authentication.
¦ The Department will continue to plan strategically and
to identify other major equipment replacement and
maintenance items to be included in this Fund in order
to maintain future operational needs of the Department.
¦ OCSD has been in the forefront of the digital patrol
video system evolution. Our department has been using
patrol video since the early days of analog VHS tapes in
1994. The importance of collecting video evidence, protecting
our deputies from false accusations and improving public relations has proliferated in the last few years.
The latest trend in law enforcement is the incorporation
of body worn cameras. OCSD is working on merging
this new technology with the existing digital patrol
video system.
The Sheriff's Substation Fee Program is a self-balancing
fund with restricted revenue. The developer deposit fees
received will be used for the future construction of a Sheriff's
substation. Construction has been deferred to FY 2014-15.
The existing substation is severely overcrowded. Future
population growth in South Orange County will exacerbate
the need for the additional space.
The Jail Commissary Fund is a self-balancing fund that does
not rely on support from the County General Fund. Operational
and product costs are projected to increase in FY
2014-15.
During FY 2013-14 the number of County inmates
increased due to the Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE) Detainees and State Realignment
Assembly Bill 109, which have resulted in increased Jail
Commissary profits.
The Inmate Welfare Fund is a self-balancing fund with
restricted revenue. This budget is intended to fund inmate
programs and operational costs. The FY 2014-15 budget
plans for growth in inmate programs and operational costs.
While inmate population remains high, the amount of
commissary sales points toward a higher profit transfer
for the year, however; the largest source of revenue is the
inmate telephone commissions. Recent changes in legislation
regarding telephone call charges and the current
Request for Proposal (RFP) for inmate telephone services
leaves an uncertain future for telephone revenues.
The Cal-ID Operational Cost Fund is a self-balancing fund
with restricted revenue. The budget is intended to fund
operational cost in Fund 109 when revenue is insufficient to
offset the expenditures for that year. The Fiscal Year 2014-15
Budget includes a $921,699 transfer to Fund 109 from Fund
14D.In accordance with the Cal-ID Joint Agreement, resuming in
Fiscal Year 2014-2015, Cal-ID Users (cities) will be billed a
share of the operational costs based on each cities population
which will result in $1,012,359 in annual revenue. In
past years, revenues from court fines/fees and Vehicle Registration
Fees were sufficient to cover operational costs.
Recently, there has been a significant decline in revenue
from court fines resulting in the restoration of collections. 
The trend continues to shift from traditional fingerprint
identification databases to multi-modal biometric identification
systems, capable of storing several types of
physical features for identification. Fingerprints, facial
images, iris patterns, and voice patterns are among the
biometric modalities being considered by local law
enforcement to maximize the ability to identify criminals.
¦ The inability for disparate local, state, national, and
international identification systems to communicate
with one another is no longer a permanent obstacle.
The momentum is in the direction of interoperability,
being able to search an unlike system and allowing
unlike systems to search our local data.
¦ These trends will impact the Cal-ID operation and will
result in more technically skilled staff with a more
diverse skill set.
The Cal-ID System Costs Fund is a self-balancing fund with
restricted revenue. There are no transfers to Fund 109 from
Fund 14E budgeted for Fiscal Year 2014-15. Fund 109 is projected
to have sufficient revenue to offset expenditures.
The trend continues to shift from traditional fingerprint
identification databases to multi-modal biometric identification
systems, capable of storing several types of
physical features for identification. Fingerprints, facial
images, iris patterns, and voice patterns are among the
biometric modalities being considered by local law
enforcement to maximize the ability to identify criminals.
¦ The inability for disparate local, state, national, and
international identification systems to communicate
with one another is no longer a permanent obstacle.
The momentum is in the direction of interoperability,
being able to search an unlike system and allowing
unlike systems to search our local data.
¦ These trends will impact the Cal-ID operation and will
result in more technically skilled staff with a more
diverse skill set.
This fund is a self-balancing fund with restricted revenue,
which supplements jail operations and construction costs, as
well as supports front-line law enforcement in the unincorporated
areas of Orange County. There are no anticipated
changes in FY 2014-15 compared to FY 2013-14.
This funding source is subject to State budget approval
each year. It is anticipated that the State will continue to
approve funding in the future; however, funding levels
cannot be projected.
FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for Alternate Defense
services includes $5,587,360 Appropriations and $5,451,960
Net County Cost, which is $873,490 less than FY 2014-15
adopted budget of $6,325,450. The decrease in Alternate
Defense budget is due to projected decrease in Alternate
Defense cost and services. The OC Superior Court provides
administrative support to Alternate Defense and receives
reimbursement from the County. The base budget includes
$1,000,000 technical augmentation rolled into base budget
to transfer funds from Alternate Defense Budget Control 073
to Trial Court Budget Control 081 & Detention Release Budget
Control 048. Decrease in Budget is due to decrease in
Alternate Defense cases and services.
FY 2014-15 Net County Cost (NCC) for Trial Court 081 is
$39,355,133, which $1,232,731 increase over FY 2013-14 for
3 technical augmentations rolled into base budget:
1) $910,731 Increase in NCC for transfer from Alternate
Defense Budget 073 to offset decrease in recording
fees
2) $522,000 Increase in NCC for transfer of Judges OBP
Budget and NCC from Employee Benefit Budget 056
3) $200,000 Decrease in NCC for transfer of Laguna
Hills lease cost to Probation Budget 057
FY 2014-15 Base Budget include $843,200 decrease for a
projected health cost savings from judges health plan
changes.
FY 2014-15 Budget include $136,293 reduce and restore level
of service augmentation for Trial Court Budget 081. Reductions
were required to meet NCC limits. Trial Court Revenue
from Courts and Recording fee continued to decline in FY
2013-14. FY 2014-15 Budgeted revenue estimated to be less
than required Revenue MOE payment to the State, which
means there will be negative excess MOE payment to the
State. AB233 Revenue MOE payment was set in 1997 based
on actual revenue receipts in FY 1994-95, which means FY
2014-15 Trial Court revenue will be lower than FY 1994-95
level. The restore augmentation is required to make statutory
MOE and CFP payments to the State.
FY 2013-14 2nd Available Financing projections include
$207,526 NCC overrun due to lower court revenue and
recording fee revenue estimates but the 3rd Available
Financing projections shows no NCC overage due to savings
from health cost reimbursement to Judges. FY 2014-15
$63,964,707 Appropriations (with $136,293 Restore Augm.) include:
(1) $54,449,487 AB233 MOE payment to the State,
(2) $4,632,785 SB1732 County Facility Payment (CFP) to the
State,
(3) Excess AB233 MOE payment to State $0,
(4) Supplemental Judicial Benefits $1,793,150, and the balance
$3,089,285 consist of Victim Witness Services
($2,748,730), insurance and earthquake insurance cost
($218,188) for court facilities, Court transcript costs for
Grand Jury Hearings ($100,000) and accounting and telephone
services ($22,367).
OC Community Resources has complied with the 2% baseline
Net County Cost limit increase. While this increase will
help OC Animal Care and OC Community Services meet its
objectives, these programs will manage their operations in
FY 14-15 with even greater increases in costs in addition to
comparatively minimal growth in revenues. As the result,
both OC Animal Care and OC Community Services programs
must continue reduce costs while maximizing the use
of existing revenues.
OC Animal Care's appropriations include $100,000 for
design and development costs of the new animal shelter.
The FY 2014-15 OC Community Resources' budget continues
to face economic challenges of increased costs of
maintaining services with flat or minimal increases in
funding. As the result of increasing salaries and
employee benefits as well as services and supplies costs,
OC Community Resources reduced expenditures where
possible and will continue to subsist on a lean budget.
The Fund 106 Budget for FY 2014-15 contains three new
capital projects including $386,000 to repair the Newport
Harbor Patrol ways cart (which hauls Sheriff patrol boats out
of the water for repair), $250,000 to repair Upper Newport
Bay East Bluff Drainage System, and $336,000 to pave the
public parking lot at Upper Newport Bay.
In FY 2012-13, Fund 106 borrowed $300,000 from OC
Parks Operating Fund 405 in order to pay City of Newport
Beach to dredge portions of lower Newport Bay. OC
Parks staff expect Fund 106 will have sufficient funding
to repay the $300,000 to Fund 405 in FY 2015-16.
Library capital improvement projects are contingent upon
available funding. Capital projects budgeted in FY 14-15
include the San Clemente and Silverado branch remodel and
expansion, Garden Grove Air Handler/Elevator, Fountain
Valley Roof Improvement, Westminster Air Handler
Replacement, and OCPL Headquarters HVAC and Solar
Parking Structure projects.
Funding provided for the San Clemente Branch expansion is
primarily from Library Fee Developer Deposits, San Clemente
Friends of the Library Group, and from the City of San
Clemente.
Library branch facilities will continue to be maintained
and upgrades and enhancements will be provided contingent
upon available funding. In FY 14-15, building
improvements and energy efficiency upgrades will be
carried out to increase energy conservation and productivity
FY 2014-15 budget decreased approximately by $903,510 or
17% lower in comparison with FY 2013-14 Modified Budget.
This decrease is primarily due to the one-time distributions
received in FY 2012-13 from the dissolution of the Redevelopment
Agency which accounted for the larger Fund Balance
Unassigned in FY 2013-14.
Fund 120 revenue reflects a 6% increase in overall property
tax revenue due to an improving housing market and economy
as seen in the increase of secured and supplemental
taxes revenue. OC Public Libraries’ Operating budget plan assumes boosting
current service levels by increasing library material purchases,
continuing the five year plan to upgrade the library
computer systems, completing the One-Desk Model,
increasing broadband for all libraries, and continuing with
needed maintenance projects that were previously deferred
in prior fiscal years due to limitations in funding.
Under the guidance of the Library Advisory Board, OC Public
Libraries has been directed to establish a general reserve
equal to 10% of the operating budget. The recommended
base budget includes a $1.82M contribution to reserves
which will enable us to meet the 10% operating reserve goal.
Future contributions to reserves are contingent upon available
funding.
OC Public Libraries continues to incorporate new technology
and trends into the library system in order to
meet the needs of the community and the changing
landscape on how individuals access information. The
rising popularity of e-books, e-audiobooks, and ematerial
is transforming the OC community’s reading
habits. According to the Pew Institute, in a survey of
Americans’ attitudes and expectations for public libraries,
the Pew research Center’s Internet and American
Life Project finds that many library patrons are eager to
see libraries’ digital services expand, at the same time
indicating the importance of traditional print material.
¦ The availability of free computers and Internet has
equal importance as traditional book borrowing and
librarian reference expertise. Below are the results of a
national survey of Americans ages 16 and older:
? 80% of Americans say borrowing books is a "very
important" service libraries provide.
? 80% say reference librarians are a "very important"
service of libraries.
? 77% say free access to computers and the internet is a
"very important" service of libraries.
¦ Due to a notable number of patrons who have expressed
a desire of even wider uses of technology, OC Public
Libraries will be implementing a number of new products
such as Zinio (digital magazines), Mango (online
language learning course), and apps-based access to
library materials and programs. As a result of the high
demand for e-material, the Library will strive to provide
a broader selection of e-books. The Library’s projected
plans are to create and convert existing space to be more
comfortable for reading, working, and relaxing. Power
sources and open work space will be made available to
the public.
The FY 14-15 Recommended Base Budget reflects a $474K
decrease from the FY 13-14 Modified Budget due to less carryover
funding for projects currently anticipated for FY 14-
15.
The Workforce Investment Act budget reflects a $1,380,257
increase compared to the FY 2013-14 Modified Budget. This
increase is due to additional Federal Workforce Investment
Act revenues that are projected in FY 14-15.
Fund 15F was established during FY 2010-11 to separately
recognize Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) revenues and expenditures for rental assistance
programs. Positions and appropriations were
previously budgeted and recognized in OC Housing fund
15G. Fund 15F also includes over $146 million recognized
for Housing Authority Payments (HAP), which was previously
processed and disbursed through an external bank
account.
The FY 14-15 Proposed Budget reflects a $11.6 million
decrease from the Modified FY 13-14 Budget due to Federal
HUD Administrative Fee and Sequestration reductions. In
addition, the FY 14-15 Proposed Budget includes a Technical
Augmentation to request the transfer of one Planner III position
to OC Housing Fund 15G to realign duties within the OC
Community Services Program.
OC Housing Authority continued to exceed HUD's high
performer lease-up standards of 97% and exceeded
99% over the past two years. Appropriations for FY
2014-15 will be sufficient to maintain optimum leaseup
with a goal to exceed 98% (at least 10,159 families).
¦ The Shelter Plus Care program has continued to expand
since 1999 and now includes 15 grants targeted to assist
approximately 600 disabled households with more than
$8 million in annual rental assistance funding for the
homeless. The program is expected to assist up to 700
households annually as the Division applies for annual
renewal grants for those expiring after five years. By
March, 2014, the program was assisting 697 disabled
households that were homeless.
¦ During 2009 HUD invited OCHA to apply for 70 Housing
Choice Vouchers dedicated to the Veterans Affairs
Supportive Housing (VASH) Program. Case managers at
the Long Beach Veterans Affairs center select eligible
veterans participating in a five year program for supportive
services and refer them to OCHA for rental
assistance. OCHA was awarded another 150 VASH vouchers in 2010, and 75 VASH vouchers during 2011
and 2012, to assist up to 370 veterans and their families.
By April 2013, a total of 310 veterans were receiving
housing assistance using VASH Vouchers. In August
2013, OCHA was awarded another 100 VASH Vouchers,
enabling housing assistance for up to a total of 470 qualified
VASH veteran households.
The FY 2014-15 budget reflects a $1.1 million decrease from
the FY 2013-14 Modified Budget due to less available Federal
funding for housing development projects
The FY 2014-15 OC Housing Budget continues to face
the economic challenges of increased costs of maintaining
services and decreases in Federal funds and the
elimination of Redevelopment funding. As a result, OC
Community Services reduced expenditures where possible
to meet ongoing needs.
The FY 2014-15 budget reflects a $652K increase from the
FY 13-14 Modified Budget due to additional CALHOME loan
expenses anticipated.
$669,000 increase in Equipment - Object 4000 for FY 2014-
15 compared to modified budget FY 2013-14. Increase is primarily
due to FY 2013-14 IT project deferral and increased
need for equipment and vehicle replacement in FY 2014-15.
$15.2 million is budgeted for an operating transfer to Fund
406 of which $7.2 million will finance Fund 406's capital
project requirements in FY 2014-15 and $5.0 million will
increase Fund 406's capital project reserve for future use.
$4.2 million increase in property tax revenue compared to
modified budget FY 2013-14 as property tax revenue is projected
to increase due to an improving economy.
OC Parks expects to receive sufficient funding in Fund
405 in FY 2014-15 to pay for park staff, maintenance
and improvement contracts, and other expenses
required to operate all OC Parks facilities for public use
and enjoyment.
¦ OC Parks has reached its established goal of maintaining
an Operating Reserve equal to 20% of its actual salaries
& benefits and services & supplies. No contribution
to the Operating Reserve is budgeted in FY 2014-15.
The total FY 2014-15 Budget for Fund 406 is $28.2 million
which is approximately $4.8 million higher than the modified
Fund 406 Budget for FY 2013-14. The increase is due
primarily to the addition of $5.0 million to capital project
reserves in FY 2014-15. These reserves will provide funding
for future planned park capital improvements.
In addition, Fund 406 has budgeted $15.2 million in operating
transfer-in revenues from Fund 405 in FY 2014-15. This
transfer will provide sufficient funding to pay for engineering
and capital project construction costs budgeted for FY
2014-15 and increase capital project reserves as noted above.
OC Parks staff have budgeted for twenty-five capital
projects in Fund 406 in FY 2014-15 to further maintain
and protect park facilities. Included is $2,500,000 to
dredge Sunset Harbor, $1,574,000 to replace the water
supply system at Caspers Wilderness Park, $700,000 to
refurbish the Silverado School property for park purposes,
$537,000 to refurbish four picnic shelters at Craig
Regional Park, $650,000 to refurbish four restrooms at
Salt Creek Beach Park, $1,470,000 to restore and protect
the creek bed running through Riley Wilderness Park,
$282,000 to replace two picnic shelters at Yorba
Regional Park, and $429,000 to repair and restore a portion
of the exterior of the Old County Courthouse.
CSS expected the federal and state allocations to remain flat
for FY 2014-15. CSS' FY 2014-15 base budget includes $58.1
million in appropriations offsetting by $55.6 million from
Federal (66%) and State (34%) revenue sources. To balance
its budget, CSS also included a Transfer In $2.5 million from
Special Revenue Fund 12C to offset the expenditures. Due to
increasing costs, there is no net county contribution
included in FY 2014-15 Budget.
CSS continues to exceed federal performance measures
in percent of collections on current support and percent
of cases with arrears collection. The success of CSS plays
a key role in assisting families in achieving and maintaining
self-sufficiency.
¦ Through strategic planning, CSS continues to evaluate
existing program and processes and when possible
implement new technologies to achieve efficiencies,
improve performance, and increase effectiveness of
programs.
The base budget includes a Transfer Out of $2.5 million to
GF-027 to balance the budget. $2.5M also includes $106K
Transfer Out from CSS Building Reserve Account to General
Account 100-027 to reimburse the excess of non-claimable
principal over the claimable building depreciation expenses.
Interest earnings is the Fund’s primary revenue source
which is estimated only $85K as a result of continued low
interest rates.
The base gross budget decreases $48.1 million primarily
related to the expected impact of Federal Health Reform.
These decreases are offset by decreased categorical revenues
in Low Income Health Plan (LIHP) and Health Realignment.
Reductions and cost containment measures implemented in
prior years are carried forward into the FY 2014-15
requested budget in order to align Agency expenditures with
available funding levels.
HCA continues to face the challenge of providing
needed and often mandated health services with limited
resources. At State and federal levels, legislative
measures aimed at budget reduction could have a significant
impact on local funding for health care services.
¦ CHS continues to provide basic and emergency health
care services to County, State (AB 109), and federally
(ICE) incarcerated inmates in the Orange County jail
facilities. As the AB 109 incarcerated population grows,
the bed capacity for other inmates/detainees is diminished.
ICE revenue is at risk in FY 14-15, as there is a
possibility that a reduction in the ICE population will
need to occur, which would impact revenue.
¦ HCA is in the process of building and implementing two
Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems. Correctional
Health Services (CHS) and Behavioral Health Services
(BHS) are implementing two separate EHR’s which are
both expected to improve clinical documentation management,
enhance privacy, and add security and access
control. This effort is consistent with national priorities
in health care to transform the nation's health care system
and improve the quality, safety, and efficiency of
patient healthcare through the use of electronic health
records.
¦ AB1421 (Laura's Law) creates an assisted outpatient
treatment program that provides court-ordered treatment
for persons with severe mental illness under certain
conditions. Counties must opt in to establish a
program. Orange County Mental Health Board will hold
public hearing on recommendation to implement
assisted outpatient therapy (AOT) in April 2014. The
Orange County Board of Supervisors will vote in May
2014 on whether to approve, and provide a resolution to
implement AOT. The AOT team will be identified and
steps for implementation will be identified which
includes facility, policy and procedures, outcome measures,
and program. The estimated HCA costs to implement
Laura’s Law included in the requested budget for
HCA totals $4.4M.
¦ There will be continued emphasis within HCA on
implementing new Mental Health Services Act (MHSA)
programs in FY 2014-15, funded through available Prop
63 revenues. This year, the County has additional
MHSA "growth" funds that will allow expansion of
some existing programs where there are identified
unmet needs. We will also use Prevention and Early
Intervention funds to expand the Post-Partum Wellness
Program to include women who need services while
pregnant.
The Public Guardian budget was adjusted to report through
Health Care Agency, fund 100/department 042. In addition,
a technical adjustment was processed to move the net
County cost related to County Counsel services for Public
Guardian to budget control 030.
On March 25, 2014 the Board of Supervisors approved
the reorganization plan to combine the Orange County
Public Guardian Agency under the Health Care Agency,
Behavioral Health Services, with budgetary changes to
take effect as of July 1, 2014.
Increased Costs of Doing Business and Funding Limitations
- Costs associated with increasing benefit costs, information
technology costs and added workload resulting from continuous
program mandate changes are not fully funded by Federal
and State program allocation funding. The lack of
funding for increased cost of doing business is aggravated by
unfunded program mandate changes, which result in additional
workload and/or higher performance standards. In
turn, this may increase the risk of fiscal sanctions being
imposed for non-compliance due to inadequate program
resource levels.
Medi-Cal provides health care coverage for California
residents who have limited resources and income.
Under ACA, Medi-Cal has been expanded significantly
and new standards regarding income, assets, and family
composition have been added as alternatives to the traditional
Medi-Cal eligibility rules. The State began transitioning
to the new Medi-Cal environment in January
2013, when the Healthy Families program started to
transition approximately 80,000 children to Orange
County’s Medi-Cal program. With the implementation
of ACA, the number of new Medi-Cal applications has
increased by over 50.0% since October 2013. Additionally,
the State has 85,000 unduplicated records in its
data systems, which are being transferred to SSA to
review and finalized eligibility.
¦ Based on the number of clients transitioned from other
programs, as well as the number of new applications
received so far, the number of Medi-Cal clients in
Orange County is expected to rise by 100,000 persons or
more during this fiscal year. Medi-Cal caseload growth
is expected to be 14.1% over FY 2013-14.
¦ The CalFresh program continues to grow as well, up
9.0% this fiscal year. This is significantly lower than
growth during the recession, which peaked with 42.0%
in FY 2009-10. Caseloads include single adults whose
numbers have increased, in part, due to the waiver of
rules which required work or other activities in order to
receive benefits for more than 3 months.
¦ The weak job market in Orange County since the recession
has also coincided with a large increase in General
Relief caseloads. In addition, a Consent Decree required
liberalization of certain program rules, which further
increased the number of clients.
¦ In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) provides services
to aged, blind, or disabled persons limited in their ability
to care for themselves, which enable them to live
safely in their homes instead of a higher priced facility.
Caseloads are expected to increase by 4.0% and hours
are expected to increase by 7.4% in FY 2013-14. Implemented
in FY 2012-13, counties now have a Maintenance
of Effort (MOE) requirement in lieu of paying a
share of the non-federal costs for IHSS services, administration,
and Public Authority administration. County
costs that exceed the total MOE level will shift back to
the State. The MOE increases 3.5% annually effective FY
2014-15.
Ongoing funding for the IHSS Provider Payments - SSA has
budgeted a total County cost share amount of $44.7 million
based on continuation of the current State program funding
participation with the provider wage at $9.30 and $0.60 benefits.
A Maintenance of Effort (MOE) was established in lieu
of County Share of Cost. The MOE is comprised of three
components - IHSS administration, IHSS Public Authority
administration, and IHSS services.
Caseloads and hours are projected to increase 9.1% and
9.6% respectively over FY 2013-14 levels.
CalWORK's caseloads are projected to maintain FY 13/14
levels however pursuant to ACL 14-05 the Maximum Aid
Payment (MAP) will increase 5% starting March 2014.
CalWORK's caseloads are projected to maintain FY 13/
14 levels however pursuant to ACL 14-05 the Maximum
Aid Payment (MAP) will increase 5% starting March
2014.
Due to slight increase in caseloads, the base budget for Aid
To Refugees increased by $89,476 from FY 2013-14 to FY
2013-14.
Caseloads are projected to increase by 28.3% over FY
2013-14 levels.
A Maintenance of Effort (MOE) was established in lieu of
County Share of Cost. The MOE is comprised of three components
- IHSS administration, IHSS Public Authority
administration, and IHSS services.
OC Public Works Fund 080 FY 2014-15 Recommended Base
Budget Request of $40,017,402 is $3,720,658 (7.19%) lower
than the FY 2013-14 Modified Budget through 2nd Quarter
Adjustments. The significant differences are due to: Salaries
& Benefits decrease totaling $600,000 for 18 deleted positions
(13 Real Estate Services to CEO, 5 Accounts Payable to Auditor Controller) net of a lower vacancy factor and retirement
increases; Services & Supplies decreases totaling $3.5
million which is primarily the transfer of all real estate function
costs to CEO, Fixed Assets lower by $111,000, and
Intrafund Transfers lower by $528,840.
OC Facilities/Operations & Maintenance/Central Utility
Facility 1) will continue an effective Preventive Maintenance
(PM) Program to allow for scheduled preventive
maintenance of County facilities, reduce emergency
repair costs, avoid costly building/system shutdowns
and be proactive regarding the stewardship of public
buildings and use of public funds; 2) is working on the
continued development of the CMMS (MaintStar) database
directing Preventive Maintenance work and providing
cost accounting support; and 3) is working to
produce an energy demand model for each County
facility to support strategic project developments targeted
at reducing demand on utilities.
¦ OC Facilities/Design & Construction worked with
Jacobs Engineering Group (Jacobs) to complete the
Strategic Development Plan (SDP) for the Central Utility
Facility and Civic Center Campus facilities in 2013.
Goals of the SDP are to reduce operating costs and provide
a reliable operating infrastructure for County,
State, City and Federal agencies operating in the Civic
Center. D&C has begun implementation of the SDP recommendations.
Our Board of Supervisors awarded an
Amendment to Jacobs in November 2013 for Schematic
Design and directed County staff to begin work on
financing for the project.
¦ The OC Watersheds & the Agricultural Quality Compliance
Service Area will continue its programs of training
staff, educating the public, seeking State funding and
cooperatively partnering with the State to achieve its
goals.
¦ The OC Planning Services Area will continue its programs
of training staff, improving morale, increasing
efficiency, educating the public, and providing the best
and most efficient customer service.
OC Public Works Budget Control 034 OC Watersheds FY
2014-2015 Base Budget request of $16,008,495 is $233,082
(1.48%) higher than the FY 2013-2014 Modified Budget
through 2nd quarter adjustments. Salaries and Employee
Benefits increased as a result of increases in Salaries, Retirement,
and Employee Group Insurance. Services and Supplies
decreased primarily due to decreased costs for Professional
Services.
Regulatory mandates continue to increase in number,
scope, and complexity. The Santa Ana and San Diego
Regional Water Quality Control Boards reissue municipal
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permits for the County, cities, and OC Flood
Control District every five years. In each renewal cycle,
mandates are added and expanded to increase the protection
of drinking water supply, fishing, swimming,
and other uses of Orange County’s streams, bays, harbors,
and beaches.
¦ In addition to NPDES requirements, state and federal
regulators periodically assess the health of waterways.
When data show pollution levels are impairing the uses of those waters, they are added to a list of water quality
impairments under the federal Clean Water Act. In the
most recent update, the list of impairments in Orange
County increased from 122 to 130. A new regulation
called Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) is then
developed to correct each impairment. To date, 33
TMDLs have been adopted that impose corrective measures
on the County, OC Flood Control District, cities,
and other public and private entities. Both the currently
adopted mandates and the growth trend in this regulatory
arena are expected to outpace our resources to
address the problems as well as outpace our ability to
sustain compliance.
¦ The County has taken a leadership role in crafting regulatory
approaches as well as investing in science and
regulatory development to bring forward TMDL and
other regulations for adoption by the Regional Boards.
In collaboration with Riverside and San Bernardino
Counties, regulators, and other stakeholders, a major
revision to the Santa Ana Regional Board’s basin plan
was developed to rationalize recreational water quality
standards for streams and channels. Once approved, it
will retain strict standards for those streams where people
actually recreate and adjust standards in flood control
channels to reflect the actual risk to human health
based on usage; will modernize the water quality objectives
used to measure bacterial contamination; and will
suspend the requirement to meet recreational standards
during dangerous storm conditions in engineered channels.
As a result, cities and counties could invest their
limited resources in protecting those streams where recreation
occurs and human health may be at risk. Initiatives
are underway for improvements to existing
TMDLs for bacteria, sediment, and nutrients, and toxics.
¦ Integrated Regional Water Management Plans have
been completed for all three Watershed Management
Areas to develop collaborative water management strategies
and integrate the management of water supply,
water quality, flood management, and natural resource
protection. The plans identify solutions to meet regulatory
mandates and other water needs, and establish a
context for multiple agencies to collaborate on implementation.
The plans also position Orange County
agencies for grant funding opportunities and prioritize
implementation projects for each Watershed Management
Area.
OC Public Works Budget Control 071 Building and Safety
General Fund FY 2014-2015 Base Budget request of
$9,281,693 is $1,029,451 (12.47%) higher than the FY 2013-
2014 Modified Budget through 2nd quarter adjustments.
The Salaries and Employee Benefits costs reflect increases in
Salaries, Retirement, and Employee Group Insurance. Services
and Supplies also increased in FY 2014-15 resulting
from increased costs for Professional Services including
costs relating to direct charges for services provided within
the department.
The overall increase is offset by an increase of $1,029,451 in
revenues due to anticipated increase in Building and Safety
permit activity.
When comparing FY 2013-2014 to date with the same
period during FY 2012-2013, the data represents an
18% increase in the number of building permits issued.
Based on recent data and current market and recent
activity, the permit volume increase is expected to continue.
¦ OC Public Works/OC Planning will continue to monitor
workload levels and take appropriate mitigating actions
as necessary. This includes a review every twelve
months of the Fee Ordinance.
¦ OC Public Works/OC Planning continues to work with
the building industry on further improvements in its
provision of services, principally through the Development
Processing Review Committee (DPRC) appointed
by the Board of Supervisors and through the Local Governmental
Affairs Committee of the Building Industry
Association (BIA) of Orange County.
A technical adjustment was submitted to request funds from
OC Waste & Recycle Fund 279 in the amount of $5 million to
cover professional services expenses and land right of way
costs related to the La Pata Capital Project.
Gas tax funds are used to leverage available federal,
state, and local grant funds to allow project implementation
to proceed as permits and approvals are completed.
¦ Staff continues to monitor State and Federal legislation
for potential impact on future funding and projects.
The Fiscal Year 2014-15 expense budget includes appropriations
for the architecture and engineering contract and construction
cost related to the landside and waterside portion
of the Revitalization Project and various improvement/
maintenance projects throughout the Harbor. The department
continues to ensure that all available funds are dedicated
to the operation of the Harbor or earmarked for
projects identified as crucial for the safety and well-being of
Harbor tenants and visitors such as dredging, quay walls,
maintenance of Harbor structures and the Revitalization
Project. These funds are also necessary to demonstrate the
commitment of the department’s resources to the establishment,
improvement, and conduct of the Harbor as directed
by the State of California upon the granting of Dana Point
Tidelands.
The safety of the public and environment is the priority
for OC Dana Point Harbor. Staff continues to facilitate
and oversee maintenance projects and restoration of
public facilities to ensure compliance with Federal and
State safety requirements as well as meet the needs and
expectation of the public using the Harbor.
¦ With approval by the California Coastal Commission for
the Harbor Local Coastal Program Amendment, OC
Dana Point Harbor will be actively pursuing steps
towards implementation of the Revitalization Plan. This
includes the development of final design, obtaining a
Coastal Development Permit, finalizing a financing
strategy and acquisition of the required construction
permits.
The Fiscal Year 2014-2015 expense budget includes appropriations
for emergency repairs as required by the Department
of Parks and Recreation, Division of Boating and
Waterways loan agreement.
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Base Budget is lower than
the FY 2013-14 Modified Budget, due to the encumbrance in
the amount of $700,000 in FY 2013-14 to fund the Disposition
and Development Agreement with Lowe Enterprises
Real Estate Group for the entitlement and development of
the County’s 100+ acres of land at the former Marine Corps
Air Station El Toro in Irvine.
Supplemental Assessment filed by the developer reduced the
assessment value for the real properties in the El Toro Redevelopment
areas.
In FY 2009-10, the Irvine Redevelopment Agency filed an
appeal to reduce prior year assessed values for the El Toro
parcels. This resulted in a reduction of assessed values and
negative supplemental property taxes for the El Toro parcels.
The Agency has requested no refund but will offset future
incremental property taxes. As a result of the withholdings,
Fund 15T received no incremental property tax revenue in
FY 2010-11 and received lower $667,147 revenue in FY 2011-
12. FY 2012-13 revenue was budgeted at $518,075, which is
less than the $673,863 amount in the initial schedules and
Recognized Obligation Payment Schedule (ROPS) received
from the Irvine Redevelopment Agency. The revised ROPS
from the Oversight Board to Successor Agency to the Irvine
Redevelopment Agency included a reduced amount of
$110,000 for FY 2012-13, the County received $40,206. An
additional $89,818 in incremental property tax was received
for FY 2012-13 in FY 2013-14. As per County Implementation
Agreement No. 1, Fund 15T receives revenue within 30
days after the close of the fiscal year.
FY 2014-15 revenue is budgeted at $282,000, which is composed
primarily of rent from ground leases and incremental
property tax.
In December 2011, the California Supreme Court
upheld Assembly Bill X1 26 dissolving redevelopment
agencies effective February 1, 2012. The City of Irvine
elected to become Successor Agency to the Irvine Redevelopment
Agency.
¦ The Successor Agency to the Irvine Redevelopment
Agency met and approved the ROPS on February 7,
2013, which included $256,754,898 for County Implementation
Agreement No. 1 to Fund 15T for FY 2013-14
(Year 7) through FY 2051-52 (Year 46). The approved
ROPS shows $110,000 FY 2013-14 estimated revenue
for the County Implementation Agreement to El Toro
Improvement Fund 15T. As per the County Implementation
Agreement, Fund 15T receives a certain percentage
of incremental property taxes, which changes with
changes in assessed value each year.
¦ As per the County Annexation Agreement 2.2.8, the
County would receive 100% of the property tax revenue
that County would have received if the Base, or any part
thereof, was not within a redevelopment project area.
The dissolution of redevelopment agencies resulted in
distribution of an excess residual incremental property
tax revenue to all taxing entities including County General
Fund, Library Fund, and other County Special District
Fund. The excess residual incremental property tax
resulted in a reduction in the allocation to Fund 15T
because all excess residual distribution is counted
towards the 100% of the property tax revenue as
described in the Annexation Agreement section 2.2.8.
As like all other taxing entities (schools, cities, special
districts, etc.), the County General Fund benefited from
the dissolution of redevelopment project areas in
Orange County but Irvine RDA resulted no benefit to
the County due to this provision.
The revenue base budget is $119.3M, a decrease of $86.3M
compared to the FY 2013-14 modified budget. The decrease
is primarily due to operating transfers of $87.1 from other
JWA funds included in the FY 13-14 1st Quarter adjustment.
Most of the remainder was due to an increase of $2.3M in
concession revenue from reimbursement-based airline rents
that was offset by a 1) a decrease of $.5M in Intergovernmental
Revenue from one-time proceeds of Newport Beach Settlement
and 2) a decrease of $.9M in airline landing fees,
RON, and Gate Use fees.
The expense base budget is $144.2M, a decrease of $57.1M
compared to the FY 2013-14 modified budget. This is primarily
due to a decrease of $59.7M in operating transfers to
other JWA funds. The decrease is offset mostly by increases
of $.6M in Salaries and Benefits, $.2M in Services and Supplies,
$1.5M in equipment and $.2M in depreciation
expense.
The FY 2014-15 Budget Priorities are to carefully manage
operating and other expenses; maintain a viable
diversification of revenue sources to provide quality airport
operations in Orange County; and appropriate Airport
cash reserves, Public Facility Charge revenues,
bond proceeds and other financing sources for continuing
capital improvements at the Airport.
¦ The Finance and Operating Priorities are to maintain
adequate financial resources while passenger traffic
growth resumes by controlling operating expenses and
other cash outlays, sustaining Airport revenue streams
and planning for growth in future fiscal years. Keys to
the revenue streams are that compensatory airline rents
and fees are based on cost reimbursement, while concession
and other rents have Minimum Annual Guarantees.
¦ Additional priorities include complete major Airport
Improvement Program projects and other capital
improvements, provide adequate wherewithal to maintain
Terminals A, B and C in good condition and exceed
bond rate covenant indenture requirements.
Expenditures in this fund are financed by transfers from the
Airport's Operating Fund (Fund-Department 280-280) and
Debt Service Fund (Fund-Department 283-280), Federal
and State grants and by interest earnings on the cash balance
in the Fund.
All key trends for the Airport are contained in the narrative
for Airport Operating Fund 280.
JWA will utilize bond proceeds from the 2009 bond issuance
and PFC revenue to effect transfers to the JWA Capital
Projects Fund (Fund-Department 281-280).
Operating costs decreased by a net $20.1 million primarily
due to the decrease in transfers to OC Waste & Recycling
Capital Project Fund 273 and increases in salaries and
employee benefits, construction management, landfill gas
service contracts, multidisciplinary engineering support
contracts, and equipment.
OC Waste & Recycling will continue to support the
County General Fund in FY 14/15 with an estimated
transfer of $8.8 million for bankruptcy debt obligations.
¦ OC Waste & Recycling continues to integrate disposal
capacity and strategic financial and operational planning,
maintains a competitive disposal rate, and continues
to manage risk/liability through diligent
administrative practices.
¦ OC Waste & Recycling continues with its ongoing habitat
mitigation efforts.
¦ OC Waste & Recycling operates and maintains state of
the art environmental control systems and continues to
work towards increasing the beneficial reuse of landfill
gas at the landfills.
¦ OC Waste & Recycling will continue development of the
County’s landfills in FY 14/15 with large capital expansion
projects.
Expenditures in this fund will be financed by a combination
of transfers from OC Waste & Recycling Bankruptcy Recovery
Plan Fund (Fund-Department 285-299), OC Waste &
Recycling Operating Fund (Fund-Department 299-299) and
by interest earnings on the cash balance in the Fund.
The Auditor-Controller defunded eleven positions in order
to meet the Net County Cost limit.
The Auditor-Controller Department has been able to
continually meet established Net County Cost limits
through careful analysis, planning, and limiting
requests to those that are essential to the mission and
goals of the department.
The COB submitted a base budget request in compliance
with its NCC limit.
After a multi-year increase of assessment appeal filings
of 16,000 – 19,000 annually, improvements to the real
estate market resulted in 2013 filings decreasing to
approximately 10,000. While still higher than our previous
average annual filings of 7,500, it has allowed the
department to begin reducing the backlog of appeals.
The implementation of a hearing confirmation process
in FY 2013-14 has significantly reduced the number of
scheduled hearings where the applicant does not
appear. This has resulted in workload savings for the
Assessor and Clerk of the Board by focusing staff efforts
only on hearings with confirmed attendance.
Changes included in the FY 2014-15 Recommended Base
Budget results in the Net County Cost (NCC) required totaling
$14,186,129, in which the Net County Cost Limit is
$13,027,750. One Secretary II position was defunded from
Corporate Real Estate to meet the Net County Cost Limit.
The increase in Net County Cost, Expenditure and Revenue
budget are due to the County Executive Office and Human
Resource Services Reorganization and consolidation of Real
Estate functions. During the FY 2013-14 3rd Quarter Budget
Reporting Process, one Administrative Manager I position
was deleted from Budget Control 054 Human Resource Services
(HRS) and transferred to Budget Control 017 County
Executive Office (CEO) for administrative services support
in Phase II of the Reorganization. During the FY 2014-15
Budget Process, one Chief Human Resources Officer position
and one Executive Secretary I position were deleted from
HRS and transferred to CEO in Phase I of the Consolidation.
Also, during the FY 2014-15 Budget Process, thirteen positions
were deleted from Budget Control 080 OC Public Works
(OCPW) and transferred to Budget Control 017 County
Executive Office for Real Estate Services. These positions
include two Administrative Manager II’s, four Administrative
Manager I’s, five Real Property Agent III’s, one Real
Property Technician and one Secretary I. Net County Cost in
the amount of $870,931 was transferred from OCPW Real
Estate to CEO Real Estate in support of Corporate Real Estate
and Land Development.
County Fiscal Update:
¦ County general purpose revenue is down $57 million or
8% compared to the prior fiscal year, due to the State’s
capture of County vehicle license fees. This revenue supports
the County General Fund budget for mandated
core services such as law enforcement and general government,
as well as County matching requirements for social and health care programming. As a result, the
County will need to reduce spending in these areas for
the upcoming year. The County would normally use
reserve funds to bridge short-term budget shortfalls;
however, a significant portion ($150 million) of the discretionary
reserve has been set aside to repay the State
for past vehicle license payments withheld by the
County.
¦ Infrastructure Needs:
The County’s aging infrastructure at the Civic Center
will require significant investment over the next few
years. This includes building maintenance and potentially
new construction of office space. Jail capacity is
near the limit of the existing facilities. With AB 109
(prisoner realignment), the increase in inmate population
has put pressure on the Sheriff to reduce the population
of immigration detainees, which brings revenue
to the County. New jail construction is underway at the
Musick Facility in Irvine. This project was funded with
State grants; however, the cost to operate the facility will
be a County responsibility and another future funding
challenge.
¦ Revenue-Generating Opportunities:
To generate new revenue, the County is reviewing
financing options to support development of the
County's real estate assets, which has the potential to
generate significant discretionary revenue. New sources
of revenue are critically important to restore the
County’s financial stability. The office continued to
identify locations suitable to develop 16 public-private
development plans as directed by the Board of Supervisors.
CEO Real Estate is currently working on real estate
projects throughout Orange County, such as the El Toro
Development Project, with the goal of providing a revenue
stream for the County of Orange. CEO Real Estate is
in the preliminary stages of developing a marketing and
advertising initiative for the County. All departments
are encouraged to participate with thoughts/ideas and
identify assets and opportunities available to their
respective areas for consideration and inclusion in the
initiative.
¦ Complete Human Resource Services (HRS) and Real
Estate Centralization:
To be completed in FY 2014-15 is the final space planning
and office remodeling activities to allow for consolidation
of non-satellite HRS teams within the Hall of
Administration (i.e., recruiting, classification, returnto-
work, transaction processing), plus the reassignment
of Real Estate Services from OC Public Works to the
County Executive Office. Human Resource Services will
also be examining ways to maximize workforce productivity,
including establishing a mechanism for extended
use of part-time or temporary help.
¦ Full Transition to IT Managed Services:
The CEO’s office is in the process of completing a significant
technological milestone, as Xerox State and Local
Solutions Inc. assumed management and support of the
County’s voice and data network systems. This is part of
a 25-month project to merge into a single converged
voice and data network (VoIP). The new network will
deliver a streamlined design with additional bandwidth,
speed and end-to-end user support by a single
entity. Additionally, the office will be completing modernization
of Print & Publishing services which will
enable acquisition of new customers and expansion of
services.
¦ Standardized Best Practices:
The goal of the CEO’s office is to create standardized
best practices, including measurable goals and benchmarks.
The office is setting a business-focused vision
for agencies and departments with an emphasis on consistent
customer service.
¦ Training and Succession Planning:
One clear way to provide benefits for employees, even in
light of the County’s financial challenges, is to encourage
training opportunities through the OC Leadership
Academy and Passport to Your Future program. Additionally,
the CEO is committed to creating a process for
succession planning to prepare a new generation of
County leadership.
Transfer three positions (Chief Human Resources Officer,
Executive Secretary I, and Administrative Manager I to the
County Executive Office (CEO) as part of the consolidation
of HRS into the CEO's office.
Transfer NCC from the CEO to HRS for HRS assuming countywide
leadership of Volunteer Services and the Orange
County Leadership Academy/Orange County Leadership
Lessons programs.
The Affordable Care Act has resulted in considerable
workload increases for HRS such as increased number
of recruitments due to significant staffing increases in
HCA and SSA, changes to Employee Benefits, and the
future requirement that any County employee (including
Extra Help) working 30 or more hours per week
must be provided health care benefits by the employer.
¦ The improved economy and elimination of the countywide
Vacant Position Freeze has resulted in a significant
increase in recruitments.
FY 2014-15 Base Budget includes transfer of Net County Cost
(NCC) from County Counsel Budget Control 025 to Public
Administrator (PA) $293,606 and OC Public Guardian (PG)
$1,663,764. The transfer of NCC will allow County Counsel
to cost apply actual cost of services to PA and PG.
Due to the challenging financial times the County continues
to experience, we are seeing an increase in litigation,
as evidenced by the escalation of workloads
resulting from cases filed against the County due to
reduction of County services, as well as labor proceedings
and legal actions.
The Registrar of Voters FY 14/15 budget submittal includes
an augmentation for costs anticipated in the November 2014
General Election.
Orange County has seen a growth in Vote-by-Mail voting
without all Vote-by-Mail elections. The percentage
of Orange County voters choosing Vote-by-Mail is
increasing, while the percentage of votes completed at
the polling places is slowly declining.
¦ Wells Fargo and Enterprise Rent-A-Car have assisted
the Registrar of Voters in providing their employees to
work on Election Day. We hope to have our corporate
sponsors’ continued support in future elections. Our
corporate sponsorship program is designed to engage
businesses in the election process by having them provide
technology services or volunteers to work at the
polling place.
¦ Overall survey results from voters and poll workers
reflect extremely well on the operations and service provided.
Several customer service surveys will be taken
during the 2014 General Election.
¦ The Secretary of State launched the Online Voter Registration
statewide for all Californians. Voters will be able
to electronically register to vote, change their address,
political party, etc. We will use their signature from
their driver’s license or identification card on file with
the DMV.
¦ Continue promoting voter outreach at various events
throughout Orange County.
Government auditors are increasingly expanding their
roles from traditional compliance and financial audits
to include complex performance audits and operational
reviews. Conducting these comprehensive audits
requires auditors to possess a broad range of skill sets,
including strong analytical skills, strategic acumen,
communication skills, and operational experience
across diversified functions such as information technology,
accounting, and finance. The Office has followed
this trend by recruiting auditors with advanced
graduate degrees in public administration, public policy,
and business administration as well as work experience
in consulting, management and finance.
The FY 2014-15 Base Budget exceeds the NCC Limit of
$1,887,991 by $848,783. A Reduce Level of Service Augmentation
has been submitted to meet NCC Limit.
Additionally, the base budget includes a Technical Augmentation
to transfer $1,519,112 in NCC funding from Budget
Control 074 (TTC) to Budget Control 015 (Property Tax System
Centralized O&M Support). Currently, three departments
each fund a portion of the information technology
support costs for the Property Tax System: Auditor-Controller,
Clerk of the Board, and Treasurer-Tax Collector. The
Property Tax System Centralized O&M Support Budget Control
(015) under the Auditor-Controller Department was created
to centralize the costs and resources related to the
administration of this system. The approval of this augmentation
will transfer funding from Treasurer-Tax Collector
Budget Control 074 in the amount of $1,519,112 to Auditor-
Controller Budget Control 015.
The Revenue Budget is $11,293,950, which is an increase of
$991,466 from the FY 2014-15 Modified Budget primarily as
a result of increased revenue for the Delinquent Secured Collection
Fee and the Delinquent Unsecured Collection Fee,
and the reclassification of Object 2900 reimbursements to
Revenue Code 7590. The Expense Budget is $14,030,724, which is an increase of
$1,377,268 from the FY 2013-14 Modified Budget primarily
due to increased costs for Retirement ($179,911); Health
Insurance ($83,160); Enterprise IT ($282,769) – reflects the
new CEO-IT rate increases implemented in March 2014;
Auditor-Controller IT Support ($67,189) – reflects increased
costs from Auditor-Controller to provide the TTC with IT
support for desktops, applications and servers, and the Treasury
Fund Accounting System; Printing and Mailing Tax Bills
($190,000) – reflects increased vendor costs; a decrease in
Object 2900 reimbursements of $332,950 due to the reclassification
of this item to Revenue Code 7590; an increase of
$61,000 to operating transfers-out to set aside funds for the
future purchase of remittance processing equipment.
Continuing to meet investment objectives of safety,
liquidity, and yield.
¦ Increasing usage of eCheck, which is the most effective
payment option.
¦ Continuing to reduce the Investment Administrative
Fee to increase yields.
¦ Adding additional payment options for taxpayers.
¦ Increasing secured tax bills collection rates.
The FY 2014-15 Base Budget includes $509,500 of appropriations,
which will be used to purchase remittance processing
equipment.
The FY 14-15 Base Budget maintains the current level of
operations. Due to non-discretionary cost increases in salaries/
benefits and services/supplies, our base budget exceeds
the Net County Cost limit of $2,592,437 by $35,854. A
Reduce Level of Service Augmentation has been submitted
to meet the NCC limit.
Dynamic Financial Environment of the County: This
includes managing reduced revenues caused by State
Legislature changes or economic conditions beyond our
control. Such an environment requires flexibility in the
annual Audit Plan. As such, the Internal Audit Department
(IAD) must be ready to respond to unscheduled
assignments from the majority of the Board of Supervisors
and the AOC. We estimate hours required for Board
of Supervisors' requested reviews based on history and
reserve hours in the Audit Plan specifically for this purpose.
¦ Staff Retention and Replacement: Because the IAD is a
small department, each of our staff is significant to the
accomplishment of the Audit Plan. All members including
the Audit Director perform original work and complete
numerous audits. Due to budgetary constraints,
IAD has been unable to replace some positions when staff separate from our department due to a job transfer
or retirement. Subsequently, these vacant positions
were deleted and affect the flexibility in our audit plan.
¦ OC Fraud Hotline Activities: IAD has operated the OC
Fraud Hotline since it was established in the 1990’s. In
recent years there has been a steady increase in the
number and complexity of allegations made via the
Hotline. (In calendar year 2013, the volume of Hotline
reports was approximately twice that of 2011.) IAD continues
to evaluate the need to modify and reform its
Hotline processes to respond to the increasing use of the
Hotline by the County’s employees and the public.
¦ Information Technology (IT) Issues: The pace of technological
advancement and benefits to be realized by
implementing these advances to improve County business
operations is increasing at an accelerating pace. As
such, Information Technology (IT) Audits continue to
be an important part of our audit efforts. The IT audit
process complements and may integrate with the Internal
Control Audits (ICA). ICAs are audits that determine
whether controls and processes are in place over critical
business processes, and include an evaluation of the
adequacy and integrity of internal controls. We also perform
computer assisted audit techniques (CAATs).
CAATs are automated queries applied to large amounts
of electronic data searching for specified characteristics
in the areas of duplicate vendor payments, employeevendor
match, multiple direct deposits for payroll
checks, and working retiree thresholds limits.
The requested 036 budgeted Net County Cost for FY 2014-15
is $14,239,697, which includes:
1. $7,561,340 for carryover capital projects from FY
2013-14
2. $6,152,014 for new capital and critical maintenance/
repair projects
3. $526,343 for mid-year contingencies and change
orders
The $14,239,697 requested 036 budget for FY 2014-15
excludes $1,700,000 restore level of service augmentation to
transfer funds to Courthouse Construction Fund 105 for
debt service payment on Juvenile Justice Center Bonds.
Base budget includes key Information Technology initiatives
that are recommended for FY 2014-15 by the IT Investment
Review Board. FY 2014-15 Budget includes a $4,623,881
Appropriations and NCC for various IT projects listed below:
1) $800,000 SharePoint Phases II & III
2) $790,000 Public Defender Case Management System
3) $35,000 Mobility Platform - Initial Phase
4) $60,000 e-Agenda Upgrade (CAMS) - Phase I to
define requirements and prepare a Request for Proposal
(RFP)
5) $1,859,599 Transfer to CAPS+ Upgrade Reserves
6) $500,000 Contingency for IT Projects
7) $579,282 IT Project Loan Repayment to OC Waste &
Recycling
Expand Augmentation includes borrowing from OC Waste &
Recycling Fund 279 for continuing support of the Property
Tax Management System (PTMS).
Continue to follow the new Countywide IT Governance
model to ensure collaboration, transparency, accountability,
and business alignment of Countywide IT decisions.
¦ Provide County Agencies and Departments with technology
to meet their business goals and objectives.
¦ Continue strategic planning, operations and policy
review, and process standardization.
¦ Implement best practices to increase efficiency.
FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget is $9,783,393, which
include $7,163,576 for capital and maintenance projects for
Probation facilities and $2,619,817 for debt service on Sheriff-
Coroner's facility.
FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget is funded from
$2,325,000 operating revenue, $3,000,000 operating transfer
in from Budget Control 036, and $4,458,393 projected carryover
fund balance from FY 2013-14.
The primary use of these court penalties, fines, and fees is to
make $3.9 million Debt Service payments on Juvenile Justice
Center Bonds and Civic Center Expansion COP, which will be
paid off in June 2019.
FY 2014-15 Proposed Expense Budget is $3,939,223. FY
2011-12 State Controller's Court revenue audit findings
resulted in a substantial decline in ongoing revenue to Fund
105. FY 2014-15 revenue is not sufficient to fund the bond
payments in Fund 105. In order to avoid the projected negative
fund balance at the year-end (6/30/15), an Operating
Transfer-In of $1.7 million from Fund 036 is budgeted. This
transfer avoids the projected negative fund balance in Fund
105 and allows the Fund to meet the required debt service
obligation. Previously, the County Board of Supervisors
approved resolutions for $2.5 million on June 26, 2012 and
$1.3 million on June 25, 2013. The $3.8 million loans were
not recorded as Operating Transfer-Ins to Fund 105, which
resulted in a positive cash balance but the negative fund balance
at the year-end. Fund 105 will repay $3.8 million to the
General Fund whenever excess funds are available in Fund
105 after meeting its Debt Service obligations. After the payment
of final Juvenile Justice Center Bonds in June 2019 or
earlier, all available funds (including bond reserves) in Fund
105 will be used to repay all loans from the County General
Fund before transferring the remaining balance to the State.
The 800 MHz Countywide Coordinated Communications
(CCCS) fund is a self-balancing budget with restricted revenue.
The Base Budget includes a balancing entry to reflect
over-financing to match anticipated Fund Balance Available
at year-end. This budget is intended to fund 800 MHz CCCS
equipment and infrastructure costs. The FY 2014-15 budget
is higher than FY 2013-14 year-end projections, as a result of
fund balance available carry forward that will be used in
future years for 800 MHz CCCS equipment purchases and
radio site development.
System life extension program to extend useful life of
the 800 MHz CCCS network and subscriber fleet.
¦ Interoperable communications for First Responders.
¦ Federal Communications Commission (FCC) required
Rebanding project.
¦ Technical and operational development for a migration
path to the next generation system.
The base budget requested reflects a $980,002 decrease from
FY 2013-14 adopted budget.
Mainframe budget has been decreasing each year since its
establishment in FY 08-09, and the budget has been supporting
both the mainframe and new server platform operating
costs.
CEO/IT continues to provide support to the mainframe
operating system as legacy systems transition to new
server platform systems.
The requested budget includes the mid-year transfer in the
FY 13-14 of two positions from Fund 100, Budget Control
054 to Fund 100, Budget Control 056 to support programmatic
and finance duties.
The recommended budget also include reimbursement from
Fund 100, Budget Control 081 for the Optional Benefit Program
cost associated with the Judges.
The known projected costs associated with implementation
of the provisions of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act (PPACA) have also been included in
the FY 14-15 budget request.
Base budget anticipated to increase due to additional costs
associated with the new IT Sourcing Contract which will
include new services and implementation of Countywide,
converged Network and VoIP systems.
The County has transitioned from a staff augmentation
IT service delivery model (County purchases staff hours
and provides direction and oversight to contract staff)
to a managed services model whereby the vendors will
provide services based on service level requirements
(performance-based).
Medical inflation (trend) nationwide continues to rise causing
an increase in medical, hospital, and prescription drug
costs. These rising costs are reflected in an increase in health
plan premiums.
Medical inflation (trend) continues to rise causing an
increase in medical, hospital, and prescription drug
costs. These rising costs are reflected in an increase in
County health plan premiums as well as for other
employers.
¦ As the result of implementation of the provisions of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA),
additional fees have been added to the health plan premiums
in 2014. Employee Benefits staff will continue to
monitor the cost impact implemented PPACA changes
have on health plan claims costs and health plan rates
for the 2015 plan year and beyond.
Unemployment claims experience has continued to decline
and no layoffs have been projected at this time. This has
allowed the rate holiday for County departments to be continued
from FY 13-14. Savings associated with reductions in
claim experience is held to maintain sufficient reserves to
fund potential economic downturns or internal labor market
issues.
Due to the economic downturn, layoffs and the Federal
extension program, the number of claims and amount
of benefit paid significantly increased in FY 08-09 and
again in FY 09-10. The Federal legislation increased the
benefit from 26 to 46 weeks and weekly maximum benefit
from $450 to $475. To assist the Departments with
their NCC budget targets no premiums were charged
from July 2009 through February 2010.
¦ In FY 10-11, the claims experience improved slightly
from FY 09-10 which enabled the Unemployment rate
charged to Departments to be reduced in FY 11-12 from
.0028 to .0027 of payroll. The claims experience in FY
11-12 improved slightly from FY 10-11 and allowed the
Unemployment rate charged to Departments to remain
at .0027 of payroll in FY 12-13. Unemployment claims
experience continued to decline in FY 12-13 and 13-14.
The drop in claims allowed for rate holiday for County
departments in FY 13-14 which will be continued into
FY 14-15.
Medical inflation (trend) continues to rise and has been
causing an increase in medical and prescription drug claims
within the PPO plans for employees and retirees.
HR/Employee Benefits staff is currently analyzing the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) to
determine potential cost impacts of this health care reform
legislation on further health plan rate increases for 2014 plan
year and beyond.
Medical inflation (trend) continues to rise and has been
causing an increase in medical and prescription drug
claims within the PPO plans. The overall medical and
pharmacy claims expenses for employees and retirees
are expected to continue to rise with medical inflation.
¦ As the result of implementation of the provisions of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA),
additional fees have been added to the health plan premiums
in 2014. Employee Benefits staff will continue to
monitor the cost impact implemented PPACA changes
have on health plan claims costs and health plan rates
for the 2015 plan year and beyond.
Workers' Compensation charges to program participants
will increase in FY 2014/15 as a result of a strategic funding
decision to increase program funding as outlined in the
Board approved funding policy.
Workers' Compensation claim costs are increasing due
to rising medical costs, however, the County's loss rate
and claim frequency are significantly below the benchmark
average for other California counties.
Property & Casualty Risk charges to program participants
will increase in FY 2014/15 as a result of a strategic funding
decision to increase program funding as outlined in the
Board approved funding policy.
Commercial insurance premiums are leveling and
insurance market conditions are currently stable.
OC Fleet Services Fund 296 FY 2014-15 Base Budget Request
of $32,813,994 is $3.9 million (13.63%) higher than the FY
2013-14 Modified Budget through 2nd Quarter Adjustments.
This is primarily due to an increase in the Equipment
and Depreciation appropriation requests. A high volume of
vehicle replacements have been requested by County Departments
and Agencies as depreciated, obsolete, and vehicles
with safety issues need to be replaced.
As a result of the planned Publishing Services Modernization
Project, FY 14-15 proposed budget reflects an increase
of $683,688 over the FY 13-14 budget for related software
and hardware purchases. The project will provide better customer
experience through a new customer interaction portal,
faster response time through automated workflow,
integrated billing, guaranteed service levels, and enhanced
quality of service.
CEO/IT is evaluating innovative printing technology
solutions to enhance customer service and produce
operational and cost efficiencies.
The inflationary trend for dental claims has been less than
expected, resulting a 4% decrease in the rates charged to the
Department for FY 14-15. The dental rate charged to
departments will be reduced another 1% in 2015.
The inflationary trend for dental claims has been less
than expected, resulting a 4% decrease in the rates
charged to the Departments in 2014. The dental rate
charged to the Departments was reduced another 1% in
2015.
¦ Salary continuance rates have remained unchanged
since FY 12-13.
The Premium Deposit Account (PDA) held by Standard
Insurance was used to offset the life insurance premiums
paid by the County departments and employee.
The PDA was exhausted at the end of 2012 and the
County departments and the employees paid the full
premium beginning in 2013. The rate charged to the
County departments and employees has remained
unchanged since 2013. The budget assumes no rate
change in FY 14-15.
¦ The budget also assumes no changes to the Accidental
Death and Dismemberment (AD&D) premiums.
