The Orange County District Attorney's Office (OCDA) has
been in a glide down mode for several years. In FY 09-10,
OCDA deleted 15 prosecutor, 18 investigative and 25 support
positions. In FY 11-12, OCDA deleted an additional 4 investigative
and 1 support positions. To offset the significant
loss of positions, the OCDA introduced a variety of initiatives
to reduce the resources required to prosecute certain type of
cases. As a result of higher than anticipated Prop 172 revenue,
pension prepayment savings, continued cost cutting
measures by deferring and reducing expenses in services,
supplies, and equipment, and eliminating non-essential
travel and training.
The FY 2013-14 baseline budget includes a deletion of 38
positions and $4.6 million to meet Net County Cost and
other funding limits. Restoration of the positions and
appropriations would maintain baseline services and continued
operation at the FY 2012-13 already reduced level of
staffing. Staff of the OCDA is interdependent and integrated.
As a result of additional staff losses through attrition, the
OCDA has reached a tipping point where further cuts are
likely to be unsustainable.
The OCDA continues to handle approximately 80,000
criminal cases each year. To avoid significant increases
to the base budget, the OCDA introduced a variety of
initiatives to reduce resources required to prosecute certain
types of cases and continued cost cutting measures
by deferring and reducing expenses in services, supplies,
and equipment, and eliminating non-essential
travel and training.
¦ The advance of DNA technology is bringing an unprecedented
number of cold hit DNA cases into the criminal
justice system. These cold hits often identify violent
offenders and may implicate statute of limitations so
that immediate attention is paramount for public safety.
As DNA technology expands, the number of perpetrators
identified by DNA cold hits will continue to
increase.
¦ Continue to evaluate staffing levels to ensure sufficient
resources are available to address both the volume and
complexity of caseloads. Caseload demands are managed
through staff rotations and in some instances use
of volunteer staff. The Office has successfully utilized
volunteer attorneys through the Trial Attorney Partnership
(TAP) program whereby experienced private attorneys
are trained and deputized to prosecute certain
types of misdemeanor cases while temporarily assigned
to the Office.
¦ Continue to exercise fiscal prudence and closely monitor
revenues and expenses. The OCDA has implemented
significant reductions for several years to offset Prop
172 revenue shortfalls and mitigate NCC required. The
FY 2012-13 budget includes a transfer out of 100% of
the Office’s Fund 14J FBA or $4.6 million to fund existing
positions. Further, the Office endured additional
staff losses through attrition. To cope with the loss of
staff, the OCDA has implemented a variety of initiatives
to reduce the resources required to prosecute certain
type of cases.
¦ Continue to work collaboratively with CEO/Budget
Office and highlight variances and issues, which may
impact budget requirements.
The Task Force has experienced a large number of
investigations involving identity-theft and fraudulent
credit cards to acquire vehicles at local car rental agencies.
These crimes have been linked to the manufacturing
of fraudulent credit cards and associations with
criminal gangs.
¦ The Task Force also continued to investigate and prosecute
"chop shops" (locations where stolen vehicles are
stripped and dismantled, and/or identifying numbers
are changed); vehicle insurance fraud; and cases involving
stolen motorcycles.
As a result of a 2012 statute amendment that authorized collection
of the fee on additional specified real estate documents,
the program revenue is expected to be higher than
prior years. The collection on additional documents began
in January 2013.
Continued foreclosures, even at a lower level than at
height of real estate crisis, will result in allegations of
fraud by so-called loan modification specialists. Most of
these entities are fraud mills that generate illegal
upfront fees from victim distressed homeowners.
Increased reporting of fraud involving short sales as
well as an increase in allegations of real estate investment
fraud by those offering high returns on investments
in distressed real estate are also trends that will
likely result in additional allegations of criminal fraud.
FY 2013-14 Requested Budget for Grand Jury services
include $539,166 Appropriations and Net County Cost,
which is $25,140 more than FY 2012-13 adopted budget of
$514,026. The increase in Grand Jury budget is due to FY
2012-13 3rd Quarter Budget Adjustment for increased
administrative support cost and services. The OC Superior
Court provides administrative support to Grand Jury and
receives reimbursement from the County. The base budget
includes $20,000 technical augmentation rolled into base
budget to reconcile with FY 2012-13 3rd Quarter ongoing
budget adjustment.
As per Memorandum of Understanding between the
County and OC Superior Courts, the County reimburses
the Court costs incurred for this program. FY 2013-14
Proposed Budget for Grand Jury services include
$539,166 appropriations and Net County Cost.
FY 2013-14 Proposed Budget for Juvenile Justice Commission
services include $168,095 Appropriations and Net
County Cost, which is $1,664 (1%) more than FY 2012-13
adopted budget of $166,431.
As per Memorandum of Understanding between the
County and OC Superior Courts, the County reimburses
the Court costs incurred for this program. FY 2013-14
Proposed Budget for Juvenile Justice Commission services
include $168,095 Appropriations and Net County
Cost.
FY 2013-14 Requested Budget for Detention Release services
include $1,478,658 Appropriations and $1,468,658 Net
County Cost, which is $5,261 less than FY 2012-13 adopted
budget of $1,473,919. The decrease in Detention Release
budget is due to FY 2012-13 3rd Quarter Budget Adjustment
for projected decrease in administrative support cost and
services. The OC Superior Court provides administrative
support to Detention Release and receives reimbursement
from the County. The base budget includes $20,000 technical
augmentation (reductions) rolled into base budget to reconcile
with FY 2012-13 3rd Quarter ongoing budget adjustment.
As per Memorandum of Understanding between the
County and OC Superior Courts, the County reimburses
the Court costs incurred for this program.
¦ FY 2013-14 Proposed Budget for Detention Release services
include $1,478,658 Appropriations and $1,468,658
Net County Cost.
Probation's base budget includes the loss of $5.3 million in
SB678 funding as a result of State budget cuts. To meet the
Net County Cost (NCC) limit, Probation increased the budgeted
vacancy factor from 8.5% to 9.5%, resulting in the
need to leave an additional 14 positions vacant throughout
the year to meet the NCC budget limit. Probation's base budget
also includes use of $2.9 million in prior year unspent
Youthful Offender Block Grant (YOBG) revenue, and the
inability to fully fund all information technology upgrades
and improvements.
Probation continues to focus on the efficient and effective
use of staff resources by continuing to review
deployment of its existing resources. The Balanced
Scorecard and Evidence-Based Practices initiatives are
being used to continue this effort. The Department continues
to manage with limited resources to ensure public
safety, as well as the health and security of juveniles
in custody. Probation will continue its joint efforts with
the Courts, other County agencies, and community law
enforcement and stakeholders, especially as it relates to
AB109 activities. Probation continues to make priority
improvements in its information technology infrastructure
to increase efficiency, while ensuring compatibility
for data sharing with state, county, and local agencies.
Probation continues to look for grant opportunities to
help fund needed department-wide services consistent
with its use of best practices.
To meet the FY 2013-14 NCC limit, the Public Defender submitted
a reduce augmentation in the amount of $3.7 million
requiring the deletion of 37 positions. As the Public
Defender’s budget is comprised primarily of salaries and
benefits, it is likely that any reductions to the base budget
would result in staff reductions and the Department could
have to begin reducing caseloads, potentially becoming
unavailable on as many as 10,464 cases. In order to maintain
current levels of service the Public Defender submitted an
augmentation request to restore the $3.7 million in General
Funds and all 37 positions.
The Office continues to provide quality service on
approximately 78,000 cases per year and is proactive in
addressing workload impacts resulting from the complexity
of casework, realignment, revocation hearings,
the three strikes law, changes in Proposition 36, changes
in how some juvenile offenders are prosecuted, expansion
of attorney responsibilities in delinquency matters,
laws mandating increased sentencing, expanded filing
of "cold cases" arising from advances in the use of DNA
evidence and other impacts of the evolving legal environment.
¦ The Office of the Public Defender in partnership with
the Community Correction Partnership and other
County Departments and Agencies, continues to evaluate
and employ best practices to ensure successful
implementation of services required as a result of
AB109. In FY 2013-14, the County will assume responsibility
for all State Parole Violation Hearings.
¦ Over the last several years, the Office of the Public
Defender has worked with the County Executive Office
to address serious budget constraints and challenges.
Throughout this period, the Department has remained
committed to provide services based upon ethical,
practical and efficient values that are consistent with the
County’s mission, vision and strategic initiatives.
Negotiated Salary and Benefits adjustments and rate
increase in Worker's Compensation Insurance and Property
& Liability Insurance.
Prop 172 Public Safety Sales Tax Revenue (Prop 172)
remains a significant funding source for the Sheriff's
Department, but fluctuated with the economy and
declined significantly in past years. Although Prop 172
revenue has started to experience growth, it is not significant
enough to offset the ongoing operational costs
increase in the areas of Salaries & Employee Benefits,
Workers' Compensation Insurance, Property & Liability
Insurance, fuel, and food as well as other Services &
Supplies.
¦ In response to overall operational costs increase and the
decline in State and Federal grants as well as other revenues,
the department focused on reducing the budget
without impacting public safety. One of the measures
was to hold vacancies open longer in order to save cost.
In addition, the department reduced/deferred facility
maintenance and equipment purchases, and eliminated
extra-help positions.
¦ The department aggressively sought grants, contracts
and other sources of funding. In FY 2012-13 Federal
grant funding continued, the ICE contract slightly
increased due to additional detainees housed in our jail
facilities. The department entered into a new contract
with the City of Yorba Linda for Law Enforcement Services
and a new contract with the City of Santa Ana for
helicopter services. The department also received additional
State revenue for Assembly Bill (AB) 109. In FY
2012-13, AB 109 revenue represented approximately
$30 million, an increase of $15 million compared to FY
2011-12.
The financial challenges we have faced over the last few
years have greatly impacted the organization. With all
the constraints we face, the Department will continue to
search for ways to reduce expenditures without impacting
public safety, as well as to continually achieve exceptional
success in our mission to serve the residents of
Orange County.
Emergency Management is increasingly reliant on
information systems to produce detailed information
during disaster response, such as automated detection
for radiation plumes, rapid damage assessment tools
and the ability to produce a common operational picture
for all levels of government. Technical support is
now required to manage the informational systems
used in everyday emergencies. Moving forward, high
tech solutions will be required to address catastrophic
emergencies.
¦ Emergency Management is leading the effort to improve
emergency planning for people with disabilities, access
and functional needs through a collaborative effort,
which includes the building of partnerships with private,
non-profit and advocacy groups.
¦ Emergency Management continues to work on planning,
preparing and training for yearly emergency exercises,
including those related to the San Onofre Nuclear
Generating Station.
¦ Emergency Management continues to improve current
Emergency Plans (County and Operational Area Emergency
Operations Plan, Hazard Mitigation Plan, San
Onofre Nuclear Generating Station (SONGS)) and
Annexes (Weapons of Mass Destruction, Aviation
Disaster) and develop new Annexes (Mass Evacuation,
Volunteer Management, County/Operational Area
Recovery).
¦ Emergency Management continues to lead the County/
Operational Area on the implementation of the National
Incident Management System for all Emergency Plans
and training for all County staff.
¦ Emergency Management is responsible for maintaining
the County/Operational Area Emergency Operations
Center in a constant state of readiness (per County
Board Ordinance) for activation and exercises.
¦ Emergency Management continues to receive a high
number of requests for public education and preparedness
expos, which fall into an unfunded area. There is
no staff dedicated to working with the unincorporated
County area residents and community groups. This is
an area in which requests will continue to increase as
incidents and emergency situations increase.
The Sheriff's Department Court Operations Division
continues to experience growth in the public's demand
for services in the Civil Process activity even while
available General Fund monies have diminished. Four
Civil Process Technician positions that were deleted in
08-09 and 09-10 were restored in 11-12 and several
other positions are in the process of being reclassified as
part of an organizational "overhaul" of this activity.
Court Operations holds positions vacant for extended
periods of time to accommodate any NCC reductions.
¦ Assembly Bill 118, effective July 1, 2011 made certain
changes to the manner in which Court Security services
are funded. Funds for Court Security come directly to
the County from the State and have been deposited in a
unique Trial Court Security Account. This account will
be "billed" each month for reimbursement of all allowable
security costs as detailed by the Sheriff ’s Department.
State funding for Court Security should be stable
through FY 2014-15. Superior Court and the Sheriff will
continue to negotiate a staffing and security plan, in
which the Court is no longer in the middle of the flow of
funding.
¦ The Sheriff's Court Operations Division continues to
maintain a working partnership with the Superior
Court and will seek to maximize security services while
working within available funding levels.
Interoperable communications for first responders.
¦ Digital audio and video recording systems and services.
¦ Video conferencing/visitation systems.
¦ Jail electronics and control systems and services.
¦ System life extension program to extend useful life of
the 800 MHz network and subscriber fleet.
¦ Next generation radio system planning.
¦ Rebanding planning and implementation.
FY 2013-14 consists of new grant funding.
Orange County and Southern California continue to be
the pipeline for major drug trafficking organizations
(MDTO’s) bringing their methamphetamine into the
United States. Once in the Southern California area, the
methamphetamine is often cleaned with a process
called "Icing" which involves the washing of the drugs
with solvent, which allows it to be sold at a higher price.
The presence of methamphetamine manufacturing labs
in Southern California has dropped; however, the team
continues to encounter these "Icing" labs in and around
Orange County. The drug cartels have moved some of
their production into Mexico where they have more
access to the precursor chemicals needed for production
and less of a presence from law enforcement.
¦ During 2012, PROACT continued to focus on disrupting
the drug trafficking organization in the facilitation,
manufacturing and distribution of methamphetamine.
The team has worked, and continues to work extensively,
with federal agencies as well as local law enforcement
in establishing an ongoing wire-tap investigation.
This investigation is very intensive and involves a large
Mexican drug trafficking organization. The organization
is involved in transporting large amounts of methamphetamine
from Mexico and distributing the drugs
to northern California, Kansas, Nevada and Texas.
 The County Automated Fingerprint Identification Fund is a
self-balancing budget with restrictive revenue from Court
Fines. The base budget includes $880,000 transfer in from
Fund 14D and Fund 14E to fund operational costs in Fund
109 when revenue is insufficient to offset the expenditures
for that year.
The trend continues to shift from traditional fingerprint
identification databases to multi-modal biometric identification
systems, capable of storing several types of
physical features for identification. Fingerprints, facial
images, iris patterns, and voice patterns are among the
biometric modalities being considered by local law
enforcement to maximize the ability to identify criminals.
¦ The inability for disparate local, state, national, and
international identification systems to communicate
with one another is not the permanent obstacle it once
was. The momentum is in the direction of interoperability,
being able to search an unlike system and allowing
unlike systems to search our local data.
¦ These trends will impact the Cal-ID operation and will
result in more technically skilled staff with a more
diverse skill set.
The Regional narcotics Suppression Program (RNSP) fund is
a self-balancing fund with restricted revenue. This budget is
intended to fund services and supplies and to reimburse
overtime costs worked by participating agencies. The FY
2013-14 Budget is higher than the FY 2012-13 year-end projections,
as a result of fund balance available carry forward
that will be used in the future to replace equipment and to
fund new items to fight the war on drugs.
Violence along the southwest border area of Mexico
continues to escalate as the different cartels compete to
control the drug trafficking routes into the United
States. This violence has a direct impact on the domestic
market. Seizures of all major drugs (methamphetamine,
cocaine, heroin, marijuana) continue along the
border as well as other parts of California. Drug trafficking
organizations are not only using land routes to
smuggle their drugs into the United States, but continue
to utilize cross border tunnels and air routes to include
ultra-light aircraft. In addition, cartels are also taking
their drug loads via the ocean with the use of "Panga"
boats where the drugs are off loaded along the coast as
far north as Santa Barbara. This approach to smuggling
has a direct impact in and around Orange County. RNSP
continues to impact these organizations in the areas of
narcotic and U.S. currency seizures targeting both narcotic
and money laundering organizations. Mexican
Drug Trafficking Organizations continue to be the primary
large-scale drug traffickers in the Southern California
Region.
¦ Due to the violence in Mexico, RNSP continues to experience
resistance from drug/money couriers as well as a
shift to female drivers/couriers in an effort to deceive
border patrol and local surveillance teams. In addition,
RNSP continues to experience and investigate major
drug trafficking/money laundering organizations utilizing
electronic money transfers as a means of transporting
currency across state and international lines.
The Sheriff ’s Narcotics Program (SNP) fund is a self-balancing
fund with restricted revenue. This budget is intended to
fund services and supplies, overtime reimbursements,
equipment and lease cost for part of the Brad Gates Forensic
Science Building. The FY 2013-14 Budget is higher than the
FY 2012-13 year-end projections, as a result of fund balance
available carry forward that will be used in future years for
costs to fight the war on drugs.
In 2012, the Sheriff ’s Narcotics Program continued to
lead the County in the area of storefront marijuana
investigations. With the continued partnership of the
DEA, enforcement efforts have resulted in closure of all
except two marijuana storefronts in the Sheriff ’s operational
area.
¦ The continued high demand for marijuana, both locally
and nationwide, has raised the volume of illegal marijuana
trafficking in Orange County. This activity is
apparent through the high number of indoor marijuana
growing operations, and rise in both marijuana and
narcotic currency seizures through parcel and airport
interdiction. The investigation of indoor marijuana
growing operations brings a list of dangerous hazards to
law enforcement personnel. During these investigations,
the risk of fire, electrocution, carbon dioxide, and
mold pose the greatest threats to law enforcement personnel.
¦ Another significant trend is the increase in overdose
deaths as the result of prescription narcotic abuse and
rise in heroin use. The abuse of these two drugs is usually
intertwined, typically resulting from the user
switching between the uses of the two types of narcotics.
Enforcement efforts for this trend have seen an
increase in seizures and investigations into their distribution. Sheriff ’s personnel have increased the number
of investigations regarding prescription drug and heroin
sales. The DEA’s "Diversion Group" has been utilized
in several investigations, having and specializing in the
investigations of doctors, pharmacies and consumers.
¦ The increase partnerships with the United States Postal
Service, United Parcel Service, the Department of
Homeland Security, the Federal Bureau of Investigation
and Drug Enforcement Agency has been successful in
interdiction of narcotics trafficking through parcel,
freight and mass transit carriers. The Sheriff ’s Narcotics
Program has significantly increased narcotic and narcotic
currency seizures at the John Wayne Airport and
United States Postal Service though increased enforcement
efforts. These efforts have resulted in the combined
seizures of over $920,000 U.S. currency, 5 pounds
of cocaine, 32 pounds of marijuana, 2 pounds of synthetic
stimulants (Bath Salts), and 3 firearms.
The Orange County Jail Fund is a self-balancing fund with
restricted revenue. This budget is intended to assist in jail
operational costs. Annually, it reimburses Budget Control
060 to partially offset positions added in 1989 for expansion
of the Theo Lacy Branch Jail and when additional funds are
available, it reimburses one-time jail expenditures. FY 2013-
14 Base Budget includes Transfers Out of $950,000 to Budget
Control 060.
The Traffic Violator fund is a self-balancing fund, intended
to fund/reimburse personnel costs and services and supplies
associated with the program. No major funding changes are
anticipated going into FY 2013-14.
This fund is a self-balancing fund with restricted revenue,
intended to fund costs for correctional purposes. All unassigned
fund balance is being allocated to partially offset
anticipated reductions in Immigration Customs and
Enforcement (ICE), U.S. Marshal and other revenues.
SCAAP funding is subject to annual budget approval by
the Federal Government. In past years, there has been
discussion at the Federal level of discontinuing this
funding source. However, in each of the years, the Federal
Government continued to approve funding at a
reduced level. In prior years, the Department had kept
fund balances sufficient to cover ongoing costs for five
years. However, as a result of economic challenges that
have negatively impacted Budget Control 060, the Fund
Balance Available in Budget Control 13P has been utilized
to offset revenue shortfalls in the Sheriff's Main
Operating Budget. Therefore, fund balances are no
longer available to offset future year's anticipated costs.
This fund is a self-balancing fund with restricted revenue
The base budget includes planned replacement and major
maintenance requirements of key Department equipment
scheduled to occur following FY 2012-13.
The key trends in mobile computing are the enhancements
to connection speed, reliability, coverage and
security. The Mobile Data Computer (MDC) Project will
continue to remain in the forefront of these advancements.
¦ With the increase in cyber-threats, we are in the process
of improving our security with a combination of new
equipment, better applications and the eventual implementation
of multi-factor authentication.
¦ The Department will continue to plan strategically and
to identify and other major equipment replacement and
maintenance items to be included in this Fund in order
to maintain future operational needs of the Department.
The Sheriff's Substation Fee Program is a self-balancing
fund with restricted revenue. The developer deposit fees
received will be used for the future construction of a Sheriff's
substation. Construction has been deferred to FY 2013-14.
The existing substation is severely overcrowded. Future
population growth in South Orange County will exacerbate
the need for the additional space.
The Jail Commissary Fund is a self-balancing fund with
restricted revenue. This budget is intended to fund commissary
product and operational costs which include anticipated
cost increases in FY 2013-14.
The decrease in revenues related to the reduced inmate
population and the economic downturn continued during
the first few months of FY 2011-12. Recently, the
number of County inmates and Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE) Detainees has increased
slightly and State Realignment AB 109 agreements were
implemented. These occurrences have resulted in
increased Jail Commissary profits.
The Inmate Welfare Fund is a self-balancing fund with
restricted revenue. This budget is intended to fund inmate
program and operational costs. The FY 2013-14 budget
plans for growh in inmate programs and operational costs.
Recently, the number of County inmates and Immigration
and Customs Enforcement (ICE) Detainees has
increased slightly and State Realignment AB 109 agreements
were implemented. These occurrences have
resulted in increased telephone commissions, profit
transfer from Jail Commissary and education contracts
related to the additional inmate/detainee population.
The CAL-ID Operational Costs Fund is a self-balancing fund
with restricted revenue. The budget is intended to fund
operational costs in Fund 109 when revenue is insufficient to
offset the expenditures for that year. The FY 2013-14 budget
includes a transfer to Fund 109 from Fund 14D in the
amount of $33,166.
The trend continues to shift from traditional fingerprint
identification databases to multi-modal biometric identification
systems, capable of storing several types of
physical features for identification. Fingerprints, facial
images, iris patterns, and voice patterns are among the
biometric modalities being considered by local law
enforcement to maximize the ability to identify criminals.
¦ The inability for disparate local, state, national, and
international identification systems to communicate
with one another is not the permanent obstacle it once
was. The momentum is in the direction of interoperability,
being able to search an unlike system and allowing
unlike systems to search our local data.
¦ These trends will impact the Cal-ID operation and will
result in more technically skilled staff with a more
diverse skill set.
The CAL-ID System Costs Fund is a self-balancing fund with
restricted revenue. The FY 2013-14 budget includes a transfer
to Fund 109 from Fund 14E in the amount of $846,834 to
fund operational costs in Fund 109 if revenue is insufficient
to offset expenditures.
The trend continues to shift from traditional fingerprint
identification databases to multi-modal biometric identification
systems, capable of storing several types of
physical features for identification. Fingerprints, facial
images, iris patterns, and voice patterns are among the
biometric modalities being considered by local law
enforcement to maximize the ability to identify criminals.
¦ The inability for disparate local, state, national, and
international identification systems to communicate
with one another is not the permanent obstacle it once
was. The momentum is in the direction of interoperability,
being able to search an unlike system and allowing
unlike systems to search our local data.
¦ These trends will impact the Cal-ID operation and will
result in more technically skilled staff with a more
diverse skill set.
This fund is a self-balancing fund with restricted revenue,
which supplements jail operations and construction costs, as
well as supports front-line law enforcement in the unincorporated
areas of Orange County. There are no significant,
planned changes in the FY 2013-14 budget from FY 2012-13.
This funding source is subject to State budget approval
each year. It is anticipated that the State will continue to
approve funding in the future; however, funding levels
cannot be projected.
FY 2013-14 Net County Cost (NCC) for Trial Court 081 is
$38,102,402, which is same as FY 2012-13. FY 2012-13 NCC
was reduced by $434,775 with expected increase in ongoing
revenue ($1.8M) from State Audit findings offset by ongoing
increase in State AB233 MOE payment ($0.9M), increase in
supplemental judicial benefits ($0.4M), and increase in
earthquake insurance ($0.1M). FY 2012-13 & FY 2013-14
overall 081 court revenue seems lower than our initial projections.
FY 2012-13 2nd Available Financing projections
include $308,400 NCC overrun due to lower court revenue
estimates.
FY 2013-14 $65,415,111 Appropriations include (1)
$54,449,487 AB233 MOE payment to the State, (2)
$4,632,785 SB1732 County Facility Payment (CFP) to the
State, (3) Excess AB233 MOE payment to State $1,000,000,
(4) Supplemental Judicial Benefits $2,103,100, and the balance $3,229,739 consist of Victim Witness Services
($2,793,451), County share of cost for Laguna Hills Lease
($200,000), insurance and earthquake insurance cost
($215,309) for court facilities, and accounting and telephone
services ($20,979).
California State Controller completed the Court Revenue
Audit for FY 2003-04 through FY 2008-09. These actual
audit findings were implemented in FY 2011-12. These audit
findings did not address incorrect allocation of revenue during
FY 2009-10, FY 2010-11, and FY 2011-12. The total
impact of the prior year audit findings will result in one-time
revenue increase of $10.2 million and one-time appropriation
increase by $7 million in FY 2011-12. The ongoing
impact of these audit findings was suppose to increase ongoing
revenue by $1.8 million offset by ongoing increase in
Excess MOE appropriations by $0.9 million but the County
did not notice the expected increase in Court revenue during
FY 2012-13.
Orange County has experienced a substantial decrease
in Court statutory fines, fees, and penalty revenue in
Trial Court Fund 081. FY 2011-12 actual revenue were
$10.5 million less than FY 07-08 actual. The County is
monitoring these impacts closely.
OC Community Resources has complied with the 1% baseline
Net County Cost limit increase. While the 1% Net
County Cost growth will help OC Animal Care and OC Community
Services meet its objectives, these programs will
manage its operations in FY 13-14 with an even greater
increase in costs in addition to comparatively minimal
growth in revenues. As the result, both OC Animal Care and
OC Community Services programs must continue to reduce
costs while maximizing the use of existing revenues, including
Federal Workforce Investment funding, Measure M2
funding and State Department of Aging funding.
OC Animal Care's appropriations include $100,000 for
design and development costs of the new animal shelter.
The FY 2013-14 OC Community Resources' budget continues
to face the economic challenges of increased
costs of maintaining services with flat or minimal
growth in funding. As the result of increasing salaries
and employee benefits and services and supplies costs,
OC Community Resources reduced expenditures where
possible and consequently will continue to subsist on a
lean budget.
Fund 106's Budget for FY 2013-14 includes a $100,000
increase to the reserve for dredging of the lower Newport
Bay area adjacent to the public docks at the harbor patrol
facility.
In FY 2012-13, it is anticipated that Fund 106 will pay
City of Newport Beach up to $1,550,000 to dredge portions
of lower Newport Harbor adjacent to Newport
Tidelands properties.
¦ OC Parks Fund 405 is expected to transfer $300,000 to
Fund 106 in FY 2012-13 to provide Fund 106 with sufficient
funding to pay Newport Beach for the dredging
mentioned above.
¦ OC Parks staff project that it may take several years
before Fund 106 repays Fund 405 for the loan of
$300,000 for dredging work.
The FY 12-13 Modified Budget includes a one-time operating
transfer-out to Fund 15F for additional Housing Assistance
Payments that is not budgeted in FY 13-14.
Library capital improvement projects are contingent upon
available funding. Capital projects budgeted in FY 13-14
include the San Clemente branch remodel and expansion
project, OC Public Libraries Headquarters and Garden Grove
Regional Library HVAC upgrades and the Silverado Relocation
and ADA upgrade projects.
Funding provided for the San Clemente Branch expansion is
primarily from Library Fee Developer Deposits, San Clemente
Friends of the Library Group, and from the City of San
Clemente.
Library branch facilities will continue to be maintained
and upgrades and enhancements will be provided contingent
upon available funding. In FY 13-14, building
improvements and energy efficiency upgrades will be
carried out to increase energy conservation and productivity.
The FY 13-14 budget increased approximately by $1.2 million
or 3% higher in comparison with FY 12-13 modified
budget. This increase is primarily due to the additional pass
through property taxes OC Public Libraries will receive from
the dissolution of the redevelopment agencies and a projected
higher fund balance due to reversals of prior year
encumbrances.
OC Public Libraries’ Operating budget plan assumes boosting
current service levels by increasing library material purchases,
continuing the five year plan to upgrade the library
computer systems and moving forward with needed maintenance
projects that were previously deferred in prior fiscal
years due to limitations in funding
The recommended base budget includes a $1.5 million contribution
to reserves. Under the guidance of the Library
Advisory Board, OC Public Libraries is directed to establish
a general reserve equal to 10% of the operating budget. OC
Public Libraries has also historically contributed to reserve
balances for equipment refresh and vehicle replacement.
Future contributions to reserves are contingent upon available
funding.
Library services to County residents have changed dramatically
within the last five years. Much focus has been
made on whether libraries are still needed in today’s
Google society. Trends such as data curation with cloud
based repositories are changing how information can be
stored. As collections become larger and space becomes
more limited, digital preservation is becoming the solution
to long term archival planning. Information technology,
not as it was known ten years ago but redefined
with mobile apps and social media, is important more
than ever. It is not enough to just understand the user’s
desire for information but also to accept his/her need to
access social media and networks anytime and anywhere.
Mobile environments, the delivery and accessibility
desired by many generations, needs to be
balanced with the needs of traditional users who insist
on using conventional library materials. Patron driven
e-book acquisition seems to be the new trend; a trend
which is a challenge to pursue while still meeting the
needs of the rest of the library community.
¦ Public libraries must develop the staff needed to meet
changing user patterns and to meet these challenges
through creative approaches by assessing current practices
and adapting to user needs.
¦ Library management re-evaluated the staffing levels at
all 34 libraries in the system. They have not been evaluated
since the establishment of the library. A Branch
Library Tier Service Model was created to determine
optimal staffing levels at all libraries. The 34 libraries
were categorized into four tiers based on a formula utilizing
four factors:
¦ Size of Facility
? Hours of Operation
¦ Robust Circulation
? Community Population
¦ In addition to establishing a Branch Library Tier Service
Model, each library is being evaluated to determine if
traditional multiple service points is the most efficient
model to serve the public. In a traditional library, a
minimum of three service points were provided to the
public: the circulation desk, the adult service desk, and
the children’s service desk. The new model combines all
three desks into one service desk to assist the user,
eliminating all other service points. This increases efficiency,
creating less confusion on the part of the user,
and leaving valuable staff time to deal with other professional
tasks.
The 2013-14 budget reflects approximately 21% decrease
from the Modified FY 2012-13 Budget. This is due to
decreases in Marriage License fees anticipated in FY 13-14
based on actual revenue receipts in FY 2012-13.
The Workforce Investment Act budget reflects a $581,207
decrease compared to the FY 2012-13 Modified Budget. This
decrease is due to decreased Federal Workforce Investment
Act revenues that are projected to be received in FY 2013-14.
Fund 15F was established during FY 2010-11 to separately
recognize Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) revenues and expenditures for rental assistance
programs. Positions and appropriations were
previously budgeted and recognized in OC Housing fund
15G. Fund 15F also includes over $120 million recognized
for Housing Authority Payments (HAP), which was previously
processed and disbursed through an external bank
account.
The 2013-14 baseline budget reflects a $13.3 million
increase for Housing Assistance Payments compared to the
FY 2012-13 Modified Budget, which includes increases for
incoming Portability tenants, Veterans Affairs Supportive
Housing (VASH) program, and Shelter Plus Care.
OC Housing Authority continued to exceed HUD's high
performer lease-up standards of 97% and exceeded
99% over the past two years. Appropriations for 2013-14
will be sufficient to maintain optimum lease-up with a
goal to exceed 98% (at least 10,159 families).
¦ The Shelter Plus Care program has continued to expand
since 1999 and now includes 15 grants targeted to assist
approximately 600 disabled households with more than
$8 million in annual rental assistance funding for the
homeless. The program is expected to assist 15 to 35
additional families annually as the Division applies for
at least one new grant each year and applies for annual
renewal grants for those expiring after five years. By
March 2013, the program was assisting 685 disabled
households that were homeless.
¦ During 2009, HUD invited OCHA to apply for 70 Housing
Choice Vouchers dedicated to the Veterans Affairs
Supportive Housing (VASH) Program. Case Managers at
the Long Beach Veterans Affairs center select eligible
veterans participating in a five year program for supportive
services and refer them to OCHA for rental assistance. OCHA was awarded another 150 VASH
Vouchers in 2010, and 75 VASH vouchers during 2011
and 2012, to assist up to 370 veterans (and their families).
By April 2013, a total of 310 veterans were receiving
housing assistance using VASH Vouchers.
The FY 2013-14 budget reflects a $92.3 million decrease
from the FY 2012-13 Modified Budget as the FY 2012-13
Modified Budget includes appropriations as placeholders for
projects consistent with the Amended Enforceable Obligation
Payment Schedule for Redevelopment Successor Agency
expenditures.
The FY 2013-14 baseline budget assumes that Federal funding,
including Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG) and HOME funding will decrease 5% from FY 2012-
13 budgeted levels. OC Community Resources/OC Community
Services plans to address these decreases by reorganizing
funding in impacted areas including reallocating costs,
reducing services and supplies, and deferral of discretionary
expenditures.
The FY 2013-14 OC Housing Budget continues to face
the economic challenges of increased costs of maintaining
services and decreases in Federal funds and elimination
of Redevelopment funding. As a result, OC
Community Services reduced expenditures where possible
to meet other ongoing needs.
The FY 2013-14 Baseline Budget reflects a $489,000 increase
from the Modified FY 2012-13 Budget. $300,000 of this
increase is due to additional CalHOME revenues from the
State that are anticipated in FY 2013-14. The remainder is
due to the carryover of unused fund balance that are budgeted
for FY 2013-14.
15U funding is being recommended to support the FY
2013-14 Armory Emergency Shelter Program.
$1.0 million increase in Salaries and Benefits for FY 2013-14
is the result of adding six positions as approved by the Board
of Supervisors in FY 2012-13.
$400,000 decrease in Equipment - Object 4000 compared to
modified budget FY 2012-13 is primarily due to reduction in
vehicle replacement.
$5.0 million is budgeted for an operating transfer to Fund
406 to finance Fund 406's capital project requirements.
$5.8 million increase in property tax revenue, compared to
modified budget FY 2012-13, is primarily due to the residual
payment of the Redevelopment Agency (RDA) dissolution
and the recategorization of California Redevelopment Association
(CRA) pass-through revenue as property tax.
Included in FY 2013-14 property tax revenue is $2.5 million
forecasted for the residual payment of the RDA dissolution.
OC Parks expects to receive sufficient funding in Fund
405 in FY 2013-14 to pay for park staff, maintenance
and improvement contracts, and other expenses
required to operate all OC Parks facilities for public use
and enjoyment.
¦ OC Parks will increase the Fund 405 Operating Reserve
by $942,000 in FY 2013-14. This increase will enable OC
Parks to reach its established goal of maintaining an
Operating Reserve equal to 20% of its actual salaries &
benefits and services & supplies.
Fund 406's budget of $15.0 million for FY 2013-14 will
decrease by approximately $12.4 million (45%), compared
to the FY 2012-13 Modified Budget of $27.3 million due to
the projected award of five substantial capital projects in FY
2012-13 which are described in the key accomplishment section.In addition, Fund 406 has budgeted a $5.0 million operating
transfer-in from Fund 405 in FY 2013-14 to provide sufficient
funding to pay for capital project engineering and construction
costs planned for FY 2013-14.
OC Parks has begun preparation of the general development
plan to guide the proposed development and construction
of a new regional park on the site of the
former Marine Corps Air Station in Tustin.
¦ OC Parks will explore selling bonds, within the next two
to three years, to raise funding necessary to develop and
construct the proposed Regional Park at Former MCAS
Tustin.
The federal and state allocations for CSS are expected to
remain flat for FY 2013-14. Net County Cost Contribution is
$250,000 with anticipation of $496,000 in County Wide Cost
Allocation Plan (CWCAP) charges for FY 2013-14. Our FY
2013-14 base budget includes technical adjustments to
reduce salaries and employee benefits appropriations in the
amount of $679,768 for the deletion of 12 long-term vacant
positions included in FY 2012-13 Second Quarter Budget
Adjustment Report. CSS has also included a transfer in of
$3.8 million from Fund 12C to balance the budget.
CSS continues to exceed federal performance measures
in percent of collections on current support and percent
of cases with arrears collection. The success of CSS plays
a key role in assisting families in achieving and maintaining
self-sufficiency.
Through strategic planning, CSS continues to evaluate
existing program and processes and when possible
implement new technologies to achieve efficiencies,
improve performance, and increase effectiveness of
programs.
Base budget includes a Transfer Out of $3.8 million to General
Fund Department 027 to balance the Budget. CSS also
included a technical augmentation to account for the $1.4
million transfer in of Child Support Services Building
Reserves held in General Fund Reserve Accounts for reimbursement
of the excess of non-claimable principal over the
claimable building depreciation expenses. The primary revenue
source is from interest earnings.
The base gross budget decreases $48.6 million primarily
related to the expected impact of Federal Health Reform.
These decreases are offset by decreased categorical revenues
in Low Income Health Plan (LIHP). Reductions and cost
containment measures implemented in prior years are carried
forward into the FY 2013-14 requested budget in order
to align Agency expenditures with available funding levels.

An ongoing challenge facing HCA is providing needed
and required health services at reduced funding levels.
At State and federal levels, legislative measures aimed at
budget reduction could have a significant impact on
local funding for health care services. Across the board
cuts from the federal "sequestration" could impact HCA
services by approximately $1 - $2 million dollars. At this
time, the potential impacts are being reviewed as additional
information becomes available.
¦ An important change in the relationship between the
state and counties was implemented in FY 2011-12,
through AB 109/AB 117. These Assembly bills, which
became effective on October 1, 2011, realigned to counties
a broad array of health and social service programs
under the umbrella of "public safety." HCA Correctional
Health Services (CHS) has been allocated approximately
$6.2 million in FY 2012-13. These funds are
used to offset costs to provide basic and emergency
health care services to the AB 109 incarcerated population
in the Orange County jail facilities, as mandated by
California Code of Regulations (CCR), Title 15 Minimum
Standard for Local Adult Facilities. Currently, CHS
is responsible for Health Care services for approximately
1,100 inmates housed in Orange Jails under AB109
related sentencing. In addition, HCA Behavioral Health
Services (BHS) is responsible to provide post-custody
treatment to reduce or eliminate the recidivism cycle by
treating mental illness and/or substance use disorders
that contribute to criminal behavior.
With the addition of AB 109 inmates to the jail population,
HCA is treating clients serving longer sentences.
This increases the probability that some inmates will
require treatment for very expensive medical conditions.
HCA retained an outside independent consulting
firm specializing in Medical Stop-loss insurance, to
gather and report back on the feasibility and costs for
Medical Re-insurance on inmates.
¦ On 07/20/10, the Board of Supervisors approved a fiveyear
Inter-Governmental Service Agreement (ISGA)
with U.S. Department of Homeland Security (USDHS),
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) to house
and care for up to 838 detainees in the Orange County
jail system. HCA’s Correctional Health Services provides
emergency and basic health care services 24 hours per
day, seven days per week to meet the immediate welfare
and maintain the health of ICE detainees. Some portion
of this revenue may be at risk in the future, if ICE placements
decrease, or if AB 109 inmates use up available
beds and leave insufficient space to house the ICE
detainees.
¦ With implementation of the Affordable Care Act, HCA
will transition Medical Services Initiative (MSI) clients
to CalOptima on December 31, 2013. During this transition,
Health Care Agency and CalOptima will ensure
that continuity of care is maintained with minimal disruption
for approximately 52,000 MSI clients. Thereafter,
HCA will continue to operate the MSI program at a
reduced scope to provide services for medically indigent
adults who are legal residents but do not qualify for coverage
under the Affordable Care Act or are otherwise
uninsured. With the transition of most MSI clients to
CalOptima, a key issue to be resolved over the next several
years will be the redistribution of a portion of local
Health Realignment Revenue to the state to offset the
cost of providing services to the MSI clients that are
newly eligible for Medi-Cal. It will be imperative that
HCA retain sufficient Health Realignment revenue to
operate the scaled back MSI program and to carry out
the statutory responsibilities of Public Health.
¦ The MSI program uses a "pool" model which limits risk
for the County but which results in reduced provider
payments as utilization rises. Under the MSI pool
model, rising utilization, rising enrollment, and continued
reimbursement delays from the State Department
of Health Care Services (DHCS) have led the MSI Program
to take drastic measures to keep the program
within budget. MSI can only spend funds that are likely
to be reimbursed by DHCS during the current fiscal
year. In order to conserve remaining funds, the MSI
program took the unprecedented step of reducing
interim payments to MSI hospitals. The MSI program
also reduced interim payments to physicians and community
clinics. Continued rate cuts and payment
delays could, eventually lead to significant losses of providers
to the MSI primary care and MSI specialty care
networks.
¦ On January 25, 2013, Department of Health and Human
Services issued the final HITECH Rule (Health Information
Technology for Economic and Clinical Health)
which has an effective date of March 26, 2013. The compliance
date is September 23, 2013. HITECH updates
HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability & Accountability
Act) privacy regulations, and provides standards for use
of Electronic Health Records.
¦ HCA is in the process of building and implementing two
Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems. Behavioral
Health Services (BHS) and Correctional Health Services
(CHS) are implementing two separate EHR’s which are
both expected to improve clinical documentation management,
enhance privacy, and add security and access
control. This effort is consistent with national priorities
in health care to transform the nation's health care system
and improve the quality, safety, and efficiency of
patient healthcare through the use of electronic health
records.
¦ There will be continued emphasis within HCA on
implementing new Mental Health Services Act (MHSA)
programs in FY 2013-14, funded through available Prop
63 revenues. The official opening of a new MHSA
funded mental health campus at 401 S. Tustin occurred
in 2012. This campus is home to a 15-bed Crisis Residential
Program serving adults who are in crisis, a Peer
Support and Wellness Center for individuals who are
stable and trying to enhance/maintain their wellness,
and an Education and Training Center to provide education
and training services.
¦ Beginning in 2012 and continuing in 2013, HCA/Public
Health will conduct a Community Health Assessment
(CHA) and develop a Community Health Improvement
Plan (CHIP). Although many community health assessments
have been performed around certain health
issues or certain populations, a comprehensive Countywide
health assessment and planning process has not
been done in the past. The process requires an intensivement of gaps and resources, selection of community
priorities with input from multiple sectors of the community
(including the general public), and a plan for
addressing the priorities utilizing the resources of multiple
agencies involved with the planning and prioritization
process.
Increased Costs of Doing Business and Funding Limitations
- Costs associated with increasing benefit costs, information
technology and data processing, and added workload resulting
from continuous program mandate changes are not fully
funded by Federal and State program allocation funding.
The lack of funding for increased cost of doing business is
aggravated by unfunded program mandate changes, which
result in additional workload and/or higher performance
standards. In turn, this increases the risk of fiscal sanctions
being imposed for non-compliance due to existing inadequate
program resource levels.
Medi-Cal provides health care coverage for California
residents who have limited resources and income. To be
eligible for Medi-Cal, an individual or family must meet
asset, income, institutional status, residence, and citizenship/
alien requirements. Medi-Cal will see two dramatic
changes during the next two years. In January
2013, the State Healthy Families program started to
transition approximately 82,000 children to Orange
County’s Medi-Cal program. These transitional cases
are expected to add to the continuing caseload as they
are phased in but not to count as intakes. Also started in
January 2013, Medi-Cal will process all new applicants who would have gone to Healthy Families. Many details
are in the process of being clarified by the State and
coordinated with the CalWIN data system.
¦ Although the Federal Affordable Care Act officially
starts in January 2014, California’s Low Income Health
Program for childless adults will launch in May 2013.
The program will have no asset test, but there will be
two components based on family income level.
¦ Medicaid Coverage Expansion enrollees have family
incomes at or below 133 percent of Federal poverty
level (FPL). All those currently eligible for Medical
Services Initiative will be folded into Medi-Cal.
¦ Health Care Coverage Initiative will serve families
with incomes of 133 through 200 percent of FPL.
¦ The ACA is expected to add approximately 44,200 new
individuals to Medi-Cal in the month of May 2013, and
approximately 4,136 new applications per month thereafter.
Of these new applications, approximately 3,143
are expected to be approved as new cases each month
and will join the ongoing Medi-Cal caseload.
¦ The weakening of the job market in Orange County the
past few years has coincided with a large increase in
General Relief caseloads. In addition, a further spike in
caseloads occurred as a result of changes to the eligibility
requirements and aid levels approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
¦ In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) provides services
to aged, blind, or disabled persons limited in their ability
to care for themselves which enable them to live
safely in their homes instead of a higher priced facility.
Caseloads are expected to increase by 4% and hours are
expected to increase by 7.4% in FY 2013-14. Implemented
in FY 2012-13, counties now have a Maintenance
of Effort (MOE) requirement in lieu of paying a
share of the non-federal costs for IHSS services, administration,
and Public Authority administration. County
costs that exceed the total MOE level will shift back to
the State.
¦ Operation Santa Claus is a member of the Orange
County Toy Collaborative and a Board of Supervisors
approved toy collection and distribution program for
foster/underprivileged children. There has been a significant
decrease in donations and monetary funding
with an increased demand for services. To counteract
this, fund raising efforts have been increased as well as
enhanced solicitation for increased awareness to the
community, businesses, and volunteer organizations.
Ongoing funding for the IHSS Provider Payments - SSA has
budgeted a total County cost share amount of $40.8 million
based on continuation of the current State program funding
participation with the provider wage at $9.30 and $0.60 benefits.
Effective July, 2012, a Maintenance of Effort (MOE) was
established in lieu of County Share of Cost. The MOE is comprised
of three components IHSS administration, IHSS Public
Authority administration, and IHSS services with the
requirement based on FY 2011-12 expenditures.
Caseloads and hours are projected to increase 4% and
7.4% respectively over FY 2012-13 levels.
Due to caseload decreases, the base budget for CalWORKs
decreased by $4,994,472 from FY 2012-13 to FY 2013-14.
CalWORKs caseloads are projected to decrease in FY
2013-14. This is due to shortened CalWORKs 60-month
time limit to 48 months for aided adults.
Due to slight increase in caseloads, the base budget for Aid
to Refugees increased by $84,960 from FY 2012-13 to FY
2013-14.
Refugee caseloads are projected to increase 3.7% in FY
2013-14.
OC Public Works Fund 080 FY 2013-14 Base Budget Request
of $53,041,866 is $2,828,620 (5.06%) lower than the FY
2012-13 Modified Budget through 2nd Quarter Adjustments.
The significant differences are due to: Salaries & Benefits
decrease totaling $1.7 million for 25 deleted positions
(11 Corp RE to CEO, 12 to HRS, 1 Safety Training Officer to
Risk Management, and 1 to Flood); and Services & Supplies
decreases totaling $1.1 million which is primarily the net of
the reduction for Demolition costs for El Toro totaling $3.5
million offset by the increase in professional services totaling
$2.9 million (largely due to recentralized position cost).
OC Facilities/Facilities Operations will continue an
effective Preventive Maintenance (PM) Program to
allow for scheduled preventive maintenance of County
facilities, reduce emergency repair costs, avoid costly
building/system shutdowns and be proactive regarding
the stewardship of public buildings and use of public
funds. Upon completion of the Maintstar software platform
implementation we will have a system to catalog
and direct all facilities maintenance and repair
demands. This system will also serve as the tool used to
project the need of Operational and Capital funding to
support life cycle cost demands.
¦ OC Facilities/A&E Project Management is working with
Jacobs Engineering Group to have a Strategic Development
Plan (SDP) developed for the Central Utility Facility
and Civic Center Campus facilities. Goals of the SDP
are to reduce operating costs and provide a reliable
operating infrastructure for County, State, City and Federal
agencies operating in the Civic Center. OC Facilities/
A&E will continue to work on implementation of
the SDP recommendations.
¦ OC Facilities in partnership with Corporate Real Estate
will continue to focus its energies on the most effective
cost reducing and revenue enhancing initiatives consistent
with the County Facilities Master Plan and Board
directives augmenting that plan. While some initiatives
requiring extensive investments will be deferred, primary
efforts for FY 13-14 will continue to be to secure
historic low lease rates for the long term for as many
agencies as possible, to minimize the use of leased
parking, to increase the revenue generated from leasing
County owned real estate and to enhance the value of
the County's real estate portfolio.
¦ OC Facilities/OC Property Development will continue to
evaluate and pursue the energy and other sustainability
strategies that will provide the greatest cost savings and
benefit to the County and will continue to pursue appropriate
property development initiatives on behalf of the
County's goals.
¦ The OC Agricultural Commissioner will continue its
programs of training staff, educating the public, seeking
State funding and cooperatively partnering with the
State to achieve its goals.
OC Planning Services will continue its programs of
training staff, educating the public, and providing the
best and most efficient customer service.
OC Watersheds FY 2013-14 budget decreased approximately
$2.2 million compared to FY 2012-13, primarily related to
the scaled back San Diego Creek Basin dredging project
anticipated for FY 2013-14.
Regulatory mandates continue to increase in number,
scope, and complexity. The Santa Ana and San Diego
Regional Water Quality Control Boards reissue municipal
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permits for the County, cities, and OC Flood
Control District every five years. In each renewal cycle,
mandates are added and expanded to increase protection
of the drinking water supply, fishing, swimming,
and other uses of Orange County’s streams, bays, harbors,
and beaches. The San Diego Regional Board chose
to adopt one permit for San Diego, southern Riverside,
and southern Orange County in spring 2013, even
though Orange County’s permit does not expire until
December 2014.
In addition to NPDES requirements, state and federal
regulators periodically assess the health of waterways.
When data show pollution levels are impairing the uses
of those waters such as recreation, habitat, or drinking
water source, they are added to a list of water quality
impairments under the federal Clean Water Act. In the
most recent update, the list of impairments in Orange
County increased from 122 to 130. New regulations
called Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDLs) are then
developed to correct each impairment. To date, 33
TMDLs have been adopted that impose corrective measures
on the County, OC Flood Control District, cities,
and other public and private entities. Both the currently
adopted mandates and the growth trend in this regulatory
arena are expected to continue outpacing our
resources to address the problems and sustain compliance.
¦ The County has taken a leadership role in crafting regulatory
approaches as well as investing in science and
regulatory development to bring forward TMDL and
other regulations for adoption by the Regional Boards.
In collaboration with Riverside and San Bernardino
Counties, regulators, and other stakeholders, a major
revision to the Santa Ana Regional Board’s basin plan
was developed to rationalize recreational water quality
standards for streams and channels. Once approved, it
will retain strict standards for those streams where people
actually recreate and adjust standards in flood control
channels to reflect the actual risk to human health
based on usage; will modernize the water quality objectives
used to measure bacterial contamination; and will
suspend the requirement to meet recreational standards
during dangerous storm conditions in engineered channels.
As a result, cities and counties could invest their
limited resources in protecting those streams where recreation
occurs and human health may be at risk. The
revisions were adopted by the Santa Ana Regional
Board in 2012 and approval by the State Board is
expected in 2013. Similar initiatives are underway for
improvements to existing TMDLs for bacteria, sediment,
nutrients, and toxics.
¦ Integrated Regional Water Management Plans have
been completed for all three Watershed Management
Areas to develop collaborative water management strategies
and prioritize implementation projects for funding.
The plans identify solutions to meet regulatory
mandates and other water needs; establish a context for
multiple agencies to collaborate on implementation;
and achieve cost savings by creating projects that meet
multiple needs. The plans also position Orange County
agencies for grant funding opportunities from state
bond measures and other sources. To date, the activities
in south Orange County have brought over $28 million
in grants to a variety of agencies for water resources
improvements. Work with Orange County Transportation
Authority has resulted in two water quality grant
programs funded by the Measure M Environmental
Cleanup Program.
OC Public Works Budget Control 071 Building and Safety
General Fund FY 2013-2014 Base Budget request of
$8,454,206 is $1,707,940 (25.32%) higher than the FY 2012-
2013 Modified Budget through 2nd quarter adjustments.
Salaries and Employee Benefits increased by $115,314
including increases in Salaries, Retirement, and Employee
Group Insurance. Services and Supplies increased by
$1,549,917 primarily resulting from increased costs for Professional
Services including costs relating to plan check and
inspection services based on anticipated increase in Building
and Safety activity for FY 2013-2014.
The overall increase is offset by an increase of $1,707,940 in
revenues due to anticipated increase in Building and Safety
permit activity.
A Technical Augmentation was included to move one (1)
Civil Engineering Assistant and one (1) Construction
Inspector including appropriations in the amount of
$201,964 into Budget Control 400 OC Flood. The total number
of budgeted positions is decreased to 15 for FY 2013-
2014.
OC Public Works/OC Planning will continue to monitor
workload levels and take appropriate mitigating actions
as necessary. This includes a review every twelve
months of the Fee Ordinance.
¦ OC Public Works/OC Planning continues to work with
the building industry on further improvements in its
provision of services, principally through the Development
Processing Review Committee (DPRC) appointed
by the Board of Supervisors and through the Local Governmental
Affairs Committee of the Building Industry
Association (BIA) of Orange County.
The Fiscal Year 2013-14 expense budget includes appropriations
for the architecture and engineering contract and construction
costs related to the landside portion of
Revitalization. The department continues to ensure that all
available funds are dedicated to the operation of the Harbor
or earmarked for projects identified as crucial for the safety
and well-being of Harbor tenants and visitors such as dredging,
quay walls, maintenance of Harbor structures and the
Revitalization Project. These funds are also necessary to
demonstrate the commitment of the department’s resources
to the establishment, improvement, and conduct of the Harbor
as directed by the State of California upon the granting
of Dana Point Tidelands.
The safety of the public and environment is the priority
for OC Dana Point Harbor. Staff continues to facilitate
and oversee maintenance projects and restoration of
public facilities to ensure compliance with Federal and
State safety requirements as well as meet the needs and
expectation of the public using the harbor.
¦ With approval by the California Coastal Commission for
the Harbor Local Coastal Program Amendment, OC
Dana Point Harbor will be actively pursuing steps
towards implementation of the Revitalization Plan. This
includes the development of final designs, obtaining a
Coastal Development Permit, finalizing a financing
strategy and acquisition of the required construction
permits.
Supplemental Assessment filed by the developer reduced the
assessment value for the real properties in the El Toro Redevelopment
areas.
In FY 2009-10, the Irvine Redevelopment Agency filed an
appeal to reduce prior year assessed values for the El Toro
parcels. This resulted in a reduction of assessed values and
negative supplemental property taxes for the El Toro parcels.
The Agency has requested no refund but will offset future
incremental property taxes. As a result of the withholdings,
Fund 15T received no incremental property tax revenue in
FY 2010-11 and received lower $667,147 revenue in FY 2011-
12. FY 12-13 revenue was budgeted at $518,075, which is
less than the $673,863 amount in the initial schedules and
Recognized Obligation Payment Schedule (ROPS) received
from the Irvine Redevelopment Agency. The revised ROPS
from the Oversight Board to Successor Agency to the Irvine
Redevelopment Agency shows a reduced amount of
$110,000 is anticipated for FY 12-13. As per County Implementation
Agreement No. 1, Fund 15T receives revenue
within 30 days after the close of the fiscal year.
FY 13-14 revenue is budgeted at $4,033,596, which includes
a draw from reserves of $3,688,596 composed primarily of
pre-paid rent of a ground lease anticipated in FY 12-13 from
Wild Rivers Irvine, LLC.
In December 2011, the California Supreme Court
upheld Assembly Bill X1 26 dissolving redevelopment
agencies effective February 1, 2012. The City of Irvine
elected to become Successor Agency to the Irvine Redevelopment
Agency.
¦ The Successor Agency to the Irvine Redevelopment
Agency met and approved the ROPS on February 7,
2013, which included $256,754,898 for County Implementation
Agreement No. 1 to Fund 15T for FY 2013-14
(Year 7) through FY 2051-52 (Year 46). The approved
ROPS shows $110,000 FY 2013-14 estimated revenue
for the County Implementation Agreement to El Toro
Improvement Fund 15T. As per the County Implementation
Agreement, Fund 15T receives a certain percentage
of incremental property taxes, which changes with
changes in assessed value each year.
The revenue base budget is $118.0M, a decrease of $93.4M
compared to the FY 2012-13 modified budget. The decrease
is primarily due to operating transfers of $92.3 from other
JWA funds included in the FY 12-13 2nd Quarter adjustment.
The remainder was due to a decrease of $1.9M in concession
revenue from reimbursement-based airline rents
and a decrease of $318K in Intergovernmental Revenue from
one-time proceeds of Newport Beach Settlement. These were
offset by an increase of $1M in airline landing fees, RON, and
Gate Use fees.
The expense base budget is $200.8M, an increase of $73.1M
compared to the FY 2012-13 modified budget. This is primarily
due to an increase of $80.7M in operating transfers to
other JWA funds for Parking Structure C - Phase II, Terminal
A & B Baggage Handling System and an increase in depreciation
expense. The increase is offset by a decrease in Special
Items of $6.2M since beginning FBA was positive in FY 13-
14. It is also offset by decreases in Professional and Specialized
Services of $1.1M and Building Maintenance of $.3M
resulting from the completion of Terminal C.
The FY 2013-14 Budget Priorities are to carefully manage
operating and other expenses; maintain a viable
diversification of revenue sources to provide quality airport
operations in Orange County; and appropriate Airport
cash reserves, Public Facility Charge revenues,
bond proceeds and other financing sources for continuing
capital improvements at the Airport.
¦ The Finance and Operating Priorities are to maintain
adequate financial resources while passenger traffic
growth resumes by controlling operating expenses and
other cash outlays, sustaining Airport revenue streams
and planning for growth in future fiscal years. Keys to
the revenue streams are that compensatory airline rents
and fees are based on cost reimbursement, while concession
and other rents have Minimum Annual Guarantees.
¦ Additional priorities include complete major Airport
Improvement Program projects and other capital
improvements, providing adequate wherewithal to
maintain Terminals A, B and C in good condition and
exceeding bond rate covenant indenture requirements.
Expenditures in this fund are financed by transfers from the
Airport's Operating Fund (Fund-Department 280-280) and
Debt Service Fund (Fund-Department 283-280), Federal
and State grants and by interest earnings on the cash balance
in the Fund
All key trends for the Airport are contained in the narrative
for Airport Operating Fund 280.
JWA will utilize bond proceeds from the 2009 bond issuance
and PFC revenue to effect transfers to the JWA Capital
Projects Fund (Fund-Department 281-280).
Operating costs decreased by a net $19.2 million primarily
due to the decrease in transfer to OC Waste & Recycling Capital
Project Fund 273, contribution to non-county agencies,
equipment and host fees to payments to the City of Irvine
and Brea; increase in salaries and employee benefits, construction
management, landfill gas maintenance, and multidisciplinary
engineering support contracts and depreciation.
OC Waste & Recycling will continue to support the
County General Fund in FY 13/14 with an estimated
transfer of $3 million for bankruptcy debt obligations.
OC Waste & Recycling continues to integrate disposal
capacity and strategic financial and operational planning,
maintains a competitive disposal rate, and continues
to manage risk/liability through diligent
administrative practices.
¦ OC Waste & Recycling continues with its ongoing habitat
mitigation efforts.
¦ OC Waste & Recycling operates and maintains state of
the art environmental control systems and continues to
work towards increasing the beneficial reuse of landfill
gas at the landfills.
¦ OC Waste & Recycling will continue development of the
County’s landfills in FY 13/14 with large capital expansion
projects.
Expenditures in this fund will be financed by a combination
of transfers from OC Waste & Recycling Rate Stabilization
Fund (Fund-Department 277-299), Bankruptcy Recovery
Plan Fund (Fund-Department 285-299), Operating Fund
(Fund-Department 299-299) and by interest earnings on the
cash balance in the Fund.
The Auditor-Controller’s Office reduced the budget for the
FY 2013-14 external audit contract. Additionally, three positions
were defunded in order to meet the Net County Cost
limit.
The Auditor-Controller’s Office has been able to continually
meet established Net County Cost limits through
careful analysis, planning and limiting our requests to
those that are essential to the mission and goals of the
department.
One regular Executive Aid position was added and rolled
into base budget (with no appropriations) to reconcile with
FY 2012-13 2nd Quarter position add.
Transparent, productive, and accountable government.
The COB submitted a base budget request that meets the
NCC limit of $3,279,831. This budget is very lean and does
not provide funds for aging computers and sound/video
equipment in the Board and Commission hearing rooms. It
also includes a high vacancy factor that the department may
not be able to achieve because it is based on history that
includes vacancies for several management positions that
will be filled.
With the multi-year down turn in real estate values, the
number of assessment appeal filings have increased
from an annual average of 7,500 to 16,000. The trend for
increased business/commercial appeals has continued.
These hearings are more complex than residential
appeals and their hearings take longer and require more
preparation by COB and Assessor staff. As a result of
these factors, COB is no longer able to resolve appeals
within one year and is requiring nearly the full 2 year
statutory deadline.
Changes included in the FY 2013-14 Recommended Base
Budget results in the Net County Cost (NCC) required being
under the Net County Cost limit of $13,579,614. Two positions
were deleted from Budget Control 017 County Executive
Office (CEO) and transferred to Budget Control 054
Human Resources Services (HRS) in the FY 2012-13 2nd
Quarter Budget Reporting Process as part of the HRS Recentralization.
Associated Net County Cost of $150,000 for one
of the positions was also transferred to HRS. In the FY 2012-
13 1st Quarter Budget Reporting Process, twelve County
Corporate Real Estate positions were transferred from OC
Public Works to the CEO. The inclusion of the annualized
Salaries & Employee Benefits costs for these positions are
100% offset with reimbursement from OC Public Works
through additional Intrafund Transfers. The NCC of
$500,000 transferred from Budget Control 004 Miscellaneous
to Budget Control 017 CEO in the FY 2012-13 Budget
Process remains in the budget for FY 2013-14 to be utilized
as a reserve fund to accommodate one-time unanticipated
purchases and services directed by the Board of Supervisors
and County Executive Officer. This will allow for emergent
needs being met and ensure continued Department operations.
The County continues to follow fiscal policies implemented
in 2007 under close collaboration between the
CEO and Board of Supervisors to trend the County's
budget downward. Net County Cost reductions of 5%
for each of the Fiscal Year's 2008-09, 2009-10, 2010-11
and 2011-12 and 0% growth for 2012-13 had enabled
the County to achieve its goal of developing a structurally
balanced budget that does not rely upon reserves to
support ongoing expenditures.
¦ After the State reallocated the County's VLF funding
and efforts to restore this funding through the Legislative
process were unsuccessful, the Board of Supervisors
explored the County's options. Through a careful
legal analysis, it was determined the County was actually
due an additional $73.5 million dollars in property
taxes in FY 2011-12. A lawsuit was filed by the State in
April 2012 related to the County's calculation of Property
Tax. A court hearing was scheduled for April 8,
2013, but was postponed to July 8, 2013. Decisions in
regards to the outcome of the hearing will be determined
90 days following the court date. Therefore, it is
unknown at this time how the court will rule on this key
issue, which could have a critical impact on the future
financial position of the County of Orange.
¦ The CEO's office has developed strategies to identify
alternatives and financial options for the Board of
Supervisors to minimize impacts. CEO staff continues
to monitor the Department's expenditures and has
maintained a limited hiring freeze. The State's fiscal
challenges and pending lawsuit and the impacts of a
stagnant real estate environment continue to be major
challenges. There are a variety of issues and projects
that continue to be addressed. These include continued
implementation of the Assessment Tax System, Property
Tax Management System (PTMS), implementing a
plan that addresses breakdowns in the PTMS project,
development of the County's IT Sourcing Strategy, transitioning
to "Managed Services" model for IT, including
a Countywide converged voice and data network, Disaster
Recovery and Business Continuity Planning, and
continued rollout of the County Performance Scorecard
Management process (Balanced Scorecard) to additional
departments, future development of a new facility
for Animal Care Services, the impacts of various
legislative items, support by CEO staff of the Dana Point
Harbor revitalization project, and collaborative efforts
aimed at the annexation of County unincorporated
areas continues in 2013 where possible. CEO staff continues
to analyze and recommend strategies for longterm
debt reduction while meeting the County's financing
needs.
¦ Despite the budget challenges experienced in FY 2012-
13, the County continues to progress toward resolving
the VLF funding issue. The Proposed FY 2013-14 State
budget continues to present a major challenge to the
County of Orange in regards to approaching a resolution
for the property tax revenue dispute. This year's State
budget process will be both lively and challenging and
the County Executive Office will continue to focus on
fully supporting the Board of Supervisors during their
deliberations and voicing County concerns to the State
level in regards to potential impacts to the County budget
and services.
FY 2012-13 Budget Process included one-time appropriations
and Net County Cost of $500,000 transferred
from Budget Control 004 Miscellaneous to Budget Control
017 County Executive Office to establish a reserve
fund to accommodate one-time unanticipated purchases
and services directed by the Board of Supervisors.
These contingency funds will remain in the FY
2013-14 Budget and will continue to be utilized for professional
consultant services, legal fees and any other
costs requested by the Board members and County
Executive Officer. The reserve funds will result in emergency
purchases processed in an expeditious manner
and timely payments to vendors for the services provided.
¦ Public Records Act requests have increased by 70% in
Calendar Year 2012 and is anticipated to further
increase in Calendar Year 2013.
¦ Select and award contract(s) for a Managed Service Provider(
s) to support County Information Technology
Data Center Services and Voice and Data Converged
Network Services, and begin transitioning to the new
service model.
¦ CEO/IT is in progress of implementing a new CISCO
virtual server environment, replacing outdated technology.
The CISCO solution is a recognized world class
technology that will provide the County with the ability
to host 500 virtual servers, reduce power consumption
by a minimum of 40 percent, and improve current service
by empowering agency customers with the ability
to self-provision virtual servers.
¦ OC Facilities in partnership with County Corporate Real
Estate will continue to focus its energies on the most
effective cost reducing and revenue enhancing initiatives
consistent with the County Facilities Master Plan
and Board of Supervisors directives augmenting that
plan. While some initiatives requiring extensive investments
will be deferred, primary efforts for FY 2013-14
will be to continue securing historic low lease rates for
the long term for as many agencies as possible, minimize
the use of leased parking, increase the revenue
generated from leasing County owned real estate and
enhance the value of the County's real estate portfolio.
¦ OC Facilities/OC Property Development will continue to
evaluate and pursue energy and other sustainability
strategies that will provide the greatest cost savings and
benefit to the County. Appropriate property development
initiatives on behalf of the County's goals will also
continue to be pursued.
Due to the challenging financial times the County continues
to experience, we are seeing an increase in litigation,
as evidenced by the escalation of workloads
resulting from cases filed against the County due to
reduction of County services, as well as labor proceedings
and legal actions.
The Registrar of Voters FY 13/14 budget submittal includes
an augmentation for costs anticipated in the June 2014 Primary
Election as well as the 10% VLFAA Contingency
Reduction Plan.
Orange County has seen a growth in Vote-by-Mail voting
without all Vote-by-Mail elections. The percentage
of Orange County voters choosing to Vote-by-Mail is
increasing, while the percentage of votes completed at
polling places is slowly declining.
¦ Enterprise Rent-A-Car is the third major company to
assist the Registrar of Voters in providing their employees
to work on Election Day. Our corporate sponsorship
program is designed to engage businesses in the election
process by having them provide technology services
or volunteers to work at the polling place.
¦ Overall survey results from voters and poll workers
reflected extremely well on the operations and service
provided. Several customer service surveys were taken
during the 2012 Presidential Primary and General Elections.
¦ The Secretary of State launched the Online Voter Registration
statewide for all Californians. Voters will be able
to electronically register to vote, change their address,
political party, etc. We will use their signature from
their driver's license or identification card on file with
the DMV.
¦ Continue promoting voter outreach at various events
throughout Orange County.
The Base Budget meets the Net County Cost (NCC) limit of
$3,836,741.
Five Expand Level of Service Augmentations were submitted
for the following reasons: Transfer NCC of $150,000 from
CEO to support the Volunteer Services Coordinator position
that was transferred in FY 2012-13 as part of the HRS Recentralization;
increase appropriations and NCC of $350,000 to
implement HR IT related projects to increase efficiency of
Countywide HR services; increase appropriations and NCC
by $110,000 to expand EEO training opportunities to
approximately 13,500 non-management/non-supervisory
personnel; increase appropriations and NCC by $350,000 for
ongoing labor negotiation support with AOCDS, OCEA,
OCMA and OCAA; and increase appropriations and NCC by
$170,000 for personnel investigative services that will be
performed by outside attorneys.
The FY 2013-14 Budget includes changes related to the HRS
Recentralization that was implemented as part of the FY
2012-13 2nd Quarter Budget Report. Once the recentralization
has been fully implemented, HRS plans to delete
approximately 18 positions for an estimated cost savings of
$1 million.The Revenue Budget is $795,458, an increase of $704,825
from the modified FY 2012-13 Budget primarily due to
higher anticipated Other Charges for Services of $700,697 as
a result of the HRS Recentralization. These revenues are
reimbursement for staffing and other costs associated with
positions transferred from Non-General Fund Department.
The FY 2013-14 Base Budget exceeds the NCC Limit of
$1,947,377 by $909,572. A Reduce Level of Service Augmentation
has been submitted to meet NCC Limit.
The Revenue Budget is $10,302,484, which is a decrease of
$584,081 as compared to the FY 2012-13 Modified Budget,
and is primarily due to the following: Lower penalties and
delinquent charges of $509,000 due to lower property tax
delinquencies and corresponding collection fees; lower revenue
from departments and agencies served by the TTC of
over $125,000, resulting from cost savings implemented by
the TTC to lower their operating costs.
The Expense Budget (with Reduce Level of Service Augmentation)
is $12,249,361, which is an increase of $564,800 as
compared to the FY 2012-13 Modified Budget, and is primarily
due to the following: Increased benefits costs of $231,000
due to health and pension charges; increased Services &
Supplies of over $460,000 primarily due to increased use of
electronic payments which reduce manual processing costs
and associated personnel costs, but cause an increase in
banking costs.
Continuing to meet investment objectives of safety,
liquidity, and yield.
¦ Increasing usage of eCheck, which is the most effective
payment option; up over 50% in two years.
¦ Continuing to reduce the Investment Administrative
Fee to increase yields.
¦ Adding additional payment options for taxpayers.
¦ Increasing secured tax bills collection rates.
The FY 2013-14 Revenue Budget is $42,710, which is a
decrease of $26,726 as compared to the modified FY 2012-13
Budget, and is due to a reduction in the Operating Transfer-
In from the Treasurer-Tax Collector Budget Control 074.
The FY 2013-14 Expense Budget is $123,050, which is a
decrease of $94,008 as compared to the modified FY 2012-13
Budget, and is due to a decrease in Services & Supplies of
($129,008) and an increase in Equipment of $35,000.
IAD's FY 2013-14 proposed budget maintains the current
level of operations. However, due to non-discretionary cost
increases in salaries/benefits and services/supplies, our base
budget has a shortfall of $5,733. Therefore, IAD submitted a
reduce augmentation to meet the Net County Cost limit.
IAD is not requesting a restore augmentation for the shortfall
and will absorb the reductions primarily by continuing
the voluntary work furlough program in FY 2013-14.
Dynamic Financial Environment of the County: This
includes managing decreased revenues caused by State
deficits or economic conditions beyond our control.
Such an environment requires flexibility in the annual
Audit Plan. As such, the Internal Audit Department
(IAD) must be ready to respond to unscheduled assignments
from the Board of Supervisors majority. We estimate
hours required for Board of Supervisors' requested
reviews based on history and reserve hours in the Audit
Plan specifically for this purpose.
¦ Staff Retention and Replacement: Because the IAD is a
small department, each of our staff is significant to the
accomplishment of the Audit Plan. All members including
the Audit Director perform original work and are
involved in numerous audits. Due to budget constraints,
IAD has been unable to replace any positions when staff
separate from our department due to job transfer or
retirement. Subsequently, these vacant positions were
deleted and affected the flexibility in our audit plan. In
2012, a Senior Audit Manager accepted a promotion at
the Auditor-Controller's Office and separated from IAD.
Due to the increasing need of the Countywide Fraud
Hotline, we did not replace the position but used this vacant position to hire an Attorney/Fraud Hotline Manager
to manage the increasing need. The Senior Audit
Manager's workload was allocated among senior staff.
¦ Fraud Hotline Activities: The IAD established and operates
the Orange County Fraud Hotline (Hotline). There
have been sustained increases in the number and complexity
of the allegations over the past years. In FY 2011/
12, IAD experienced a 35% increase in the number of
Hotline allegations received and a 78% increase in allegations
requiring County action and investigation in
order to mitigate risks and potential liability to the
County. Due to the highly complex nature of recent allegations
requiring more sophisticated investigative work
and specific expertise, we hired an Attorney as a Fraud
Hotline Manager to exclusively address and manage the
increasing workload and the complexity of the allegations.
We did not receive funding for this position but
were able to use the savings from not filling the Senior
Audit Manager position.
¦ Information Technology (IT) issues: The pace of technological
changes and the benefits to be realized by
implementing these advances to improve County business
operations is increasing at an accelerating speed.
As such, IT Audits continue to be an important part of
our audit efforts. The IT audit process complements
and may integrate with the Internal Control Audits
(ICA). ICAs are audits that determine whether controls
and processes are in place over critical business processes,
and include an evaluation of the adequacy and
integrity of internal controls. We also perform computer
assisted audit techniques (CAAT). CAATs are automated
queries applied to large amounts of electronic data
searching for specified characteristics in the areas of
duplicate vendor payments, employee-vendor match,
multiple direct deposits for payroll checks, and working
retiree thresholds. In 2008, we hired an IT Audit Manager
to enable us to address IT issues and perform
audits of information system controls and processes.
However, budget constraints have not allowed us to hire,
on an as-needed basis, expert consultants with recognized
industry expertise to provide IT audit assistance,
consulting and in-house training.
The requested 036 budgeted Net County Cost for FY 2013-14
is $21,000,000, which includes:
1. $6,571,614 for carryover capital projects from FY
2012-13,
2. $13,548,390 for new capital and critical maintenance/
repair projects,
3. $879,996 for mid-year contingencies and change
orders
The $21,000,000 requested 036 budget for FY 2013-14
excludes 10% contingency reductions of $13,739,483.

Base budget includes key Information Technology initiatives
that are recommended for FY 2013-14 by the IT Investment
Review Board. The FY 2013-14 Budget includes a $4.6 million
Technical Augmentation to transfer funds from Fund
279 for continuing support of the Property Tax Management
System (PTMS).
Continue to follow the new Countywide IT Governance
model to ensure collaboration, transparency, accountability,
and business alignment of Countywide IT decisions.
¦ Provide County Agencies and Departments with technology
to meet their business goals and objectives.
¦ Continue strategic planning, operations and policy
review, and process standardization.
¦ Implement best practices to increase efficiency.
FY 2013-14 Proposed Budget is $9,604,720 to fund: (1)
$6,138,453 to fund new capital and maintenance projects for
Probation facilities including $791,596 for Joplin Youth Center,
$570,663 for Youth Guidance Center, $897,515 for Juvenile
Hall, $243,516 to implement PREA regulations for
privacy showers, and $3,635,163 for Los Pinos, (2) $842,657
to fund rebudget capital and maintenance projects for various
Probation facilities and contingencies, and (3)
$2,623,610 to fund debt service for Sheriff-Coroner's facility.
FY 2013-14 Proposed budget include $9,604,720 funding
from: (1) $2,630,000 operating revenue, (2) $5,817,163
operating transfer in from Budget Control 036, and (3)
$1,157,557 projected carryover fund balance from FY 2012-
13.
If the County implements the 10% contingencies reduction
plan in FY 2013-14, Budget Control 036 Net County Cost will
be reduced by $13,739,483, which will adversely impact capital
projects for County, Probation, and Sheriff facilities. The
contingency reduction plan will eliminate the above FY
2013-14 $5,817,163 operating transfer out to Fund 104.
FY 2012-13 3rd Quarter Budget Adjustment include
$7,799,432 Operating Transfer Out from the Budget Control
036 to Fund 104 for most critical public safety facilities capital
and maintenance projects, which will provide the sufficient
funding to offset the 10% contingency reduction
impacts to Fund 104.
FY 2011-12 State Controller's Court revenue audit findings
resulted substantial decline ($1.9M or 42%) in ongoing revenue
to Fund 104. The new ongoing revenue may be sufficient
to cover Sheriff-Coroner's debt service obligation but there
will be no funding available for Probation's facilities capital
and maintenance projects. Ongoing operating transfer out
from Budget Control 036 to Fund 104 will be necessary to
address the Probation's needs for capital and maintenance
projects.
FY 2013-14 Proposed Budget is $9,604,720, which
include $6,981,110 for capital and maintenance projects
for Probation facilities and $2,623,610 for debt service
on Sheriff-Coroner's facility.
¦ FY 2013-14 Proposed budget is funded from $2,630,000
operating revenue, $5,817,163 operating transfer in
from Budget Control 036, and $1,157,557 projected carryover
fund balance from FY 2012-13.
The primary use of these court penalties, fines, and fees is to
make $3.9 million Debt Service payments on Juvenile Justice
Center Bonds and Civic Center Expansion COP, which will be
paid off in June 2019.
FY 2013-14 Proposed Expense Budget is $3,921,235. FY
2011-12 State Controller's Court revenue audit findings
resulted in a substantial decline ($1.9M or 42%) in ongoing
revenue to Fund 105. FY 2013-14 revenue is not sufficient to
fund the bond payments in Fund 105. In order to avoid the
projected negative fund balance at the year-end (6/30/14), a
resolution for a General Fund Temporary Transfer “Resolution”
to loan up to $1.3 million from the County General
Fund to Fund 105 will be submitted for Board consideration.
This resolution avoids the projected negative cash balance in
Fund 105 and allows the Fund to meet the required debt service obligation. The County Board of Supervisors approved a
similar resolution for $2.5 million on June 26, 2012. The
$2.5 million loan was not recorded as an Operating Transfer-
In to Fund 105, which resulted in a positive cash balance but
the negative fund balance at the year-end. Fund 105 will
repay $2.5 million to the General Fund whenever excess
funds are available in Fund 105 after meeting its Debt Service
obligations. After the payment of final Juvenile Justice
Center Bonds in June 2019 or earlier, all available funds
(including bond reserves) in Fund 105 will be used to repay
all loans from the County General Fund before transferring
the remaining balance to the State.
The 800 MHz Countywide Coordinated Communications
(CCCS) fund is a self-balancing budget with restricted revenue.
This budget is intended to fund 800 MHz CCCS equipment
and infrastructure costs. The FY 2013-14 budget is
higher than FY 2012-13 year-end projections, as a result of
carry forward of funding that will be used in future years for
800 MHz CCCS equipment purchases and radio site development
System life extension program to extend useful life of
the 800 MHz CCCS network and subscriber fleet.
¦ Interoperable communications for First Responders.
¦ Federal Communications Commission (FCC) required
Rebanding project.
¦ Technical and operational development for a migration
path to the next generation system.
The base budget requested reflects a $34,555 decrease from
the FY 2012-13 adopted budget.
Mainframe budget has been decreasing each year since its
establishment in FY 08-09, and the budget has been supporting
both the mainframe and new server platform operating
costs.
CEO/IT continues to provide support to the mainframe
operating system as legacy systems transition to new
server platform systems.
The requested budget includes the transfer of two Information
Technology positions to Fund 100, Budget Control 054
and the loss of associated reimbursement from CAPS+ for
these positions. The cost of Employee Benefits specific functions
for these positions will now be billed to Services and
Supplies.
The requested budget includes the transfer of two Information
Technology positions to Fund 100, Budget Control
054 and the loss of associated reimbursement from
CAPS+ for these positions. The cost of Employee Benefits
specific functions for these positions will now be
billed to Services and Supplies.
The known projected costs associated with implementation
of the provisions of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act (PPACA) have also been included in
the FY 13-14 budget request.
Base budget anticipated to increase due to additional costs
associated with the new IT Sourcing Contract which will
include new services and implementation of a Countywide,
converged Voice and Network systems and upgrade to VoIP.
Upon Board approval, the County will transition from
the current staff augmentation IT service delivery
model (County purchases staff hours and provides
direction and oversight to contract staff) to the new
managed services model whereby the vendors will provide
services based on service level requirements (performance-
based).
Medical inflation (trend) nationwide continues to rise causing
an increase in medical, hospital, and prescription drug
costs. These rising costs are reflected in an increase in health
plan premiums.
Medical inflation (trend) continues to rise causing an
increase in medical, hospital, and prescription drug
costs. These rising costs are reflected in an increase in
County health plan premiums as well as for other
employers.
¦ Employee Benefits staff will continue to monitor the
cost impact implemented PPACA changes have on
health plan claims costs and health plan rates for the
2014 plan year and beyond.
Unemployment claims experience has continued to decline
and no layoffs have been projected at this time allowing for a
rate holiday for County departments in FY 13-14. Savings
associated with reductions in claim experience is held to
maintain sufficient reserves to fund potential economic
downturns or internal labor market issues.
Due to the economic downturn, layoffs and the Federal
extension program, the number of claims and amount
of benefit paid significantly increased in FY 08-09 and
again in FY 09-10. The Federal legislation increased the
benefit from 26 to 46 weeks and weekly maximum benefit
from $450 to $475. To assist the Departments with
their NCC budget targets, no premiums were charged
from July 2009 through February 2010.
¦ In FY 10-11, the claims experience improved slightly
from FY 09-10 which enabled the Unemployment rate
charged to Departments to be reduced in FY 11-12 from
0.28% to 0.27% of payroll. The claims experience in FY
11-12 has improved slightly from FY 10-11 and has
allowed the Unemployment rate charged to Departments
to remain unchanged in FY 12-13. Unemployment
claims experience has continued to decline in FY
12-13 and no layoffs have been projected at this time
allowing for a rate holiday for County departments in
FY 13-14.
Medical inflation (trend) continues to rise and has been
causing an increase in medical and prescription drug claims
for employees and retirees within the PPO plans. Budget
includes anticipated costs for implementation of PPACA fees
required starting in 2013.
Medical inflation (trend) continues to rise and has been
causing an increase in medical and prescription drug
claims for employees and retirees within the PPO plans
¦ Plan design changes were implemented for the Retiree
PPO plans, effective January 1, 2012. These changes
resulted in a decrease in trend for retirees. The overall
medical and pharmacy claims expenses for employees
have continued to rise with medical inflation.
¦ Budget includes anticipated costs for implementation of
PPACA fees required starting in 2013. Employee Benefits
staff will continue to monitor the cost impact to
implement PPACA changes have on health plan claims
costs and health plan rates for the 2014 plan year and
beyond.
Workers' Compensation charges to program participants
will increase in FY 2013/14 as a result of a strategic funding
decision to increase program funding as outlined in the
Board approved funding policy.
Workers' Compensation claim costs are increasing due
to rising medical costs, however, the County's loss rate
and claim frequency are significantly below the benchmark
average for other California counties.
Property & Casualty Risk charges to program participants
will increase in FY 2013/14 as a result of a strategic funding
decision to increase program funding as outlined in the
Board approved funding policy.
Defense costs continue to increase as does the complexity
of litigation.
¦ Employment litigation involving agencies throughout
the County is increasing.
¦ Commercial insurance premiums are leveling and
insurance market conditions are currently stable.
The inflationary trend for dental claims has been less than
expected, resulting in a 4% decrease in the rates charged to
the Department for FY 13-14.
To assist the Departments with their NCC budget targets
and to reduce the excess reserve, the dental and salary
continuance rates were reduced by 50% in FY 08-09.
¦ The FY 08-09 rate reduction resulted in the dental
expenses exceeding the premium revenue. In 2012 and
2013, the rates were increased so that the revenue would
eventually sustain the projected expenses. The inflationary
trend for dental claims has been less than
expected, resulting in a 4% decrease in the rates
charged to the Department for FY 13-14.
¦ The salary continuance rate reduction was sustained
through FY 11-12. Beginning in FY 12-13, the salary
continuance rate was increased so that the revenue
would sustain the projected expenses. The salary continuance
rate will remain unchanged in FY 13-14.
The Premium Deposit Account (PDA) held by Standard
Insurance was being used to offset the reduction in the
County and employee life insurance premiums. The PDA
was exhausted at the end of 2012 and the County departments
and the employees paid the full premium beginning
in 2013. The budget assumes no rate change. In FY 2013-14
the County departments and the employees will pay the full
premium for the entire fiscal year.
Life insurance premiums charged to County departments
were reduced by 15% for calendar year 2009. The
reductions in the premiums were sustained through
2011. Employee premiums for voluntary and dependent
life were reduced by 30% for calendar year 2009. The
reductions in the premiums were sustained through
2010.
¦ The Premium Deposit Account (PDA) held by Standard
Insurance was being used to offset the reduction in the
County and employee life insurance premiums. As the
balance of the PDA has reduced, the portion of premium
that was paid by the County departments and the
employees has been increased gradually over the last
two years to offset the decline in the PDA. The PDA was
exhausted at the end of 2012 and the County departments
and the employees paid the full premium beginning
in 2013.
¦ The budget assumes no rate change. In FY 2013-14 the
County departments and the employees will pay the full
premium for the entire fiscal year.
¦ The budget assumes no changes to the Accidental Death
and Dismemberment (AD&D) premiums.
