The Administrative Services Department provides a broad spectrum of services to county departments and to the
public. The department is comprised of six diverse divisions and during the development of the department’s
FY 2014-15 budget, division managers focused their efforts on maintaining core business functions, staffing levels,
supplemental costs attributed to consolidation initiatives and the phased implementation of the Information
Technology Strategic Plan.
The four General Fund divisions include:
? Administration
? Information Technology
? Procurement
? Revenue Services
The two Internal Service Fund divisions include:
? Central Services
? Telecommunications
Priorities and challenges facing this department during FY 2014-15 include enhancing the County’s website
utilization through increased functionalities, strengthening interoperable communications capabilities countywide,
increasing access to existing information technologies and working with service providers on the deployment of
high-speed broadband services into unserved and underserved Placer County communities.
Major accomplishments during FY 2013-14 include infrastructure upgrades to the County’s Enterprise Data
Network, a redesign of the County’s public website, the expansion of call center technologies to support the Health
& Human Services’ Covered California Initiatives, successful deployment of new multifunction copier devices
countywide, amended the County’s Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance, and increased the County
Surplus Program’s sales and revenues.
Agriculture Enforcement
The Department strives to prevent harmful invasive insect, weed, and disease pests from becoming established in
Placer County, and subsequently statewide. These activities protect our farmers, landscapes and natural areas and
reduce the need for pesticides. Program activities include:
? Evaluating over 40,000 shipments of incoming plant materially annually.
? Servicing 1,500 insect detection traps to screen for harmful invasive species.
? Performing noxious weed control on 250 infestation sites.
The Department is responsible for regulating Placer County’s certified farmers’ markets, certified producers and
organic growers. The Department enforces strict rules to ensure that fruits and vegetables purchased at a farmers’
market are actually grown by the farmer selling them. Organic regulations ensure the integrity of produce
advertised or sold as “organic.” Annual activities include:
? Issuing nearly 60 Certified Producer’s Certificates.
? Approving 18 Certified Farmers’ Markets.
Pesticide Use Enforcement
Approximately 250,000 pounds of pesticides are used in Placer County each year. The Department is the primary
agency responsible for ensuring that these pesticides are used in a manner that is safe, legal, and protects the
environment, through the following activities:
? Ensuring pest control operators are properly trained, licensed, and permitted.
? Conducting inspections of structural, agricultural and landscape maintenance pesticide applications and
employee safety and pesticide dealer records.
? Annually registering approximately 370 licensed pest control businesses and issuing nearly 300 pesticide
use permits.
Weights and Measures
Approximately $1 Billion in trade takes place over commercial weighing and measuring devices in Placer County
annually. The Department’s weights and measures programs actively inspect gasoline pumps, grocery store
scales, propane dispensers and other devices to ensure consumers get what they pay for, and businesses operate
in an equitable marketplace. Activities include:
? Inspecting approximately 6,000 weighing and measuring devices annually.
? Inspecting approximately 5,000 items for accurate pricing annually.
? Implementing variable frequency inspections of retail fuel dispensers and computing scales, which will
allow the Department to focus on lower compliance areas of quantity control and price verification.
Wildlife Services
The Department’s Wildlife Services program works to assist citizens, businesses, schools, public agencies and
farmers and ranchers with wildlife-related issues. Program activities include:
? Annually responding to 2,500 requests for assistance.
? Offering technical aid for behavior modification, use of repellents, exclusion, habitat modification and
removal of problem animals.
Agricultural Marketing
The Agricultural Marketing program seeks to promote sales and profitability of agricultural products produced by
Placer County farmers and ranchers. The program is conducted through the efforts of the county’s contractor,
Merlot Marketing, and in cooperation with the non-profit PlacerGROWN organization. The program is currently
operated as a PR and Social Media campaign and all efforts are branded as “PlacerGROWN.”
The Assessor’s Office is responsible for administering the property tax assessment program that serves as a key
revenue stream for Placer County, incorporated jurisdictions within the county, special districts, and the public
school system. As part of this program, the Assessor maintains assessment parcel maps, and values real and
personal property for property tax assessments as mandated by the state. The Assessor delivers an annual and
supplemental assessment roll that ultimately results in property tax revenue that funds key local government
services. The 2013-2014 assessment roll was in excess of $54.4 billion in property value, which is net of over $2.3
Billion in property tax exemptions as administered by the Assessor. Staff is composed of licensed property tax
appraisers, auditor appraisers and technical support staff with an understanding of the revenue and taxation code,
property tax rules, pertinent court cases, administration of new legislation and ultimately a goal of service to the
public.
The California property tax system can be very complicated, particularly as the real estate market has changed
dramatically over the last decade. It is our mission in the Assessor’s Office to keep the public informed, provide
information that is accurate, easily understood and accessible for all property owners in the county.
Since 2007, the Assessor’s Office has recognized properties where a temporary decline in assessed value is
indicated. Currently, over 64,000 of the 173,000 assessments in the county have seen this temporary decline and
are assessed at less than their Proposition 13 base year value. The Assessor’s Office utilizes technology and
appraisal expertise in developing mass appraisal methodologies to assess each of these properties at market value
as of the annual January 1st valuation date.
As the real estate market recovers and assessed values continue to increase, our office will maintain proactive
communication by sending out value notices to each property owner in July, informing them of their assessed
values and soliciting their feedback. Last year, 46,700 residential property owners saw assessed value increases
due to real estate market recovery after receiving temporary relief with market declines in prior years; we anticipate
that this recovery of value will continue. Property owners may request a review of their assessed value through a
streamlined process that can be requested on the Assessor’s website from July 1st through December 31st of each
year. This review process is no charge and is an additional option to the Assessment Appeal Process that is
administered through the Clerk of the Assessment Appeal Board. We are happy to explain how and why a property
tax valuation increased, decreased or stayed the same.
Our website is one of the most frequently accessed in the County, with over 10,000 visitors per month. We provide
information by parcel, Frequently Asked Questions by topic, county assessor’s map information, and a variety of
other informative resources. Our forms are provided for public convenience in a user fillable Adobe format. E-fling
of Business Property Statements is now also offered as an additional service. Supplemental assessments are a
particularly confusing area; to provide assistance to new property owners, we have developed a supplemental tax
estimator that has received excellent customer response. The Assessor’s Office receives thousands of property
owner inquiries each year, and it is our goal to answer each letter, email, phone call or visit to our lobby with
courtesy, clarity, and respect.
The Auditor-Controller‘s Office provides a broad range of financial accounting and auditing services to all County
Departments, agencies and districts whose funds are kept in the County Treasury. The Administration Division of
the office provides administrative, functional, technical and secretarial support to divisions providing services as
follows:
The General Accounting Division provides general accounting services to the public, other government agencies
and County departments.
? Records all receipts and disbursements of County monies.
? Maintains budgetary control of various funds.
? Enforces accounting policies and procedures.
? Oversees the warrant and cash reconciliations of the County.
The Financial Accounting Division provides financial information to the public, other government agencies and
County departments.
? Compiles financial statements for the County and Special Districts.
? Prepares reports required by Federal and State laws for the County and Special Districts.
The Internal Audit Division conducts audits of County departments and programs, Special Districts and Federal and
State grants.
? Assists departments with reviews of their internal controls, processes and records.
? Ensures countywide compliance with policies.
? Provides an environment that promotes the safeguarding of County assets.
The Payroll Division provides payroll services for employees of both the County and certain Special Districts.
? Produces biweekly paychecks.
? Records and transmits all payroll liabilities.
? Provides payroll data to third party benefit plan administrators.
? Prepares and files State and Federal quarterly and annual payroll tax returns.
? Ensures payroll procedures and reporting meet all legal requirements.
The Property Tax Division is responsible for preparing the countywide property tax levy.
? Creates property tax levy.
? Distributes tax proceeds to all government agencies, cities, schools, special districts and the County.
? Processes corrections to the tax roll.
This office has continued to experience a decrease in staffing and resources while demands for assistance have
increased in all of the above divisions. Even with our current staffing restraints, we continue to be committed to
providing quality and timely professional services to our customers and to be a reliable resource for County
departments.
Significant challenges in the upcoming year will strain our ability to provide quality and timely services. Those
challenges include:
? Continued efforts related to ABX1 26 “RDA Dissolution”.
? Implementing several ACORN (payroll system) configuration changes as a result of mandates and
negotiations.
? Correctly interpreting and applying increasingly complex legislative mandates in the property tax, payroll
and financial accounting and reporting arenas.
? Continuing to implement cost saving methods including, but not limited to, implementation of various
ACORN and PAS (accounting system) modifications to further motivate and enable County departments to
utilize self-service functionality and to become more paperless.
? Ensuring countywide compliance with existing and newly adopted policies.
? Providing training to our customers regarding new policy and reporting requirements, as well as training to
our ACORN and PAS users.
? Managing succession-planning efforts that are critical to the on-going effectiveness of operations.
Dealing with these issues within the budgetary constraints will be a significant challenge but one which we are
committed to meeting.
Assisting parents and children with legal services, while balancing legal requirements with acceptable solutions, is
the focus of the Placer County Department of Child Support Services. Our child support professionals work
collaboratively with both parents to ensure that children’s financial and medical needs are supported. The
Department’s commitment to excellent customer service focuses on taking the time to effectively communicate the
child support process with customers. The intent is to educate our customers to be part of the solution, which leads
to greater outcomes.
Federal Performance Measures: The State Department of Child Support Services establishes the goals for each
local child support agency based on five federal performance measures plus an additional measurement for
distributed collections. The following table captures the past year’s performance and the goals set for the current
Federal Fiscal Year (FFY) 2013.
? In 2013, of the $21 million collected $18.9 million was paid to local families.
? Child support is the second largest source of income for families receiving it.1
We are continuously exploring ways to deliver better service and reduce costs where possible, through operations,
technology, and collaboration with our customers:
? For every dollar spent, the Department collects $3.58 on behalf of families, compared to the statewide
average of $2.54.
? Court proceedings are video-conferenced with court orders produced, signed, and served when the
proceedings take place, getting support to families up to six weeks faster.
? Customers can access their child support account online or through our lobby kiosk to make payments,
view account balances, and even view jobs and apply for work.
? Customers are greeted in our lobby or on the telephone by a specialist who is prepared to handle complex
issues to reach a swift resolution.
The Federal Office of Management and Budget rates child support as the best managed and most effective social
service program in the nation. When children can count on their parents for the financial and medical support they
require, their future becomes much brighter.
With the continued recovery of the national and local economy, the Agency is responding to increased development
activity in all areas of the County. While development in the Tahoe/Truckee region has remained steady, the
Agency is seeing renewed interest in development projects in the western portion of the County, including large
specific plans which have largely been dormant for the past few years (e.g., Bickford Ranch, Placer Vineyards,
Riolo Vineyards and Regional University).
With the opening of the CDRA Administrative Office at the Customs House, all land development departments
(CDRA, Environmental Health, Assessor’s Office) are now located in a single building, creating a true “one-stop shop” for County residents needing to address land development issues. The facility has been well received by the
public, and the comfortable and inviting lobby is becoming a local meeting place for residents needing to obtain
County services. Recently, CDRA established a permanent management presence in the Tahoe City Office
expanding the County's managerial and administrative presence in the Tahoe/Truckee area. This position oversees
the Building, Planning and Engineering & Surveying divisions of the Agency. This position will also allow CDRA to
closely coordinate with the CEO and DPW management team already in the Tahoe/Truckee area. This new
management position is a supplement to the Ombudsman position created last year as a staff liaison for community
members. The sole focus of the Ombudsman position has been to provide value-added customer service on
individual projects and to facilitate process improvements that result in a user-friendly permitting process, both for
customers and for County staff.
As approved by the Board for Fiscal Year 2012-13, the Agency is nearing completion of an upgrade to the County’s
land development permit system (PLUS). Initial testing of the new system is expected be initiated in April of 2014.
The upgrade will involve installation of updated software (Accela Automation), conversion of existing data to a new
system, and establishing and building workflows. There will also be a significant redesign, business process
analysis and training component associated with the upgrade. Implementation of this upgrade will benefit County
staff's efficiency at processing and tracking permit activity and it will also improve inter-departmental coordination.
The upgrade will also allow the public better and improved access to monitoring activities associated with planning
applications, building permits and other land development issues associated with private property.
For FY 2014-15 CDRA will continue to focus on providing cost effective and efficient land development services
across a broad spectrum of activities (e.g., from policy development in community plans to building plan check and
inspection). Staff changes are largely focused on the need to address current land development needs in the
Tahoe/Truckee area, code enforcement and replacement of staff losses through attrition. CDRA will also continue
to support efforts to prepare the Placer County Conservation Plan and initiate an update to the Placer County
General Plan. There is a renewed emphasis on the large specific plans that were approved before the recession in
2008 with a particular emphasis on addressing potential modifications to finance plans and land use plans in
response to new market and economic conditions after the end of the 2008 through 2013 recession.
Major Budget Items: FY 2014-15 Proposed Budget
? The countywide alignment of costs and revenues to programs increases this budget by $395,477 for A-87
costs ($383,218), and the Placer County Government Center costs ($12,259).
? As a net zero adjustment, Retiree Health Insurance costs of $60,971 are moved from other line items to
Salaries and Benefits.
? Increase $220,201 in ongoing expenditures for an assistant director of CDRA for the Tahoe office.
? Increase $91,345 in ongoing expenditures for a Community Development Resources Agency technician.
 Program Purpose: The Building Services Division reviews construction drawings, conducts on-site inspections,
performs emergency service functions, maintains inspection records, responds to citizen requests for information
(public record requests), and reviews complaints for potentially hazardous violations of construction codes and
standards throughout the unincorporated Placer County.
Department Comments
For the past Fiscal Year, the Building Services Division continues to experience revenue and workload increases,
and staff anticipates a stable FY 2014-15 requiring a similar staff and resource setting as the prior year. Based
upon current projects, FY 2014-15 may see a slight workload increase as foreclosures subside and the demand for residential lots increases. A similar increase is also anticipated for FY 2015-16 as the housing and commercial
markets gain strength throughout the greater Sacramento region.
Code Enforcement Services, another work unit within the Building Services Division appropriation, maintains an
average of 200 active caseloads each month throughout unincorporated Placer County. As the County’s population
continues to grow, as new land use and market place conditions emerge, and as more residents move into
previously rural areas, the Code Enforcement team continues to see increases in complaints regarding neighbor
issues. In the past year, the Code Enforcement function was strengthened by implementing a contract with an
Administrative Hearing Officer who is able to work directly with Code Enforcement staff on those caseloads
associated with the issuance of administrative citations. The Administrative Hearing Officer is able to provide a cost
effective and efficient due process alternative to the Municipal Courts system. Consistent with the direction set by
the Board of Supervisors, the emphasis of the Code Enforcement team continues to center on gaining compliance,
and the results are impressive.
Building and Code Enforcement Services expect an increase in work this upcoming fiscal year. For FY 2014-15, the
Building Services Division expects to see growth in new home construction (particularly in the Martis Valley area)
as well as growth in new homes, remodels and non-residential development in western Placer County. The Division
will continue to utilize the full scope of its staffing resource to accomplish next fiscal year’s work demands and is
supplementing its work force with contract support for plan checking as well as additional staff to assist with
management of the Division, Code Enforcement, and Front Counter Services. Workload statistics are being
monitored closely as community and economic growth have commenced, necessitating the need for a modest
increase in staffing resources to ensure the level of service expected by the Board of Supervisors and the residents
of Placer County.
Lastly, staff attrition has led to a continued reduction in the Building Services Division workforce, as positions
vacated have not been backfilled. From a successional perspective Building Services is also an aging workforce
with 69 percent of staff currently at retirement age (50 or older) and 88 percent eligible for retirement within the next
five years.
Major Budget Items: FY 2014-15 Proposed Budget
? The countywide alignment of costs and revenues to programs decreases this budget by a net amount of
$296,986 for A-87 costs (-$311,814), and the Placer County Government Center costs ($14,828).
? As a net zero adjustment, Retiree Health Insurance costs of $292,560 are moved from other line items to
Salaries and Benefits.
? Increase $1,012,159 in ongoing construction permit revenues.
? Increase $246,349 in ongoing mPOWER reimbursement for two building inspectors.
? Increase $50,000 in ongoing reimbursement from TRPA for projects in the Tahoe Basin.
? Increase $514,552 in ongoing expenditures for two (2) building inspectors, one supervising building
inspector, and one code enforcement officer.
? Increase $275,000 in ongoing expenditures for outside plan check services.
? Increase $116,000 in ongoing expenditures for extra help building inspectors.
For FY 2014-15, the Engineering and Surveying Division will continue to assist the Department of Public Works by
augmenting its resources on non-general fund projects. ESD is also providing assistance to the Department of
Facility Services (Parks, Sewer, and Property Management) on several of its capital projects. In addition to ESD’s
County capital project assistance, major infrastructure encroachment permit work continues on outside utility
companies and agencies, such as Central Valley Independent Network, Placer County Water Agency, Midwestern
Placer Regional Sewer Project, San Juan Water District, Wave Broadband and Pacific Gas and Electric. ESD
provides the required plan reviews and inspections per the Streets and Highways Code, State Water Board’s
requirements and County’s Grading Ordinance. The County cost for providing these services is fully recoverable.
ESD and other land development agencies continue to see elements of economic recovery across a spectrum of
land use activities. Notably, improvement plan reviews and construction inspections have increased appreciably
when compared to last fiscal year and during the recession. ESD improvement plan review revenue was at 110
percent of budget for the first half of FY 2013-14 and construction inspection revenue has increased approximately
25 percent over the prior year. ESD mapping services likewise is showing increases in submitted land development
maps and other related documents, such as the easements and dedications for the Placer Vineyards project.
Mapping services was at 75 percent of budget for the first half of FY 2013-14 and is anticipated to increase at a
similar rate over the next several years. Recent real property transactions corroborate this supposition, as large
projects such as Bickford Ranch, Riolo Vineyard, Placer Vineyard, and Homewood Mountain Resort are beginning
to work on their existing entitlements and move towards improvement plan preparation, mapping and construction
as soon as possible., New large projects, such as the Village at Squaw Valley Specific Plan and the Martis Valley
West Parcel Specific Plan, are eager to obtain their entitlements. This renewed development activity will be
accompanied by increases in the County’s tax base as a result of impending real property improvements.
Lastly, staff attrition has led to a continued reduction in the ESD workforce, as positions vacated have not been
backfilled. From a successional perspective ESD is also an aging workforce with 57 percent of staff currently at
retirement age (50 and over) and 76 percent eligible for retirement within the next five years. While the Agency
does not anticipate workload demand commensurate with those of the mid 2000’s, recent increases in demand
could pose challenges and delivery service impacts at the current staffing level, particularly during peak workload
demand. To this end, the ESD budget includes $234,097 for three vacant funded positions, of which two are funded
for half a year. Also, the ESD budget includes approximately $275,000 earmarked for consultant services,
budgeted to assist in handling the anticipated workload. The costs for such would be fully funded by project
applicants, with no general fund impact.
Program Purpose: The Planning Services Division encompasses a variety of roles that are often grouped under
the headings of current (i.e., new development) and long-range planning. Current planning activities evaluate
applications for development entitlements, while the long-range planning focuses on the preparation of the County’s
General Plan, community plans, natural resource planning documents (e.g., the Placer County Conservation Plan),
and other policy-related matters related to a long-term perspective on growth and the implications of growth on the
need to provide governmental facilities and services, and the impacts of growth on the environment. In practice,
these two planning functional areas are intertwined so that recommendations and interpretations of codes are
guided by adopted policies, programs and standards. In addition to implementing the County's General Plan and
Zoning Code, the Planning Services Division is responsible for County compliance with the California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), as well as the State Subdivision Map Act and State Planning and Zoning Law.
Department Comments
Over the past year, the Planning Services Division has continued to focus on long-range planning activities as well
as responding to the modest increase in land development activities. There have been a number of achievements
including the adoption of an update to the Placer County General Plan Policy Document, the certification of a new
Housing Element, and the preparation of an updated Sheridan Community Plan. Staff will continue to work on code
amendments, policy programs, and legislative initiatives (e.g., securing long-term funding for the PCCP) consistent
with direction provided by the Board of Supervisors and the County Executive Office. Each of these work programs
centers around community and resident involvement and, through this involvement, the public will be able to help
shape the future of their communities.
In response to emerging trends, staff has embarked on an update to the County Winery Ordinance that is intended
to clarify existing language and further encourage the economic development of the local agricultural industry. In a
similar manner, staff has undertaken an effort to develop new definitions and standards in the Zoning Ordinance for
Community Centers. Staff also continues to work on code amendments to address implementation of the Housing
Element.
Consistent with State law, Planning Services staff has recently commenced the development of a work and public
outreach program for a comprehensive update of the County’s General Plan including the preparation of a Climate
Action Plan and new land use diagram. As the General Plan is the blueprint for development of the County, staff
envisions that this will be a two- to three-year community-driven process to assure that the sentiments of the
residents are accurately captured in the updated policy document and land use diagram. Staff is also evaluating
the initiation of an update to the 1997 Sunset Industrial Area Plan in response to new market conditions, the need
for backbone infrastructure planning, and a realization that the County needs to diversify its economic development
portfolio to include robust growth in those economic sectors that create long-term primary wage-earner jobs. The
Tahoe Community Plan updates are expected to begin the preparation of the environmental documents allowing for
a completion of the updates in FY 2014-15. Planning Services continues to cooperate on the implementation of the
Placer Legacy program with successes on grant applications, land acquisitions, program development, and public
outreach. A number of Placer Legacy projects have been initiated which will continue to be worked on next fiscal
year (e.g., Squaw Creek restoration, Truckee River Corridor Access Plan EIR, and acquisitions associated with
grant funding from the State Wildlife Conservation Board).
In terms of current planning, staff will continue to work on the numerous large projects that renewed permitting
activities shortly after the recession ended (e.g., Bickford Ranch, Placer Vineyards and Riolo Vineyards). Staff is
also working on new projects that have recently been initiated (e.g., the Village at Squaw Valley Specific Plan - 750
dwelling units and the Martis Valley West Parcel Specific Plan - 760 dwelling units). There continues to be an
increase in activity associated with smaller projects countywide, including requests for new non-residential development (North Auburn), smaller scale residential projects, redevelopment of existing properties, and other
similar projects.
Planning Services will continue to provide housing assistance through the ongoing implementation of the County's
Housing Element (certified by HCD in November of 2013). The Division also manages a number of housing
programs that focus on affordable housing and housing rehabilitation (e.g., the First Time Homebuyers Assistance
Program). Housing staff also provides administrative support for County departments working with Community
Development Block Grants. In addition, Housing staff coordinates with the Sacramento Area Council of
Governments (SACOG) on economic forecasting, the update to the Metropolitan Transportation Plan, the Rural
Urban Connection Study, and numerous other SACOG initiatives.
Lastly, staff attrition has led to a continued reduction in the Planning Services Division workforce, as positions
vacated have not been backfilled. From a successional perspective, Planning Services is also an aging workforce
with 33 percent of staff currently at retirement age (50 or older) and 67 percent eligible for retirement within the next
five years.
Program Purpose: The Low and Moderate Income Housing Asset Fund assumed and now oversees the housing
functions and assets of the former Redevelopment Agency. These activities include construction projects in North
Tahoe (Kings Beach Housing) and Auburn (Quartz Ridge).
Department Comments
Because of the dissolution of the County’s Redevelopment Agency, the State required that all unencumbered low
and moderate income monies (and associated assets) be disbursed to the local taxing entities. As a result, only
those funds encumbered for the Quartz Ridge project were retained by the Housing Successor. On-going funding
for housing projects and programs will be derived from the repayment of loans that were originally made from low
and moderate income housing asset funds. The Low and Moderate Income Housing Asset Fund continues to be
very active, and staff is currently working with schools in the Sheridan area to address identified needs.
Department Comments
The Clerk-Recorder is pleased to serve the citizens of the County by performing duties related to the recording and
indexing of real property and vital records. This service includes the issuance of certified copies of official
documents, maintenance of specified registrations, and securing permanent filmed and imaged records of all
recorded and filed documents. These services are provided to the public and to title companies and other agencies
involved in property transactions.
The Registrar of Voters is responsible for conducting federal, state and local elections, conducting voter outreach
and registering voters. In addition, the office provides related services for citizens, candidates and public officials in
the County, including election services for cities, school districts and special districts.
Real Property Land Records
Documents related to real property are accepted for recordation in the office and become a part of the
permanent database of real property records for the County. Numerous types of documents are recorded
daily and include deeds, deeds of trust, reconveyances, liens and maps. In 2013, there were 118,634
documents recorded.
Recorded documents are scanned and indexed for posterity. Copies and certified copies of recorded
documents are available for viewing or purchase in the office. The searchable index is available online or
at the kiosks located in the office lobby. Last year, the office issued 17,629 copies of recorded documents
and 3,790 copies of recorded maps.
The office provides for the preservation and continuity of permanent records. Records are stored digitally,
on microfilm / microfiche, and in original historical record books. Microfilm and digital records are also
stored offsite in a secure location to preserve the essential record of real property documents.
Vital Records
The office is the repository for birth, death and marriage vital records. Upon receipt, the vital records are
scanned and indexed and become a part of the permanent record. Certified copies of birth, death and
marriage certificates are available by application only, as prescribed in Government Code. The office
provided 13,870 copies of vital records in 2013. Like real property records, the vital records are stored
digitally, on microfilm / microfiche and in original historic record books. The microfilm and digital records
are also stored offsite in a secure location.
Marriages
The County Clerk-Recorder provides many services related to marriage. In addition to maintaining the
marriage vital records, the office issues marriage licenses, performs marriage ceremonies, and deputizes
members of the public to perform marriage ceremonies within Placer County. Placer County issued 2,166
marriage licenses in 2013 and employees performed 547 marriages on the office grounds. Photos and
DVDs of ceremonies performed at the office are available as well as rings, bouquets and keepsake
certificates.
Filings / Registrations
In addition to real property records, the office accepts documents for filing and public information / viewing.
The filings include environmental impact reports, fictitious business name statements and various bonds
and certifications. There were 2,834 fictitious business name statements and 282 environmental
documents filed in 2013.
Passport Acceptance Agent
The office is an authorized passport acceptance agent and accepts applications for new passports on
behalf of the U.S. Department of State. In 2013 the office processed 1,982 passport applications. As an
added convenience, passport photos are available for purchase at the office.
Elections
The office is responsible for conducting federal, state and local elections for Placer County. Our mission is
to provide this important service in a manner that is legally compliant, timely, accurate, transparent and
convenient.
The County is legally required to provide polling places for every voting precinct over 250 voters so voters
may cast their vote in person on election day. Local poll workers are recruited and trained to staff those
polling locations. All polling places are ADA compliant and are periodically surveyed as required to verify
compliance.
Placer County has 203,147 registered voters as of March 2014 and 63% of these voters are registered to
permanently vote by mail (PVBM). The office maintains the voter registration database with the PVBM
designation and ensures that the voter is mailed the correct ballot, processes the incoming voted ballots
and other mandated processes. On election day, voted ballots are collected from the post offices
throughout the County to ensure all possible ballots are received.
Voter Registration
The Registrar of Voters provides voter registration services to the voters of Placer County, maintains the
voter registration database and performs various mandated processes related to the database. According
to the Secretary of State’s Report of Registration as of December 31, 2013, 81% of eligible voters are Voter Outreach
The office is committed to ensuring that all eligible voters have the opportunity to register to vote and to
cast their ballots on election day. With this goal in mind, the office reaches out to students through our
successful high school voter outreach program. The County high school senior classes are visited each
semester in order to explain the voting process to them. The students are given the opportunity to register
to vote. Also included in the program are speakers representing various qualified political parties who
provide information regarding the party platforms and local elected officials who discuss their role and
experiences in office. The office also regularly visits facilities that enable us to reach out to senior citizen
voters to afford them an opportunity to register to vote or re-register to vote and to sign up as permanent
vote-by-mail voters.
Candidate Services
The office provides election services to candidates and to various special districts throughout the County.
This includes elective term tracking, candidate filing, ballot measure assistance and various administrative
tasks related to elections for the districts and candidates. The office is committed to supporting candidates
for local races through candidate workshops and to further participation in electoral democracy in the
County.
Form 700 Filing Officer
The responsibility for performing filing officer duties related to the filing of Statement of Economic Interests
(Form 700) forms resides with the office. Approximately 1,500 forms are received each year from various
boards / commissions, special districts, school districts and Placer County employees. These forms are
reviewed and scanned and are preserved in accordance with state law. They are available to the public for
viewing or to obtain a copy.
The office is committed to providing quality and timely professional services to our customers and to continue to
develop efficiencies in work processes and incorporating technology to meet our responsibilities. We continue to
see an increase in demand for Clerk services, such as vital record and official record copies, filings and
registrations and, as the real estate market recovers, the volume of real property documents submitted for
recordation. The anticipated implementation of electronic recording will assist in enhancing customer service and
efficiency of recording documents. The office is nearing completion of the state-mandated redaction project well in
advance of the 2017 deadline.
The office is looking forward to conducting the November 4, 2014 Gubernatorial General Election. Placer County
continues to experience growth in voter registration and an increase in voting by mail. This growth requires
sufficient staffing and increased election materials and resources as needed to meet demands. In 2014, the office
will include the translations of certain voting materials into Spanish and Tagalog, a requirement being imposed by
the Secretary of State. The office is also pursuing options to replace aging warehouse facilities and the acquisition
of equipment that will assist with automating some of the current processes.
The County Counsel is the legal advisor for the County, providing legal advice to the Board of Supervisors, the
County Executive Office, the elected and appointed Department Heads and other County managers, as well as for
various county boards and commissions, certain special districts and the Grand Jury. In addition, the County
Counsel’s office represents the County and its officers and employees in civil litigation and administrative
proceedings. The legal services of County Counsel are provided through the following programs:
? Transactional and General Government
This program provides legal advice to a wide variety of County departments and functions, from land use
and planning to procurement of goods and services for County use, in order to insure legal compliance of
County operations. Examples of services include contract review and analysis, legal review of agenda
items prior to submission to the Board, legal review of ordinances and resolutions, drafting and review of
facilities and real property transactions, and responding to requests for legal review department activities.
This function includes representation of the Board of Supervisors, the County Planning Commission, the
County Agricultural Commission and other County commissions, boards and committees. It is called
upon to provide legal services in support of Board initiatives such as the Middle Fork Project Public Finance
Authority, Mid-Placer Regional Sewer Project, and changes in state law, such as legal services to support
the Successor Agency of the former Redevelopment Agency. This program also includes legal advice to
certain special districts, including the West Placer Waste Management Authority and the Air Pollution
Control District. County Counsel provided approximately 6,162 hours of legal services to this program in the last fiscal year, which equates to about 30% of the total services provided.
? Finance and Tax
This program primarily provides legal services to the County Auditor, the Assessor and the Treasurer-Tax
Collector regarding property tax assessment and collection, bond and assessment financing, as well as
representation of the Assessor’s Office at assessment appeals that challenge the value of property for
property tax purposes. These services also include legal services in support of the County PACE
program, mPower Placer, and general legal advice regarding transient occupancy tax, sales tax and other
revenue generating measures. This program also provides legal counsel to the County Audit Committee,
the County Finance Committee, and the Bond Screening Committee. County Counsel provided
approximately 1,753 hours of legal services to this program in the last fiscal year.
? Personnel and Labor
The Personnel and Labor program involves representation of the Personnel Department, the Risk
Management Division and County department management on state and federal legal principles of
employer and employee relations. These legal services extend from initial legal advice through
proceedings that may come before the County Civil Service Commission or the State Employee Relations
Board on discipline, grievances and general labor relations practices. In addition, this program provides
legal advice to County Labor Negotiations Team, the Employee Relations Committee, and the Personnel
Review Committee, in addition to its on-going legal advice to County department management on meet and
confer matters, due process employment issues and fair employment /civil rights issues. This program also
includes legal advice regarding employee benefits issues, such as public employee pensions, health
benefits and other post-employment retirement benefits and serves as legal counsel to the Deferred
Compensation Committee. County Counsel provided approximately 1,563 hours of legal services to this
program in the last fiscal year.
? Public Protection
This program provides legal support to the Sheriff Office, its Corrections Division, the Probation
Department, the District Attorney, the Indigent Defense Services Program administered by the County
Executive Office and the Grand Jury. These services include legal advice on the legal compliance of
department activities with state and federal statutory provisions, including AB 109 criminal justice
realignment, as well as general legal services on department activities such as records requests,
subpoenas and Pitchess motions. County Counsel is also mandated to provide civil legal services to
Grand Jury and to provide timely enforcement of bail bond forfeiture cases, including collection of money
due to the County pursuant to summary judgment against bail bond companies. County Counsel provided
approximately 1,941 hours of legal services to this program in the last fiscal year.
? Health Services and Adult Dependency
County Counsel provides on-going legal advice to Department/Division management on legal compliance
with state and federal regulatory matters, such as HIPAA and privacy issues, the Affordable Care Act,
service contracts, responses to records requests and other general requests for legal advice. The program
also provides legal support to the Public Administrator, the Public Guardian, and in support of mental health
proceedings under the Lanterman-Petris-Short (LPS) Act. County legal services are mandated for LPS
conservatorships, probate cases, decedent estate and elder abuse cases. County Counsel provided
approximately 1,613 hours of legal services to this program in the last fiscal year.
? Juvenile Dependency
County Counsel is mandated to appear in juvenile dependency hearings on behalf of HHS/Children’s
System of Care when parents are represented by legal counsel. This program provides legal support to
juvenile dependency matters, from general legal advice, preparation of search and seizure warrants to
hearings before the Placer County Juvenile Court and writ actions in the Court of Appeal. The program
also provides training of social workers on legal issues involved in division activities. County Counsel has
three full time attorneys, as well as support staff dedicated to this work, who over the last fiscal year
prosecuted 368 petitions, and assisted in over 191 warrants. In addition, County Counsel provided
approximately 5,221 hours of legal services to this program, which equates to about 22% of the total
services provided by our office. The costs are funded by HHS and approximately 90% of charges are
reimbursed from Federal and State revenues.
? Litigation
The litigation program provides legal defense of the County in all civil legal actions filed against the County,
its departments and employees. The County Counsel also represents the County in prosecuting recovery
actions protecting the integrity of the expenditure of public funds. Government Code Section 25203
requires County Counsel to represent the County in all civil matters unless there is a conflict or general
concern stated, in which case the Board of Supervisors may retain counsel to assist by a 4/5ths vote. To
the extent such services obtained from outside counsel, the costs of legal services would likely exceed the
cost of the County Counsel’s office. Therefore, General Fund discretionary monies would not be saved
from reducing or eliminating this program. The majority of funding for this program is provided from the
Risk Management insurance fund billings. County Counsel provided approximately 4,795 hours of legal
services to this program, which equates to about 20% of the total services provided.
The recovering local and regional economies have resulted in increased activity in land use and development and
related transactional legal services. New legislative initiatives such as public employee pension reform and the
Affordable Care Act, as well as new state changes to labor negotiation issues, have caused an increasing demand
for legal advice in the personnel and labor relations program, while continuing implementation issues involved in
criminal justice realignment, and the opening of the South Placer jail facilities will continue to drive the demand for
legal services in the public protection program.
The County Executive Office / Board of Supervisors Department is responsible for the development and
implementation of policies and priorities, strategic planning, and the management of county finances and
operations. The Board of Supervisors governs the County through actions aimed at addressing and responding to
the public and directing countywide policy and operations. As part of this responsibility, the County Executive
Office coordinates and directs the activities of all county departments in cooperation with the County’s elected
officials.
The Department strives to provide effective leadership for countywide priorities and initiatives both directly and
indirectly through sound guidance, and collaboration with its many partners. To fulfill its duty to the public, the
County Executive Office / Board of Supervisors ensures:
? Development of the annual county budget, or financial blueprint, of the Board of Supervisors’ priorities to
balance available resources with the service needs of Placer County’s residents.
? Transparency of budget activity and financial policies that communicate the use of public funds.
? Leadership and management of county resources in collaboration with departments.
? Availability of Board members and their staff to the public.
? Routine board meetings to engage, inform, and solicit information from the public.
? Regular news media releases to keep the public informed of county events that may impact their lives.
? Pursuit of economic development opportunities to strengthen the County’s financial foundation for creating
jobs and retaining businesses and tourism, and supporting the community at large.
? Continuity of available fire and emergency response services for responding to community concerns,
emergencies, and potential disasters.
? Pro-active management of county risk that promotes the health and safety of county employees and the
public, while protecting the assets of the County.
? Engagement in legislative advocacy to support the best interests of the community on legislative issues or
concerns that could impact residents, businesses, and the overall well-being of the County.
The FY 2014-15 Proposed Budget delivers fiscally responsible spending, strategically leveraged grant and revenue
funding, and achieves minimal year-over-year cost increases that are not otherwise preventable. The Proposed
Budget aligns with Board priorities and establishes a foundation for the long-term sustainability of county services.
Initiatives continue to be focused on economic development, employee engagement, and public outreach. To fulfill
the initiatives, existing funding within the Department has shifted to areas of need, such as redirecting position
funding from the Administration division to the Economic Development, Organizational Development, and Public
Information divisions.
Development of the FY 2014-15 Proposed Budget includes continued implementation of Priority Based Budgeting
to be used as a communication tool to the public to explain how taxpayer funds are providing key services to county
residents. Priority Based Budgeting is an approach focused on allocating resources based upon the highest-priority
programs and services, and is being phased into the County’s operating budget this year and in future years. This
year the County Executive Office, among all County departments, have identified their Programs. The identification
of Programs provides the framework that will become the mechanism for the public and departments to evaluate
county performance and service deliverables to determine what is working and what adjustments are needed.
The District Attorney’s Office continues to maintain and improve the quality of life for all residents of Placer County
by prosecuting serious and violent crimes in Placer County, as well as directing resources to prosecute criminal
misconduct. Based upon past years’ experience, we can expect to receive 11,000-13,000 criminal referrals in
FY 2014-15, resulting in approximately 65,000-70,000 court appearances on behalf of The People of The State of
California. Our Investigative staff will receive approximately 6,500 service requests to augment investigations in
those matters where appropriate or mandated by law. We will continue to advise, assist, and review criminal
investigations completed by law enforcement and other federal, state, and local agencies.
Approximately 4,000 of our Placer County citizens will suffer victimization as a result of criminal conduct. Our office
provides aid and assistance to victims, witnesses, and their families to help guide them through the criminal justice
process and to overcome the negative effects that those crimes have had on their lives. Under the recently enacted
Marsy’s Law, victims of crime are guaranteed certain constitutional rights and to receive specific services including
the right to legal standing, protection from the defendant, notification of all court proceedings, and restitution. The
Placer County District Attorney’s Victim Services Unit works with each of these victims to assure these services are
provided and that their constitutional rights are protected.
We look forward to continuing to collaborate with our Criminal Justice Partners to develop innovative and proactive
approaches to public safety issues.
Department Comments
The Facility Services Department manages and administers the programs and operations of its seven core
divisions of Administration, Building Maintenance, Parks and Grounds, Museums, Capital Improvements, Property
Management, and Environmental Utilities. Through the Administration division, the Department carries out the
policy directives of the County Executive Office and the Board of Supervisors to assure the Department functions in
the most appropriate, effective, and efficient manner possible in providing services to the public and other county
departments. The Department’s divisions are identified below with each highlighting their most integral
responsibilities and continued initiatives to support countywide operations.
Building Maintenance
The Building Maintenance Division is charged with maintaining county facilities in a safe and healthy condition for
the use of the public and employees. In discharging this duty and obligation, Building Maintenance provides
maintenance and custodial services, monitors the condition of county facilities, and plans for service and
preventative maintenance and upgrades. This responsibility includes:
? Management of 300 diverse facilities encompassing approximately 1.3 million gross square feet of building
area spread geographically from Roseville to Tahoe.
? Performance of preventative maintenance.
? Development of private sector contracts to assist with custodial and specialty services such as HVAC and
building controls, fire detection and suppression, security electronics, elevators, and generators; and to
provide timely and cost effective services.
? Construction of projects when it is determined to be the most effective delivery method.
? Monitoring utility charges and pursuit of all reasonable means to achieve utility cost savings.
Parks and Grounds
The Parks and Grounds Division provides operation, maintenance, and construction services at park facilities and
beaches in unincorporated Placer County, and provides complete grounds maintenance services for all other
county owned facilities. Parks and Grounds also plans, constructs, and maintains county trails and public open
space, which are developed in partnership with community organizations and development projects. To fulfill these
responsibilities, Parks and Grounds:
? Ensures provision of adequate parkland consistent with the standards in the Placer County General Plan.
? Supports public / private recreation providers and community groups to further the common mission of
programming and providing parkland.
? Designs and maintains landscaped areas and natural vegetation on county properties to enhance
aesthetics, to minimize the demands for labor and water, and for fire safety.
? Works with citizens, neighboring agencies, and developers to plan and construct multiple-use trails
throughout Placer County.
? Assists regulatory and planning agencies in maintaining the public’s legal rights to access the County’s
beaches at Lake Tahoe.
Museums
The Museums Division operates six county museums and the recently-relocated Archives and Collections Facility.
The Division is dedicated to providing education programs, access to the County’s historic objects and archival
materials, and historic preservation. To accomplish this mission, Museums:
? Provides education programs, including Living History, Gold Rush and School Tours serving more than
3,500 school children each year.
? Sponsors and manages the Heritage Trail Tour which makes 19 museums available to the public free of
charge over a weekend in August.
? Regularly rotates exhibits in the museums to interpret new facets of Placer County History.
? Produces and installs temporary exhibits in public spaces to reach a broader audience.
? Operates the Archives and Collections Facility which provides the public with access to the County’s
collection of 16,500 objects, 18,500 photographs, and 21,000 documents.
Staff Curators and volunteers expertly process research requests from all over the world.
? Supports local historical preservation societies by providing advice on collection conservation and museum
operations.
? Relies on more than 200 trained volunteers who provide visitor services in county museums, support
education programs, assist with special events, and help with the conservation of objects at the Archives
and Collections Facility.
Placer County Government Center Campus
The Placer County Government Center Campus provides for the maintenance and operation of the Campus
infrastructure. These services include the following:
? Sewer, water and street light utility charges.
? Grounds maintenance associated with Campus buildings and surrounding areas including irrigation
repairs/installation, lawn mowing, weed abatement and control, tree trimming, plant replacement, and
storm water management.
? Parking lot and road maintenance including slurry seals, striping, sweeping, and pot-hole repairs.
? Maintenance for water and sewer line repairs, sidewalk repairs, storm drain system and detention basin
maintenance, and minor improvements such as additional lighting for safety, installation of new sidewalks,
and signage.
Capital Improvements
The Capital Improvements Division provides planning, design and construction services to County Departments to
support delivery of services to the public. These services include new construction, additions, remodels, and tenant
improvements. Examples include the following:
? Identify space, adjacency and facility requirements that support County Department facility needs. Perform
needs assessments, architectural programming, master planning, project scoping and cost modeling.
? Assess and recommend the most appropriate project delivery method.
? Perform project environmental studies and secure entitlements.
? Perform hazardous materials investigations and abatement / remediation.
? Deliver cost effective and responsive design solutions for new facilities, renovations and tenant
improvements.
? Provide and manage space planning, architectural and engineering design services, construction
documentation, specifications and detailed cost estimates.
? Design for safe, operationally efficient, accessible, and energy efficient public facilities.
? Manage the timely delivery of sustainable, responsibly designed and high quality civic facilities that serve
the citizens of Placer County, through effective consultant and construction management.
Property Management
The Property Management Division performs a broad range of specialized real estate and property management
services. This includes management of county-owned property, leasing privately-owned facilities for county
functions, leasing county-owned properties for revenue generation, finding and purchasing real estate to support
County operations and public services, and functioning as a one-stop resource for county property issues.
Examples of these services include:
? Negotiation of Ground Lease terms for the development of a Costco Warehouse Store at the Placer County
Government Center that upon construction would bring between 165-170 good jobs, and generate
significant and tax revenues to the County.
? Leasing surplus properties at the Placer County Government Center in Auburn for revenue generation.
? Property management of certain Kings Beach properties formerly owned by the Placer County
Redevelopment Agency, now Successor Agency, and sale of selected properties for future private
development in a manner consistent with zoning, area plans and to promote and catalyze urban renewal in
the Kings Beach area.
? Locating privately-owned facilities to accommodate County programs; negotiation of favorable lease
agreements with private property owners; and construction management of tenant improvements to
address specialized program requirements.
? Negotiate with private land owners to preserve and protect the public’s rights to shorelines fronting Lake
Tahoe.
? Acquire property rights to preserve the open space, agricultural and recreational values in support of the
Placer Legacy Program.
Environmental Utilities
Environmental Utilities administers garbage collection and recycling services, environmental monitoring and
maintenance at closed landfill sites, as well as engineering, operation and maintenance of the County’s wastewater
collection and treatment facilities. The Division also operates and maintains domestic drinking water systems in
Sheridan and at the Eastern Regional Landfill. Examples of the services Environmental Utilities provides include:
? Recovering recyclables from 430,000 tons of garbage annually at two Material Recovery Facilities.
? Reducing the amount of garbage landfilled countywide by 72% through reduction, reuse, and recycling
programs and partnerships.
? Conducting periodic environmental inspections, monitoring and reporting, and ongoing maintenance at four
closed landfill sites to ensure complete compliance with State and federal requirements. Currently
achieving 99% compliance across all of the closed landfill sites.
? Reviewing land development proposals and working with developers to ensure adequate capacity for new
development without impacting our existing customers. Currently coordinating with developers on 40
active projects with a total of 31,000 equivalent dwelling units.
? Evaluating existing facilities, and planning and implementing improvement projects to repair aging and
damaged infrastructure. Current projects include the Midwestern Placer (North Auburn) Regional Sewer
Project, the SMD 3 (Horseshoe Bar) Regional Sewer Project, the Sheridan Water Supply Project, and the
Meadow Vista Transfer Station Improvements Project.
? Providing 28 million gallons of clean drinking water and processing nearly 1.4 billion gallons of wastewater
annually.
? Evaluating existing facilities and performing preventative maintenance to ensure proper operation of our
facilities and infrastructure.
Placer County’s UC Cooperative Extension staff continues to provide a wide range of high quality educational
services to thousands of local residents. Working under the philosophy of “helping people to help themselves,” with
up-to-date research-based information, achievements during the past year have been impressive. The Farm
Advisor Department is able to leverage the budget support from the County to receive almost $600,000 in grant
funding to improve the lives of Placer County residents. Program activities and accomplishments include:
USDA Risk Management Grant to Help Beginning Farmers
? Livestock and Horticulture Farm Advisors received a $73,789 USDA Risk Management grant that targeted
beginning farmer and rancher training.
? 62 workshops were held for 1,062 producers that included beginning farming academies, series of
marketing workshops, risk management production workshops, and a farm business planning class.
Several on-farm workshops and demonstrations were held to build competence in these beginning farmers
and ranchers.
Foothill Farming Website
? This website (http://ucanr.org/foothillfarming) was developed to provide production, marketing, risk
management, drought management, and business management information to both beginning and
experienced farmers and ranchers. The website has become a key referral route for new clientele and
reached 14,000 hits and 1,000 visits per month.
CDFA Specialty Crop Grant to Increase Local Specialty Crop Consumption with county Residents
? A $387,796 CDFA Specialty Crop grant was received ($153,567 for this year) to increase local produce
consumption of county residents. The grant runs for two and a half years and will hold tasting and sampling
events for the general public, low-income, and senior audiences. The project is called Eat Local Placer
Nevada.
? Farmers received point of purchase materials and training to better understand the nutrition of the crops
they raise. Accomplishments include:
? A total of 27 tastings/samplings of local produce were held at the year round Foothill Farmers’ Market
Association market in Auburn, DeWitt Market, Roseville, and Rocklin.
? A total of 1,022 Placer County residents tasted mandarin juice, apples, pears, kale, winter greens,
winter squash soup, cabbage, and potato soup.
? Over $7,000 was put in local farmers’ pockets through redemption of $5 vouchers (1,524 distributed)
redeemable at Foothill Farmers’ Market Association markets and direct purchase of produce for
tastings/samplings. The project handed out over 5,000 samples of locally grown produce.
? Eat Local Facebook pages was established and reached over 10,000 individuals. Eat Local website
was developed.
? Community Dinner was held in Auburn to connect 81 county residents with 19 farmers. The menu
featured all locally grown products. $925 were collected in donations and used to purchase local
produce that was distributed at Auburn Interfaith Food Closet.
4-H Youth Development
? The 4-H Youth Development program saw 695 youth participating in over 2,016 projects.
? A total of 205 adult volunteers provided over 18,000 hours of mentoring and support to these 4-H projects.
4-H Embryology
? The Placer County 4-H program provides 125 incubators and eggs to teachers, home-schooled parents,
and 4-H families. This project is used to teach children about science and how an egg evolves into a chick
or a duckling.
? Over 983 teachers, parents, and 4-H families worked with 7,751 youth to experience hatching eggs from an
incubator.
Cal-Fresh Nutrition Education in Placer County Schools
? The Cal-Fresh Nutrition Education program receives $207,111 in funding to provide nutrition information,
teaching, curriculum, and produce tasting activities to over 3,200 children in low-income schools.
? The Let’s Eat Healthy nutrition curriculum was taught by Cal-Fresh staff and used by teachers throughout
the year at 111 elementary school classrooms and 15 preschool classrooms.
? Over 30 parents and caregivers completed a workshop series geared toward adults who quality for Cal
Fresh benefits on meal planning, understanding food labels, saving money, and menu planning for a week.
Nutrition Best Nutrition Program Help Placer County Families with Children Zero to Five Years of Age
? Placer County First 5 Commission provided $146,625 in funding for the UC Nutrition BEST program.
? The funding was used to expand the program to provide a weekly box of produce from a local farm for 22
weeks to 90 families in Early Head Start programs in Lincoln, Loomis, Auburn,and Kings Beach. Extra
boxes were distributed to Mothers in Recovery as part o a two-part series on food budgeting and heating
more produce.
? A 57-page cookbook, Community Supported Agriculture Bountiful Harvest Cookbook, was developed to
provide Early Head Start families with easy recipes and nutritional information with the produce boxes they
were receiving. The cookbook was translated into Spanish.
? 463 Produce vouchers that could be redeemed at Foothill Farmers’ Markets were distributed through
Placer County Women and Infant Children’s (WIC) program and teen parents at Chana and Adalante High
Schools.
? Family Garden Day was held for families to teach them how to grow their own food. 100 people attended
and learned about gardening, composting, and received plants to grow.
Master Gardener Program Provides Garden and Composting Information to Placer County Residents
? The Master Gardener program provided home horticulture and composting education and support to over
6,000 county residents.
? The 100 volunteers of the Placer County Master Gardener program established a demonstration garden at
the Senior Community Garden. These volunteers provide over 6,000 hours of service for answering home
garden questions at the Farm Advisor office, demonstration garden presentations, school gardens, and
manning various events with an informational booth.
? Our office continues to provide coordination and support for the Senior Community Garden. There
continues to be a waiting list for available plots in the garden.
Health and Human Services (HHS) provides a broad spectrum of unique mandated services to more than 60,000
Placer County residents annually. HHS proactively adjusts the methods used and the array of services provided to make best use of emerging technologies and to assure that the department is responsive to changing community
needs.
HHS delivers services through a combination of contracts with local businesses and non-profit organizations and a
dedicated team of public servants focused on providing cost effective, high quality services to County residents and
businesses. It is that dedication to the public good, to fostering a positive and community-based services approach
between our employees and the women, children, and men in our community that has led Placer County to
consistently receive federal and State recognition as a model of excellence in service delivery – the “Placer Model”.
The “Placer Model” reflects the foundational belief that the services HHS provides must be research-based, cost
effective, culturally informed, and fiscally sustainable. The Department is pleased that its innovative approaches
have resulted in reduced dependency on County general funds and increased self-sufficiency of the residents
served.
The Library’s Focus
The Library focuses its efforts on providing materials and programs in a variety of formats that support and enhance
the educational and recreational needs of its community. Formats include; books, electronic books, personal
computers, DVDs, music CDs, magazines, audio-books, and local history collections. Open access to these diverse
resources is for the benefit of all Library members in order to strengthen community engagement and participation.
Additionally, Library professionals work collaboratively with community partners and other governmental agencies
to create Library programs that strengthen community literacy, the love of reading, and life-long learning.
Partnerships
Partnerships include a grass roots collective effort of eleven Friends of the Library groups that provide fundraising,
advocacy, and donations to the Library throughout the year. In FY 2013-14, the Friends donated more than
$75,000 to the Library; mainly to help support the Library’s collection and youth programs including the annual
Summer Reading Program. A number of the Friends of the Library groups have received grants from organizations
like Union Pacific to support Library services.
The Strategic Plan
The Library has been fiscally challenged for a number of years due to the loss of property tax revenues and
increased expenses. The Library’s Strategic Plan, approved by the Board of Supervisors on December 10, 2013,
offers some insight into how to evaluate and distribute resources while moving toward a sustainable future.
Three initiatives are highlighted in the Plan and will provide a roadmap for future service:
? Reverse the Erosion in Library Services by recognizing that, like many County departments, the Library
was hit hard by the Great Recession and must invest as the economy improves in its facilities, Library
materials, staffing, and programming in order to meet the expectations of savvy Library customers. To
remain viable, the Library must move beyond the interconnected system of “small” town libraries to become
a fully interdependent network that shares and concentrates its resources and services where customers
are using them.
? Modernize Operations to Improve Efficiency and Expand Services by anticipating the needs of Library
users, reducing the unit cost of routine customer transactions, improving the Library’s website content,
providing access while making self-service easy, fun, and preferred by customers with up to date wireless
technology and equipment.
? Build Capacity for the Future by identifying new revenue sources and maintaining prudent reserves.
Recognizing that human capital is one of the County’s greatest resources and expenses, the Personnel
Department’s mission, is how to best engage and manage its workforce, as guided by the principles of Civil
Service. The Personnel Department accomplishes its mission by providing effective leadership in the management
and engagement of the County’s human resources to effectively and efficiently serve the general public.
The Personnel Department organizational functions are covered by two divisions, Department Support Services
and Operations. The Department Support Services assists in hiring, staffing, and employee relations in conjunction
of the Civil Service principals and applicable federal, state and local laws. The Operations Division assists the
departments in administration of the human resources salary and benefit administration through the PeopleSoft Human Resources Information System of the biweekly payroll for over 2600 employees. This includes program
management for the County’s health, dental, vision, retirement and leave management. Both divisions play an
integral role in labor relations activities with the County Executive Office from recommending, researching,
evaluating, and implementing new labor relations provisions for the Deputy Sheriff’s Association (DSA) and Placer
Public Employees Organization.
In the upcoming year, the Personnel Department will continue to develop internal organizational capacity, play a
critical role in supporting departments to build a quality sustainable workforce, contribute to effective labor relations,
and administer benefit and payroll transactions with the goal of maintaining excellent customer service.
Additionally, the Personnel Department will partner with County departments to implement PeopleSoft self-service
to allow employees and departmental staff to complete human resource and benefit transactions on line and assist
in the upcoming PeopleSoft software upgrade.
We also anticipate functioning as a significant resource and partner with County Departments and the workforce in
light of pension reform, the Affordable Care Act and other legislative changes impacting employers and their
workforce. For example, pension reform has resulted in exploring other alternatives to utilizing CalPERS annuitants
for temporary assignments in addition to impacting recruitment strategies given new retirement formulas. Likewise,
the Affordable Care Act will impact how the County utilizes its extra help / temporary workforce.
Personnel continues to seek best practices and alternative approaches to providing the most efficient and effective
services in the areas of staffing and hiring, human resource and benefit administration, workforce productivity, and
labor and employee relations. To this end, the Personnel Department has actively participated in compliance and
fiscal audits undertaken by the Auditor Controller’s Office in addition to an organizational analysis to assess human
resource functions and their placement within the County’s organizational structure while acknowledging the
County’s charter which includes the provision for a Civil Service Commission.
Probation continues to contribute to the overall effectiveness of the criminal justice system through cost effective
business practices and collaborative partnerships with the Court, District Attorney, Public Defender’s office,
Sheriff’s Department, local police departments, Health and Human Services, Placer County Office of Education,
and local treatment providers.
The coming fiscal year of 2014 – 2015 will be the year we open our new Placer Re-entry Program or PREP. This
facility will be adjacent to our current offices in the Santucci Justice Center. The facility will consist of a large and
small meeting room for classes, a computer lab to provide educational and job search assistance, as well as two
interview rooms. This facility will be used as a center to insure provision of evidence based programs as needed,
based on individualized case plans for each offender. Criminal Justice and Health and Human Services staff will
work to provide a continuum of services to insure consistency of evidence based programs from the time an
offender is in custody, through to their release from custody and while supervised in the community by our staff,
until they are no longer under the purview of the criminal justice system.
Adult Services is comprised of three core functions: Court Services, Supervision Services, and Adult Alternative
Sentencing. Court Services staff conducts Pre-Sentence Investigations, and provided the court with over 1660 (a
28% increase from the prior year) comprehensive reports with recommendations on sentencing, treatment,
community supervision, and victim restitution.
As mentioned last year, with the 2011 passage of AB109, Public Safety Realignment, Adult Services assumed
responsibility for Post Release Community Supervision (PRCS) offenders who have completed their sentences with
the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation. These offenders present unique challenges including
homelessness, a lack of resources, broken family connections, and a critical need for services to enhance their
opportunities for success. Our officers are committed to enhancing public safety through intensive community
supervision services, appropriate case planning, and collaborative partnerships with our law enforcement
community. During fiscal year 2013, Adult Services supervised over 3,300 offenders, conducted approximately
10,400 home contacts and 19,950 office contacts, and filed over 1,000 violations of probation. In addition, Adult
Services administered in-house programming such as Job Seekers, Courage to Change, Independent Living Skills,
and others to 457 adult offenders (an increase of 72% over the prior year) with an 81% successful completion rate.
Alternative Sentencing provides opportunities for carefully screened offenders to serve their sentence on one of
Probation’s community programs, such as Electronic Monitoring (EM) and Adult Work Release (AWR). Electronic
monitoring participants are confined to their residences and monitored through GPS devices, where they receive
intensive supervision, random drug testing, and are subject to search and seizure. The program allows participants
to retain their employment and participate in evidence-based treatment programming to enhance their likelihood of
success. The AWR provides offenders the opportunity to complete their sentences while working at one of our
approved community worksites. Use of these alternative sentencing programs equated to 64,468 in jail bed days
saved (a 65% increase from the prior year) over the last year. If these programs were not in place, approximately
176 additional offenders per day would need to be housed in the Placer County Jail.
Juvenile Services staff works closely with youth and their families, juvenile justice agencies, law enforcement,
schools, community-based treatment organizations, and victims of crime to ensure accountability while providing
early intervention and prevention services to youth in the justice system. Through the Children’s System of Care
collaborative, out-of-home placements have been reduced in recent years with 19 minors currently placed.
The 78 bed Juvenile Detention Facility (JDF) continues to operate in an efficient and cost effective manner. We
continue to staff based upon population and actively engage the Courts to use alternatives to custody as
appropriate while insuring the public’s safety.
The Correctional Food Services division insures all persons held in custody by Placer County law enforcement are
fed in accordance with federal and state mandates. With 13 full-time staff, augmented with inmate labor,
approximately 62,000 meals were served monthly over the past year. Offender participation provides meaningful
work related experience, increasing their ability to gain or retain employment upon their release from custody.
Approximately 30 offenders per month (a 20% increase from the prior year) complete an in-house culinary program
and receive a safety and sanitation certification that may also be used to strengthen employment opportunities.
Public Works provides various municipal services to citizens of the unincorporated portions of the County including:
? Road Planning, Engineering, Operations and Maintenance
? Transit Services
Stormwater Permit Compliance and Floodplain Management
? Tahoe Environmental Improvement Program
? Fleet Maintenance/Services for County Departments
Road Maintenance
Public Works operates and maintains approximately 1,050 miles of roadways throughout the unincorporated
County from the farmlands west of Lincoln to Lake Tahoe. Approximately 200 miles of roadways exceed an
elevation of 5,000 feet and require regular seasonal snow removal at an average annual cost of $2.5M/year. Road
Maintenance is responsible for several subprograms associated with maintaining County rights-of-way including:
? Maintain Pavements
? Traffic Control Devices (signing, striping and signals)
? Vegetation Management
? Roadside Drainage
? Maintain Bridges
? Snow Removal
? Issuing Transportation/Encroachment Permits
Engineering
Our engineering groups are responsible for planning future transportation facilities, managing and designing capital
improvement projects on our roadways, environmental projects in the Tahoe basin as well as providing engineering
services for other departments or entities.
Roadway and bridge engineers will be working on planning, designing or constructing 19 bridge replacements, 9
road widening or safety projects, and 8 pedestrian/bikeway projects for an approximate value of $40M.
Our traffic engineers/planners are responsible for traffic engineering, transportation planning and Land
development review.
1. Traffic engineering functions include annual review and evaluation of accidents on our roadways
(particularly locations with the highest rates of traffic accidents), assisting communities with local traffic
issues as part of our neighborhood traffic management program, investigate citizens’ traffic safety
concerns and operating our traffic signals at optimum levels.
2. Transportation planning functions include the transportation elements of community plans for planning
our future roadway system, cooperating with partners on regional transportation improvements,
administering traffic impact fee programs and programming of transportation funding.
3. Land development review consists of reviewing proposed private development projects to insure
adequate and safe regional roadways are provided.
Public Work engineers in Tahoe are responsible for delivering Placer County’s share of the $1B Tahoe
Environmental Improvement Program (EIP) whose ultimate goal is to improve clarity in Lake Tahoe and the quality
of water running into the lake. We are working on 10 of these projects at an approximate value of $15M in the Lake
Tahoe basin
Stormwater Permit Compliance
The County is currently subject to three different stormwater quality permits issued by the State for the following
areas:
? Lake Tahoe Basin
? Lower Truckee River Watershed
? Western Placer County.
Each has separate program requirements for the County to:
? Educate and involve the public on the importance of protecting stormwater quality
? Monitor, regulate, and control public and private construction activities
? Monitor, regulate and insure maintenance of stormwater quality facilities after constructed
? Monitor and maintain various county facilities for stormwater compliance
? Actively seek out and address illegal stormwater releases to our local creeks and streams
? Conduct monitoring and report to the State on the ongoing health of our watersheds
Floodplain Management
The County is a participant in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). The goal of the program is to
implement educational and program initiatives, and regulatory measures to minimize damages and financial losses
due to floods. Our efforts have led to a Community Rating Service (CRS) level five which qualifies unincorporated
county residents to a 25% discount on their premiums for flood insurance. This team also implements and enforces
the County’s Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
Transit Services
Public Works operates transit services in the Tahoe Area under the name Tahoe Area Regional Transit (TART) and
in Western Placer County under the name of Placer County Transit (PCT).
TART provides year-round bus service on the north shore of Lake Tahoe from Sugar Pine Point State Park to the
Hyatt in Incline Village. TART also provides a year-round route between Truckee and Tahoe City and a winter
route on Highway 267 between Truckee and Kings Beach. Additional service is added in the summer season.
TART transports 360 thousand passengers every year.
PCT provides five permanent fixed route lines connecting Alta, Auburn, Sierra College, Roseville Galleria, Lincoln
and the Watt Avenue Light Rail Station. We also supply bus services under contract for the City of Rocklin, Town
of Loomis and City of Colfax. Additionally we operate a commuter bus service with five trips daily to downtown
Sacramento and coordinate ten commuter vanpools. Dial-A-Ride services are also provided by PCT. PCT
transports 475 thousand passengers every year.
Fleet Service
Public works is charged with providing safe, reliable and cost effective transportation for County operations
including
? Provide reliable, cost-effective vehicles
? Vehicle repair and maintenances services
? Fuel purchasing and distribution
? Fleet management and regulatory compliance
The County has 468 automobiles and light trucks that drive over 4.5 million miles/year and utilize over 500,000
gallons of fuel/year. We also maintain over 250 pieces of equipment including environmentally friendly alternative
fuel busses and heavy construction equipment used to maintain our roads and infrastructure.
Providing the best public safety services with the resources available continues to be a priority for the Sheriff.
Public safety is a core function within the County and a priority as stated by the Board of Supervisors. Financial
constraints resulting from a struggling economy have hampered Sheriff’s Office operations for the past several
years. Although the fiscal climate has shown some signs of improvement, significant challenges continue to face
the Sheriff’s Office at both state and local levels. This budget reflects our ongoing effort to efficiently deliver the
services our constituents expect while working towards the goal of long term financial sustainability. Priorities
reflected in this budget include addressing the continuing impact of Public Safety Realignment and the transition to
the South Placer Adult Correctional Facility (SPACF). Realignment caused a fundamental shift of responsibilities
that continue to unfold. Appropriate resources such as staffing, technology, inmate housing and services are
essential in meeting our responsibility to protect and maintain the quality of life in Placer County. We continue to
adjust and reallocate limited resources to meet the demands of the ever changing public safety environment.
The Sheriff’s Office continues to evaluate options for the next phase of utilizing SPACF and therefore, no expansion
is planned for FY 2014-15. We will work with the CEO’s office to explore funding options and expansion plans for
inclusion in the FY 2015-16 proposed budget.
Full funding of allocated positions and funding to meet base operational needs are required to meet the above
priorities. The Sheriff’s Office continues to utilize cost saving strategies and is maximizing all external funding
sources to get us through these difficult and changing economic times while moving forward with our public safety
initiatives.
The Sheriff’s Office continues to evaluate our operations and to incorporate efficiencies at every opportunity. We
understand that the economic challenges facing the County cannot be met without constant refinements and
adjustments to the methods and processes of delivering services. The Sheriff’s Office looks forward to, and is
committed to, working with the Board of Supervisors and County Executive Office to maximize resources and
deliver the best possible public safety services within the available resources. The sluggish economy is challenging
yet it also provides opportunities for efficiencies and innovation. We will continue to provide proactive solutions to
delivering public safety services to the community.
The Treasury provides banking services for all County departments, all school districts in the county, and certain
special districts.
? Received, balanced, and recorded over 16,108 deposit transactions in FY 2012-13
? Over $1.859 billion in deposits were received and processed in FY 2012-13
? 1,873 electronic transfers were sent from the Treasury in FY 2012-13
The Treasury provides cash management and investment/portfolio management services for depositors, including
the County, all school districts in the County, and certain special districts. Investment activities include purchase
and sale transactions and investment strategy and analysis related to buy/sell/hold.
? Managed an average $995.2 million on deposit in FY 2012-13
? Conducted approximately 300 investment related transactions in FY 2012-13
? Reconciled approximately 100 investments daily to the County’s General Ledger System in FY 2012-13
The Treasury assists the County, school districts, and special districts in the analysis and feasibility of various types
of financing and in the issuance and marketing of municipal bonds.
? Administered 64 bonds for school districts (41 General Obligation Bonds, 17 School Facility Improvement
District Bonds, and six Community Facilities District Bonds)
? Administered seven bonds for the County (two 1915 Act Bonds, one Community Facilities District Bond,
one Tobacco Securitization, three Certificates of Participation)
? Managed the refunding of two outstanding Certificates of Participation 2013-14
? Administered two bonds for special districts/JPAs (one Eastern Regional Landfill Authority Landfill Closure
Revenue Bond, one Tahoe Forest Hospital District General Obligation Bond)
? Administered three Placer County Redevelopment-Successor Agency Bonds
The Treasury administers and processes dry period financing requests from school districts and other special
districts pursuant to the California Constitution. Dry period financing provided by the Treasury prevents undue
financial hardship due to fluctuations in revenue cash flows.
? Ten applications were processed from school and fire districts during FY 2012-13
? Total amount processed was $16.6 million in FY 2012-13
The Treasury provides technical financial analysis and financing to the County, schools, and special districts for
unique financing related to special projects. Past finance projects include:
? Placer County Sheriff’s helicopter ($674,413; 2016 maturity)
? Middle Fork Relicensing and capital projects ($80,127,261 to date; 2036 maturity)
? mPOWER Placer bonds ($3,955,807; various maturities)
? City of Colfax Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements ($1,007,134; 6/30/14 maturity)
? Rocklin Redevelopment Agency Successor Agency Low Income Housing Project financing ($ 1,470,104;
2019 maturity- in process)
? Ackerman Charter School District ($380,000; 2019 maturity)
? Mid-Western Placer Regional Sewer Project (SRF)
The Tax Collector bills, collects and accounts for real and personal property taxes throughout the County.
? Assisted over 34,400 callers in FY 2012-13
? Processed over 408,000 tax payments in FY 2012-13 resulting in the collection of over $714 million dollars
? Processed over 3,900 refunds totaling over $6.267 million in FY 2012-13
? Monitored and intervened on approximately 110 active taxpayer bankruptcies in FY 2012-13
? Managed over 790 payment plans for taxpayers during FY 2012-13
The Tax Collector is responsible for the issuance and renewal of all commercial and home based business licenses
in the unincorporated areas of the County and for issuance of snow chain installer license.
? Processed new business license applications resulting in the issuance of 1,110 new business licenses in
FY 2012-13
? Processed renewals for 6,423 business licenses in FY 2012-13
? Processed and issued 51 snow chain installer licenses in FY 2012-13
mPOWER Placer is a countywide program which provides financing to property owners for the installation of
energy efficiency, water conservation, and electrical generation improvements. The financing is repaid as an
additional charge on the annual property tax bill.
? One commercial project completed with a total financing amount of $331,162 in FY 2012-13 (one other
commercial application completed in July 2013 for $100,000)
? Restarted the mPOWER residential program
? Accepted over 360 applications totaling over $18 million and disbursed over $5 million in the first 9 months
of FY 2013-14.
The Veterans Service Office (VSO) serves Placer County Veterans, their dependents, and survivors in
understanding U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefit eligibility and assists them with the VA claim
process. By walking in or telephoning our office, a veteran or dependent can receive help with completing VA claim
forms, obtain assistance in understanding VA correspondence, and obtain referrals to other VA-related services at
no charge.
The office collaborates with a broader community of over 60 partner agencies that provide services including
mental health counseling, education benefits, buying, selling or rehabilitating homes, and finding employers who
are veteran-friendly.
Working with government and business leaders, we pursue a veteran-friendly agenda to ensure good jobs are
available to veterans. We coordinate with federal, state and local governmental entities to assist them with military
or veteran-related issues. This type of help includes partnering with the California Department of Veterans Affairs
(CalVet), and Local Interagency Network Coordinators (LINCs), to determine where veterans are settling after
service in order to educate them about their benefits.
Department staff directly submit and track claims. In just the first three months of 2014, the following results were
generated for Placer County’s veterans and families:
? 172 new claims.
? $564,000 in one time payments.
? $45,000 in new ongoing monthly benefits.
