The Administrative Services Department provides a broad spectrum of services to county departments and to the
public. The Department is comprised of six divisions that are diverse in nature but challenged by the same fiscal,
staffing, training, and service level priorities considered when developing the Department’s FY 2013-14 budget.
The four General Fund divisions include:
? Administration
? Information Technology
? Procurement
? Revenue Services
The two Internal Service Fund appropriations include:
? Central Services
? Telecommunications
The most challenging aspect for our department over the next year will be to continue to ensure the County’s
current technology systems are appropriately secured, maintained, and comply with all state and federal
laws/mandates. The Information Technology division maintains 65 physical and 175 virtual servers with a combined
total of 144 terabytes of data storage. Currently over 12 million emails are processed annually and 13 million
documents are stored electronically.
Efforts to keep existing application systems both legally and technologically compliant will once again take
precedence over new application systems projects. The Information Technology division supports 2,368 desktop
and laptop computers countywide. During FY 2013-14, approximately 40% of these devices will require
replacement and another 39% will be upgraded to support the migration to Windows 7.
In order to maintain the level of service the County provides to its citizens, future investment in technology
replacement will be an important consideration for ensuring the County’s continuity of operation. For example,
progress on the County’s website redesign and functionality from a Department-centric site to a Public-centric site
continues. Last year alone the website had over 2.4 million visits, resulting in more than 7.7 million pages being
viewed. The website will focus on helping people accomplish their primary tasks quickly and easily. Content will be
consolidated, organized, and user intuitive. Menus and navigation tools will be organized in a way that simplifies the
use of the County’s website.
The Procurement Services division continues to identify and implement new and innovative business practices to
streamline the acquisition of goods and services. Approximately 170 solicitations, 1,564 purchase orders/contracts,
922 amendments, and 6,901 credit card transactions were processed annually by the Division resulting in total
spending of $51,424,248 and cost savings of $967,538. Surplus sales and rebate revenues totaled $331,134. The
Administrative Services department has once again received the Achievement in Excellence Award from the
National Purchasing Institute for the tenth year in a row.
Over the years, the Revenue Services division has experienced tremendous success in researching and
implementing automated workflow solutions to enhance and/or improve their collection initiatives. Many of these
solutions eliminated the need to perform various collection duties manually, including the placement of reminder
calls through the use of a state of the art Interactive Call Response/Auto Dialer system, the use of email for
payment reminder in lieu of U. S. Postal Services, and the acceptance of Transient Occupancy Tax submittals via
the Internet for property management companies and individual homeowners. These enhancements contributed
towards their continued success in the collection of approximately $22 million annually.
The Central Services division provides comprehensive business services to all county departments, as well as
other government agencies, and non-profit organizations. Annually this division supports approximately 520 print
jobs, 3,342 quick copy orders, 836 graphic design requests, and 8,569 requests for records management services.
Many services provided by this division were directly impacted by the cost savings initiatives implemented
countywide. The Central Services division remains focused on identifying operational efficiencies to streamline their
operations and reduce costs.
The Telecommunications division maintains and supports the County’s data, telephone, and two-way radio
networks. These networks support the placement of approximately 2.1 million outgoing calls, 1.9 million voicemail
records, and 360,475 Interactive Voice Response Calls annually. Approximately 98 gigabits of Internet traffic is
utilized to support county services per business day. In addition, the Telecommunications division will continue with
its efforts to implement the Countywide Radio Project. Efforts to secure funding for the construction of the
remaining tower sites, the acquisition of network infrastructure, and subscriber units will be our highest priority.
Other priorities and challenges facing this Department during FY 2013-14 include:
? Succession Planning Initiatives.
? Provide support for new Automation Initiatives.
? Perform a Telemetry System Upgrade Feasibility Study.
? Work with service providers on the deployment of high-speed broadband services into unserved and
underserved communities.
The Agriculture/Weights and Measures Department strives to prevent harmful invasive insect, weed, and disease
pests from becoming established in Placer County, and subsequently statewide, which also reduces the need for
pesticides. Program activities include:
? Evaluating approximately 40,000 shipments of incoming plant material each year.
? Maintaining nearly 1,000 insect detection traps to screen for harmful invasive species.
Approximately 250,000 pounds of pesticides are used in Placer County each year. The Department is the primary
agency responsible for ensuring that these pesticides are used in a manner that is safe, legal, and protects the
environment, through the follow activities:
? Regulatory program ensures that pest control operators are properly trained, licensed, and permitted.
? Unannounced inspections of applications, records, and even pesticide dealer records.
? Annually register 370 licensed pest control businesses and issue nearly 300 pesticide use permits.
Approximately $1 billion in trade takes place annually in Placer County through commercial weighing and
measuring devices such as gasoline pumps, grocery store scales, and propane dispensers. The Weights and
Measures programs inspect the accuracy of these devices to ensure that consumers get what they pay for, and our
businesses are able to operate in an equitable marketplace. Activities include:
? Conducting quantity control and price verification inspections of pre-packaged goods.
? Implementing variable frequency inspections of retail fuel dispensers, which will allow the Department to
focus on more problematic areas of quantity control and price verification.
The Certified Farmers Market Program regulates both farmers markets and organic producers. Strict rules ensure
that your farmers market purchase is actually grown by the farmer selling it to you. The Organic Program strictly
ensures the integrity of produce advertised or sold as “organic.”
Through the efforts of the County’s contractor, Merlot Marketing, the Agricultural Marketing Program continues to
see great success in sales and profitability for Placer County’s farmers and ranchers. In cooperation with the nonprofit
PlacerGROWN organization, all efforts are branded as “PlacerGROWN.” Operating currently as a Public
Relations and Social Media campaign is the most cost effective way to achieve success. Accomplishments
include:
? A total revamp of the www.placergrown.org website.
? A huge increase in activity on the PlacerGROWN Twitter and Facebook pages.
? Significant coverage in local print and broadcast media.
Overall, the Placer County Agriculture/Weights and Measures Department operates in a cost-conscious manner
that puts equal weight on regulatory enforcement and customer service. The Department is currently evaluating
several opportunities to gain work efficiencies while focusing on priorities. The Department is also involved in
succession planning, including the development of a new Supervising Inspector job classification to help ease the
loss of experienced staff who retire.
Our website is one of the most frequently accessed in the County, with over 11,400 visitors per month. We offer the
following online services for property owners:
? Information by assessor’s parcel number.
? Frequently Asked Questions by topic.
? On-Line Fillable Property Tax Forms.
? Supplemental Tax Estimator.
? E-Filing for 571-L Business Property Statements.
? Assessment roll facts by year and jurisdiction.
Since 2007, the Assessor’s Office has recognized properties where a temporary decline in assessed value is
indicated. Currently, over 50% of the parcels in the County have seen this temporary decline. As the real estate market recovers and assessed values rise, our office will continue to promote proactive communication with
property owners by:
? Sending out value notices to each property owner informing them of their assessed value.
? Soliciting property owner feedback regarding their property’s value and condition.
? Offering a streamlined value review process, a fillable form accessed on the Assessor’s website
o available from July 1st through December 31st of each year
o no application fee
o an alternative to the Assessment Appeal process administered through the Clerk of the Board
? Providing community outreach presentations on assessment issues.
? Responding to thousands of public inquiries annually by phone, letter, and email.
As the real estate market recovers, the Assessor’s office workload will increase. Transfers and new construction
activities are already increasing. Public inquiries and assessment appeals are anticipated to increase as those
properties whose values were temporarily reduced are now gradually restored. We will continue to develop
efficiencies in work processes and utilize technology to meet our state mandated responsibilities while enhancing
the service we offer the public; however, maintaining core staffing levels is critical to the success of our mission.
The Auditor-Controller‘s office provides a broad range of financial accounting and auditing services to all county
departments, agencies, and districts whose funds are kept in the County Treasury. The Administration division of
the office provides administrative, technical, and secretarial support to divisions providing services as outlined
below.
The Financial Accounting and Reporting division provides financial information and general accounting services to
the public, other government agencies, and county departments.
? Records all receipts and disbursements of county monies.
? Maintains budgetary control of various funds.
? Enforces accounting policies and procedures.
? Prepares financial statements and reports required by federal and state laws.
? Oversees the warrant and cash reconciliations of the County.
The Internal Audit division conducts audits of county departments and programs, special districts, and federal and
state grants.
? Assists departments with reviews of their internal controls, processes, and records.
? Ensures countywide compliance with policies.
? Provides an environment that promotes the safeguarding of county assets.
The Payroll division provides payroll services for employees of both the County and certain special districts.
? Produces biweekly paychecks.
? Records and transmits all payroll liabilities.
? Provides payroll data to third party benefit plan administrators.
? Prepares and files state and federal quarterly and annual payroll tax returns.
? Ensures payroll procedures and reporting meet all legal requirements.
The Property Tax division is responsible for preparing the countywide property tax levy.
? Creates property tax levy.
? Distributes tax proceeds to all government agencies, cities, schools, Special Districts and the County.
? Processes corrections to the tax roll.
This office has continued to experience a decrease in staffing and resources while demands for assistance have
increased in the Internal Audits, Property Taxes, Financial Accounting and Reporting, and Payroll divisions.
Despite current staffing restraints, we continue to be committed to providing quality and timely professional services
to our customers, and to be a reliable resource for county departments.
Significant challenges in the upcoming year will strain our ability to provide quality and timely services. Those
challenges include:
? Implementing ABX1 26 “RDA Dissolution”.
? Implementing several ACORN (payroll system) configuration changes as a result of mandates and
negotiations.
? Correctly interpreting and applying increasingly complex legislative mandates in the property tax, payroll,
and financial accounting and reporting arenas.
? Continuing to implement cost saving methods including, but not limited to, implementation of various
ACORN and PAS (accounting system) modifications to further motivate and enable county departments to
utilize self-service functionality, and to become more paperless.
? Ensuring countywide compliance with existing and newly adopted policies.
? Providing training to our customers regarding new policy and reporting requirements, as well as training to
our ACORN and PAS users.
? Managing succession-planning efforts that are critical to the ongoing effectiveness of operations.
Dealing with these issues within the budgetary constraints will be a significant challenge, but one which we are
committed to meeting.
Assisting parents and children with legal services, while balancing legal requirements with acceptable solutions, is
the focus of the Placer County Department of Child Support Services. Our child support professionals work
collaboratively with both parents to ensure that children’s financial and medical needs are supported. The
Department’s commitment to excellent customer service focuses on taking the time to effectively communicate the
child support process with customers. The intent is to educate our customers to be part of the solution, which leads
to greater outcomes.
Federal Performance Measures: The State Department of Child Support Services establishes the goals for each
local child support agency based on five federal performance measures plus an additional measurement for
distributed collections. The following table captures the past year’s performance and the goals set for the current
Federal Fiscal Year (FFY) 2012.
? In 2012, of the $20 million collected $18 million was paid to local families.
? Child support is the second largest source of income for families receiving it.
We are continuously exploring ways to deliver better service and reduce costs where possible, through operations,
technology, and collaboration with our customers:
? For every dollar spent, the Department collects $3.35 on behalf of families, compared to the statewide
average of $2.29.
? Court proceedings are video-conferenced with court orders produced, signed, and served when the
proceedings take place, getting support to families up to six weeks faster.
? Customers can access their child support account online or through our lobby kiosk to make payments,
view account balances, and even view jobs and apply for work.
? Customers are greeted in our lobby by a specialist who is prepared to handle complex issues to reach a
swift resolution.
The Federal Office of Management and Budget rates child support as the best managed and most effective social
service program in the nation. When children can count on their parents for the financial and medical support they
require, their future becomes much brighter. The department is proud to serve the parents, children, and families
of Placer County.
The requested budget for FY 2013-14 will allow for both the Clerk-Recorder and Elections Offices to meet expected
workloads and services. In recognition of current economic conditions and to continue service improvements, the
Department is updating its multi-year business plan in order to maintain mandated and critical operations through
the most cost effective use of staff, technology, and facilities.
Document recordings increased very significantly in calendar year 2012 compared to 2011, but the Clerk-
Recorder’s Office continued to maintain next-business day index information for all recordings. Full implementation
of electronic recording is expected during FY 2013-14 and will provide enhanced services to businesses and the
public. Real estate related recordings will be able to be transmitted electronically, saving the public and businesses
valuable time while protecting security.
? 127,320 document recordings in 2012; a 20.9% increase over 2011.
The Social Security Number Data Truncation program continues to protect the privacy of the public by ensuring that
Social Security numbers are truncated (partially redacted) from all documents that are available for public view.
Social Security numbers are automatically truncated on all new documents recorded, while older documents are
checked for needed truncation. Additionally, the Clerk Recorder’s Office issued 43,524 copies of vital records,
recorded documents and map filings to the public in 2012, 4,768 licenses, and processed 1,551 passport
applications.
The Elections Office anticipates another record turnout of Placer County voters for the June 2014 Gubernatorial
Primary Election. In each major election, more Placer County voters are enjoying the convenience of Vote-By-Mail.
While 32.5% of Placer County voters used Vote-By-Mail in November 2002, 66.9% chose this method in the
November 2012 election. All vote-by-mail ballot envelope signatures are compared to voter registration records to
prevent fraud, along with checks to prevent voters from casting duplicate mail or poll ballots as well.
? Current voter registration for Placer County is 208,317, compared to 194,705 in the June 2012 Presidential
Primary and 197,655 for the June 2010 Gubernatorial Primary Election.
? Permanent registered vote-by-mail voters is 127,919 or 61.4% of total registered voters.
As part of the Clerk-Recorder-Registrar of Voters’ overall plan to constrain operating expenditures, staff will
continue to be reassigned to Elections to reduce the need for temporary workers. Other cost reductions will be
sought in precincts, ballot printing, and postage. However, due to the volume of work required for a major election
and the now increasing volumes of recordings the Office of Clerk-Recorder-Elections requires that its 56 fullyfunded
positions be filled to provide an appropriate level of service to the public, businesses, and public agencies.
Accordingly, filling of all funded, but still vacant positions is the Office’s highest operational priority for 2013. Finally,
the Clerk-Recorder-Registrar of Voters continues to work toward a facility acquisition that will improve election
warehouse security, worker safety and comfort, and will provide enhanced permanent records storage.
The County Counsel is the legal advisor for the County, providing legal advice to the Board of Supervisors, the
County Executive Officer, the elected and appointed Department Heads, as well as various county boards and
commissions and the Civil Grand Jury. In addition, the County Counsel’s office represents the County and its
officers and employees in litigation and administrative proceedings. County Counsel operates in the following
practice areas:
? General Government and Finance
Providing oral and written opinions; and drafting and review of ordinances, resolutions, and contracts for
the Board of Supervisors, the County Executive Office, the Personnel Department, Administrative Services,
the County Clerk-Recorder and the County Finance Officers, the Auditor, the Assessor, and the Treasurer-
Tax Collector.
? Community Development and Public Facilities
Advice and representation in planning and development matters before the Planning Commission and the
Board of Supervisors, and legal services related to development and management of public facilities and
roads, and public services such as sewers and waste disposal.
? Public Safety and Protection
Legal services to county criminal justice agencies, including the Sheriff-Coroner, District Attorney,
Probation Department, Child Support Services, Office of Emergency services, and indigent defense
services.
? Litigation and Claims
Representation in tort, civil rights, employment, and writ actions; and in other civil and administrative
proceedings brought against or on behalf of the County, working with the Risk Management division of the
County Executive Office.
? Juvenile and Adult Protective Proceedings
Representation and advocacy on behalf of the County Health and Human Services Department in juvenile
dependency, mental health, public guardian, and public administrator matters.
While the overall numbers of litigation cases remain consistent, County Counsel is seeing an increase in complex
and/or large damage cases and in personnel actions. County Counsel continues to be very involved in research
and advising departments, staying extremely active at the pre-litigation stage. The County also continues to
experience heavy caseloads in child protective services and mental health/public guardian cases.
As County Counsel has managed its day to day work, new responsibilities have been imposed by state, federal,
and local initiatives. These new responsibilities are part of the increasing complexity of the legal environment for
County Counsel and include:
? Criminal Justice Realignment: legal advice to Community Corrections Partnership, Probation Department,
and Sheriff/Jail Division.
? Dissolution of Redevelopment Agencies: legal advice to Placer County Successor Agency and Auditor-
Controller.
? Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) and Affordable Care Act: legal advice to
Health and Human Services and the County Executive Office.
? Middle Fork Project Finance Authority: legal advice regarding Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
(FERC) proceedings, power purchase agreements, county reimbursements, and authority policies.
? Placer County Conservation Plan: legal advice to ad hoc committee and the Board.
? Mid-Western Placer Regional Sewer Project: legal advice regarding the Design and Environmental Review
Agreement (DERA), the Construction and Initial Operations Agreement (CIOA), and environmental review.
In light of the recovering local and regional economy, County Counsel is also seeing increased activity in land use
and development; particularly as to the implementation of West Placer land development projects such as the
Placer Vineyards, Regional University, and Riolo Vineyards Specific Plans. It is also expected the County will
continue to experience a steady demand for legal advice in the areas of general government legal services,
particularly in the areas of personnel, labor relations, and assessment appeals. The greatest challenge that we face
in the coming fiscal year is to continue to improve the efficiency of our services within the constraints of the base
budget for FY 2013-14 and ongoing staff losses due to retirements.
The County Executive Office / Board of Supervisors Department is responsible for the development and
implementation of policies and priorities, strategic planning, and the management of county operations. The Board
of Supervisors governs the County through actions aimed at addressing and responding to the public and directing
countywide policy and operations. As part of this responsibility, the County Executive Office coordinates and
directs the activities of all county departments in cooperation with the County’s elected officials.
The Department strives to provide effective leadership for countywide priorities and initiatives both directly and
indirectly through sound guidance, and collaboration with its many partners. To fulfill its duty to the public, the
County Executive Office / Board of Supervisors ensures:
? Development of an annual county budget to serve as the financial blueprint of the Board of Supervisors’
priorities to balance available resources with the service needs of Placer County’s residents.
? Transparency of budget activity and financial policies that communicate the use of public funds.
? Leadership and management of county resources in collaboration with departments.
? Availability of Board members and their staff to the public.
? Routine board meetings to engage, inform, and solicit information from the public.
? Regular news media releases to keep the public informed of county events that may impact their lives.
? Pursuit and solidification of economic development opportunities to strengthen the County’s financial
foundation for creating jobs and retaining businesses and tourism, for the purposes of supporting the
community at large.
? Continuity of available fire and emergency response services for responding to community concerns,
emergencies, and potential disasters.
? Pro-active management of county risk that promotes the health and safety of county employees and the
public, while protecting the assets of the County.
? Engagement in legislative advocacy to support the best interests of the community on legislative issues or
concerns that could impact residents, businesses, and the overall well-being of the County.
The FY 2013-14 Proposed Budget delivers fiscally responsible spending, strategically leveraged grant and revenue
funding, and achieves minimal year-over-year cost increases that are not otherwise preventable. The Proposed
Budget aligns with Board priorities and establishes a foundation for the long-term sustainability of county services.
New initiatives are focused on economic development and employee engagement to add to existing innovative
approaches to meeting resident needs.
Key to development of the FY 2013-14 Proposed Budget is the phased implementation of Priority Based Budgeting
geared as a communication tool to the public to explain how taxpayer funds are used to provide services to county
residents. Priority Based Budgeting is an approach focused on allocating resources based upon the highest-priority
programs and services, and will be phased into the County’s operating budget framework over the next several
years. The framework will become the mechanism for the public and departments to evaluate county performance
and service deliverables to determine what is working and what adjustments are needed to best meet priorities and
service demands within available resources.
The District Attorney’s Office continues to maintain and improve the quality of life for all residents of Placer County
by prosecuting serious and violent crimes in Placer County, as well as directing resources to prosecute criminal
misconduct. Based upon past years’ experience, we can expect to receive 11,000-13,000 criminal referrals in
FY 2013-14, resulting in approximately 65,000-70,000 court appearances on behalf of The People of The State of
California. Our Investigative staff will receive approximately 6,000 service requests to augment investigations in
those matters where appropriate or mandated by law. We will continue to advise, assist, and review criminal
investigations completed by law enforcement and other federal, state, and local agencies.
Approximately 6,000 of our Placer County citizens will suffer victimization as a result of criminal conduct. Our office
provides aid and assistance to victims, witnesses, and their families to help guide them through the criminal justice
process and to overcome the negative effects that those crimes have had on their lives. Under the recently enacted
Marsy’s Law, victims of crime are guaranteed certain constitutional rights and to receive specific services including
the right to legal standing, protection from the defendant, notification of all court proceedings, and restitution. The
Placer County District Attorney’s Victim Services Unit works with each of these victims to assure these services are
provided and that their constitutional rights are protected.
We look forward to continuing to collaborate with our Criminal Justice Partners to develop innovative and proactive
approaches to public safety issues.
The Facility Services Department manages and administers the programs and operations of its seven core
divisions of Administration, Building Maintenance, Parks and Grounds, Museums, Capital Improvements, Property
Management, and Environmental Utilities. Through the Administration division, the Department carries out the
policy directives of the County Executive Office and the Board of Supervisors to assure the Department functions in
the most appropriate, effective, and efficient manner possible in providing services to the public and other county
departments. The Department’s divisions are identified below with each highlighting their most integral
responsibilities and continued initiatives to support countywide operations.
Building Maintenance
The Building Maintenance Division is charged with maintaining county facilities in a safe and healthy condition for
the use of the public and employees. In discharging this duty and obligation, Building Maintenance provides
maintenance and custodial services, monitors the condition of county facilities, and plans for service and
preventative maintenance and upgrades. This responsibility includes:
? Management of 300 diverse facilities encompassing approximately 1.3 million gross square feet of building
area spread geographically from Roseville to Tahoe.
? Performance of preventative maintenance.
? Development of private sector contracts to assist with custodial and specialty services such as HVAC and
building controls, fire detection and suppression, security electronics, elevators, and generators; and to
provide timely and cost effective services.
? Construction of projects when it is determined to be the most effective delivery method.
? Monitoring utility charges and pursuit of all reasonable means to achieve utility cost savings.
Parks and Grounds
The Parks and Grounds Division provides operation, maintenance, and construction services at park facilities and
beaches in unincorporated Placer County, and provides complete grounds maintenance services for all other
county owned facilities. Parks and Grounds also plans, constructs, and maintains county trails and public open
space, which are developed in partnership with communities and development projects. To fulfill these
responsibilities, Parks and Grounds:
? Works with citizens, neighboring agencies, and developers to plan and construct multiple-use trails
throughout Placer County including completing construction of Hidden Falls Regional Park for opening in
May 2013.
? Ensures provision of adequate parkland consistent with the standards in the Placer County General Plan.
? Supports public/private recreation providers and community groups to further the common mission of
programming and providing parkland in their jurisdictions.
? Maintains landscaped areas and natural vegetation on county properties to enhance aesthetics,
functionality, and fire safety.
? Assists regulatory and planning agencies in maintaining the public’s legal rights to access the County’s
beaches at Lake Tahoe.
Museums
The Museums Division operates six county museums and the recently-relocated Archives and Collections Facility.
Museums is dedicated to providing education programs, access to the County’s historic objects and archival
materials, and historic preservation. To accomplish this mission, Museums:
? Provides education programs, including Living History and School Tours serving more than 3,000 school
age children each year.
? Sponsors the Heritage Trail Tour which makes 18 museums available to the public free of charge over a
weekend in August.
? Operates the Archives and Collections Facility which provides the public with access to the County’s
collection of 16,500 objects, 18,500 photographs, and 21,000 documents.
? Staff Curators and volunteers expertly process research requests from all over the world, and satisfies over
2,000 inquiries annually.
? Supports local historical preservation societies by providing advice on collection conservation and museum
operations.
? Relies on more than 200 trained volunteers who provide visitor services in county museums, support
education programs, assist with special events, and help with the conservation of objects at the Archives.
Capital Improvements
The Capital Improvements Division staff is responsible for the design and construction of Placer County facilities,
including new construction, additions, remodels, and tenant improvements. Capital Improvements is also
responsible for managing the County’s hazardous materials program and identifying risks to reduce county liability.
To accomplish this work, Capital Improvements employs collaborative processes to define project objectives and
needs; utilizes a number of project design and construction methods to match the best project delivery method with
the specific project; and incorporates design features aimed at maximizing the life of the building, increasing energy
efficiency and reducing maintenance and operations costs. Projects currently underway include:
? Design of a new Animal Services building.
? Demolition of buildings at the Placer County Government Center originally constructed in 1946.
? Infrastructure and master planning for new development at the Placer County Government Center.
? Warranty and commissioning of the new South Placer Adult Corrections Facility.
? Programming for a potential Justice Center Building in the Tahoe area.
Property Management
The Property Management Division performs a broad range of specialized real estate and property management
services. This includes leasing privately-owned facilities for county functions, leasing county-owned properties for
revenue generation, finding and purchasing real estate to support County operations and public services, and
functioning as a one-stop resource for county property issues. Examples of these services include:
? Recent lease negotiations that will save approximately $3.1 million in rent.
? Acquisition of two buildings at Lake Tahoe taking advantage of the dip in the real estate market and
resulting in county owned facilities at a cost significantly less than new construction.
? Leases of buildings at the Placer County Government Center in Auburn generating approximately $800,000
annually.
? Ongoing negotiations for commercial development at the Placer County Government Center having the
potential to generate new rent and tax revenues for the County.
? Negotiations with private land owners to preserve and protect the public’s rights to access various
shorelines fronting Lake Tahoe.
Environmental Utilities
Environmental Utilities provides cost-effective garbage collection, recycling and disposal services, wastewater
collection and treatment, and domestic drinking water to customers in portions of unincorporated Placer County.
This includes management, maintenance, rehabilitation, and construction of infrastructure to accommodate
economic development, and protect public health and the environment. Examples of Environmental Utilities
responsibilities and projects include:
? Processing nearly 1.4 billion gallons of wastewater and 430,000 tons of garbage annually.
? Reducing the amount of garbage landfilled in the County by 72% through reduction, reuse, and recycling
programs and partnerships.
? Providing skilled staff to the Western Placer Waste Management Authority to manage the landfill and
Material Recovery Facility near Lincoln.
? Large-scale capital improvement projects in several of our sewer and water districts, including the
Midwestern Placer (North Auburn) Regional Sewer Project, the SMD 3 (Horseshoe Bar) Regional Sewer
Project, and the Sheridan Water Supply Project.
? Completion of capital improvement projects that provide for planned growth in the communities of
Applegate and Sheridan that otherwise could not develop.
? Upgrading our computerized preventative maintenance program to provide for more efficient maintenance
and planning to ensure reliable, sustainable infrastructure.
Placer County’s UC Cooperative Extension staff continues to provide a wide range of high quality educational
services to thousands of local residents. Working under the philosophy of “helping people to help themselves,” with
up-to-date research-based information, achievements during the past year have been impressive. The Farm
Advisor Department is able to leverage the budget support from the County to receive over $674,875 in grant
funding to improve the lives of Placer County residents. Program activities and accomplishments include:
USDA Risk Management Grant to Help Beginning Farmers
? Livestock and Horticulture Farm Advisors received a $73,789 USDA Risk Management grant that targeted
beginning farmer and rancher training.
? Three beginning farming classes and a farm business planning class were held for over 100 people.
? Several on-farm workshops and demonstrations were held to build competence in these beginning farmers
and ranchers.
? UCCE provided 220 hours of training to 325 farmers and ranchers with this grant.
CDFA Specialty Crop Grant to Increase Local Specialty Crop Consumption with county Residents
? A $153,567 CDFA Specialty Crop grant was received to increase local produce consumption of county
residents. The grant runs for two and a half years and will hold tasting and sampling events for the general
public, low-income, and senior audiences.
? Farmers will receive point of purchase materials and training to better understand the nutrition of the crops
they raise. Accomplishments include:
? From November to March, 2013, a total of six tastings/samplings of local produce were held at the year
round Foothill Farmers’ Market Association market in Auburn.
? A total of 1,022 Placer County residents tasted mandarin juice, apples, pears, kale, winter greens,
winter squash soup, cabbage, and potato soup.
? These residents each received a five dollar produce voucher to spend at the market. A total of 708
vouchers have been used for a 69.3% redemption rate resulting in $3,540 more in produce purchases
to local farmers at the market.
Foothill Farming Website
? This website (http://ucanr.org/foothillfarming) was developed to provide production, marketing, and
business management information to both beginning and experienced farmers and ranchers. The website
has become a key referral route for new clientele and averages 14,000 hits per month.
4-H Youth Development
? The 4-H Youth Development program saw 643 youth participating in over 2,623 projects.
? A total of 236 adult volunteers provided over 28,000 hours of mentoring and support to these 4-H projects.
? The 4-H Youth Experience in Science (YES) program trained 15 teens to deliver science activities to
afterschool children in Roseville and Auburn for a ten week period.
4-H Embryology
? The Placer County 4-H program provides 125 incubators and eggs to teachers, home-schooled parents,
and 4-H families. This project is used to teach children about science and how an egg evolves into a chick
or a duckling.
? Over 555 teachers, parents, and 4-H families worked with 4,894 youth to experience hatching eggs from an
incubator.
Cal-Fresh Nutrition Education in Placer County Schools
? The Cal-Fresh Nutrition Education program provided nutrition information, teaching, curriculum, and
produce tasting activities to over 4,400 children in low-income schools.
? The Let’s Eat Healthy nutrition curriculum was taught by Cal-Fresh staff and used by teachers throughout
the year at 111 elementary school classrooms and 15 preschool classrooms.
? Over 30 parents and caregivers completed a workshop series geared toward adults who quality for Cal
Fresh benefits on meal planning, understanding food labels, saving money, and menu planning for a week.
Nutrition Best Nutrition Program Help Placer County Families with Children Zero to Five Years of Age
? Placer County First 5 Commission provided $147,983 in funding for the UC Nutrition BEST program.
? The funding was used to expand the program to provide a weekly box of produce from a local farm for 22
weeks to 90 families in Early Head Start programs in Lincoln, Loomis, Auburn,and Kings Beach.
? Produce vouchers that could be redeemed at Foothill Farmers’ Markets were distributed through Placer
County Women and Infant Children’s (WIC) program and to teen parents at Chana and Adalante High
Schools.
Master Gardener Program Provides Garden and Composting Information to Placer County Residents
? The Master Gardener program provided home horticulture and composting education and support to over
2,500 county residents.
? 280 youth were presented vermiculture (earthworms) concepts by Master Gardeners in schools.
? Our office continues to provide coordination and support for the Senior Community Garden. There
continues to be a waiting list for available plots in the garden.
Health and Human Services (HHS) provides a broad spectrum of unique mandated services to more than 60,000
Placer County residents. HHS proactively adjusts the methods used and the array of services provided to make
best use of emerging technologies and to assure that the department is responsive to changing community needs.
HHS delivers services through a combination of contracts with local businesses and non-profit organizations, and a
dedicated team of public servants focused on providing cost effective, high quality services to county residents and
businesses. It is that dedication to the public good, to fostering a positive and community-based services approach
between our employees and the women, children, and men in our community, which has led Placer County to
consistently receive federal and state recognition as a model of excellence in service delivery – the “Placer Model”.
The “Placer Model” reflects the foundational belief that the services HHS provides must be research-based, cost
effective, culturally informed, and fiscally sustainable. HHS is pleased that its innovative approaches have resulted
in reduced dependency on county general funds and increased self-sufficiency of the residents served.
All the Placer County Libraries offer life-long learning opportunities, access to a shared collection of community
resources including books, DVDs, music CDs, audio-books, electronic books (E-books), downloadable audiobooks,
one-on-one reading assistance, and genealogical and local history collections. The Placer County Libraries
serve as a community anchor, providing a place for people to gather and grow through shared resources and
experiences. Library services are offered in 11 branch locations in Applegate, Auburn, Colfax, Foresthill, Granite
Bay, Kings Beach, Loomis, Penryn, Rocklin, and Tahoe City. Each of the Libraries have a Friends of the Library
group made up of community members that hold book sales and fundraisers. The Bookmobile is a traveling library
for schools and rural citizens. The Library also administers the Placer County Law Library.
? Currently more than 1.3 million items are borrowed from the Library annually.
? Patron use of the Library collection is up 6% from last year.
Each branch library offers unique Library programming with the interests of the local community in mind. Library
programming includes summer reading incentive programs for children and teens; book clubs for adults; lectures
and presentations by community members on popular topics; and weekly pre-school activities including movement,
rhyme, and stories read aloud by Library staff. Several libraries also offer a “Doggone Good Reading” program
where children can sign-up to practice reading skills with a friendly dog since dogs are non-judgmental and
wonderful listeners. The Library plays a key role in developing reading skills and a love of learning in young
children.
? 27,000 patrons attended over 1,000 programs offered at our Libraries this year.
Library staff is continually caring for the Library collection. Staff keeps the collection fresh and relevant by
reviewing, selecting, and processing new materials, while also retiring worn or out-dated materials. Trained and talented staff is available to assist patrons with informational questions or recommend a title. Staff and skilled
community volunteers are also available for computer assistance. Computer training is offered in group and oneon-
one settings to both first time and advanced computer users. Some of the skills taught include how to: write a
resume, attach an email or photograph, download an E-book, etc. Free use of public computers and Wi-Fi is
available at all Library locations.
? More than 300 people took advantage of the computer training classes offered by the Library since classes
began in January 2012.
? Public computers were accessed 69,000 times by Library patrons from July 2011-July 2012. Increased
computer use is expected this fiscal year.
Services in our Libraries are continually changing to meet the growing needs of Placer County communities, to
recognize efficiencies, and reduce on-going costs. Over several years, a decline in property tax revenues has
challenged and stressed the Library’s budget. The loss of $85,000 annually in state support to California libraries
has also been difficult to absorb. Short-term and long-term strategies for sustainability are continuously being
explored as staff implements and evaluates new service models with alternative delivery methods including:
? Consolidating customer services to one point of service in all libraries.
? Providing self-service options for checking out materials at the Auburn, Granite Bay, and Rocklin Libraries.
? Strategically applying for competitive grants to enhance the Library collection and support increasing
technology needs and advancements.
For the past year, the Library has been engaging community leaders and members in a strategic planning process.
The process, once complete, will be available to the public in the form of a concise plan that should establish a
roadmap for developing future services. With this plan, the Library can continue to meet the changing needs of its
community members and affect the lives of all citizens from birth to death. Success of the plan will be measured by
how effective the Library becomes in enriching and enhancing lives. How can the Library help you become your
best? Help your family thrive? Get you back on your feet? Provide you with a sense of community? Continue to
offer citizens clean, comfortable, and friendly places to meet, read, and learn for years to come? Many have
challenged the relevance of the Library in the age of the Internet and electronic books. Placer County Libraries
remain more relevant than ever, offering places where the joys of reading and learning in any format or on any
device are collectively treasured and nurtured by all citizens for the collective good.
The Personnel Department accomplishes its mission by striving to provide leadership in managing human
resources and by providing effective and efficient customer service. During the past year, the Personnel
Department undertook an internal reorganization with the goal of establishing cross-training for staff, meeting
service needs more effectively and efficiently, and to prepare for succession planning.
In an effort to meet the growing workload demand as related to recruitments and workforce planning, the Personnel
Department has continued to seek alternative approaches to providing service, such as automating processes and
streamlining access to eligible candidates to fill vacant positions. These alternatives are responsive to the
Department’s needs, yet consistent with our mission to fulfill the merit principles of the Civil Service System.
In the upcoming year, the Personnel Department will continue to: develop internal organizational capacity, play a
critical role in supporting departments to build a quality sustainable workforce, contribute to effective labor relations,
and administer benefit and payroll transactions with the goal of maintaining excellent customer service.
Probation contributes to the overall effectiveness of the criminal justice system through cost effective business
practices and collaborative partnerships with the Court, District Attorney, Public Defender’s office, Sheriff’s
Department, local police departments, Health and Human Services, Placer County Office of Education, and local
treatment providers. Organizational functions are broken down into the following Divisions:
? Administrative Services
? Adult Services
? Juvenile Services
? Juvenile Detention Facility
? Central Kitchen
Administrative Services is comprised of four core functions: special services, clerical, fiscal, and information
technology and provide staff with the necessary resources to carry out the mission of the department and ensure
that operations are both efficient and effective.
Adult Services is comprised of three core functions: Court Services, Supervision Services, and Adult Alternative
Sentencing. Court Services staff conducts Pre-Sentence Investigations, and provided the court with over 1300
comprehensive reports with recommendations on sentencing, treatment, supervision, and victim restitution.
Supervision Services conducts offender risk and needs assessments, develops case plans based on these
findings, and supervises offenders in the community to ensure compliance with court orders. Probation’s use of
evidence-based supervision and treatment practices improves the likelihood of successful transitions by offenders
back into our communities.
With the 2011 passage of AB109, Public Safety Realignment, Adult Services assumed responsibility for Post
Release Community Supervision (PRCS) offenders who have completed their sentences with the California
Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation. These offenders present unique challenges including
homelessness, a lack of resources, broken family connections, and a critical need for services to enhance their
opportunities for success. Our officers are committed to enhancing public safety through intensive supervision
services, appropriate case planning, and collaborative partnerships with our law enforcement community. During
2012, Adult Services supervised over 3,300 offenders, conducted approximately 9,000 home contacts and 14,000
office contacts, and filed over 1,000 violations of probation. In addition, Adult Services administered in-house
programming such as Job Seekers, Courage to Change, Independent Living Skills, and others to 265 adult
offenders with an 83% successful completion rate.
Alternative Sentencing provides opportunities for carefully screened offenders to serve their sentence on one of
Probation’s community programs, such as Electronic Monitoring (EM) and Adult Work Release (AWR). Electronic
monitoring participants are confined to their residences and monitored through GPS devices, where they receive
intensive supervision, random drug testing, and are subject to search and seizure. The program allows participants
to retain their employment and participate in evidence-based treatment programming to enhance their likelihood of
success. The AWR provides offenders the opportunity to complete their sentences while working at one of our
approved community worksites. Use of these alternative sentencing programs equated to 38,915 in jail bed days
saved over the last year. If these programs were not in place, approximately 107 additional offenders per day
would need to be housed in the Placer County Jail.
Juvenile Services staff works closely with youth and their families, juvenile justice agencies, law enforcement,
schools, community-based treatment organizations, and victims of crime to ensure accountability while providing
early intervention and prevention services to youth in the justice system. Through the Children’s System of Care
collaborative, out-of-home placements have been reduced over the last three years from 60 to 17, at an average
savings of $8,500 per month, per placement.
The 78 bed Juvenile Detention Facility (JDF) continues to operate in an efficient and cost effective manner. In
collaboration with other county departments, the facility provides secure custody services and programming for
detained youth. Programming within the facility includes education, health, mental health, and special programs.
Over the last year, Probation staff worked diligently to fully implement federal requirements associated with the
Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA), which is intended to keep minors safe from sexual assault and sexual
harassment while in confinement.
The Correctional Food Services division insures all persons held in custody by Placer County law enforcement are
fed in accordance with federal and state mandates. Correctional Food Services uses a cook chill system to produce
meals in bulk quantities. With 13 full-time staff, augmented with inmate labor, approximately 59,000 meals were
served monthly over the past year. Offender participation provides meaningful work related experience, increasing
their ability to gain or retain employment upon their release from custody. Approximately 25 offenders per month
complete an in-house culinary program and receive a safety and sanitation certification that may also be used to
strengthen employment opportunities.
Public Works provides various municipal services to citizens of the unincorporated portions of the County including:
? Road planning, engineering, operations and maintenance.
? Transit services.
? Stormwater Permit compliance and floodplain management.
? Tahoe Environmental Improvement Program.
? Fleet maintenance/services for county departments.
Roadways
Public Works operates and maintains approximately 1,050 miles of roadways throughout the unincorporated county
from the farmlands west of Lincoln to Lake Tahoe. Approximately 200 miles of roadways exceed an elevation of
5,000 feet and require regular seasonal snow removal at an average annual cost of $2.5 million. Our engineers will
be working on planning, designing or constructing 21 bridge replacements, eight road-widening or safety projects,
and seven pedestrian/bikeway projects for an approximate value of $40 million. Our traffic engineers annually
review and evaluate accidents on our roadways (particularly locations with the highest rates of traffic accidents) for
cost effective measures to improve safety. They also manage the County’s, and other, regional traffic impact fee
programs that are scheduled to raise hundreds of millions of dollars from local development for transportation
infrastructure.
Tahoe Environmental Improvement Program
Public Work engineers in Tahoe are responsible for delivering Placer County’s share of the $1 billion Tahoe
Environmental Improvement Program (EIP) whose ultimate goal is to improve clarity in Lake Tahoe and the quality
of water running into the lake. We are working on ten of these projects at an approximate value of $15 million in
the following areas around Lake Tahoe:
? Kings Beach
? McKinney Rubicon
? Brockway
? Lake Forest
? West Sunnyside
? Homewood
? Tahoe City
Stormwater Permit Compliance
The County is currently subject to three different stormwater quality permits issued by the State for the following
areas:
? Lake Tahoe Basin
? Lower Truckee River Watershed
? Western Placer County.
Each has separate program requirements for the County to:
? Educate and involve the public on the importance of protecting stormwater quality.
? Monitor, regulate, and control public and private construction activities.
? Monitor, regulate, and insure maintenance of stormwater quality facilities after constructed.
? Monitor and maintain various county facilities for stormwater compliance.
? Actively seek out and address illegal stormwater releases to our local creeks and streams.
? Conduct monitoring and report to the State on the ongoing health of our watersheds.
Floodplain Management
The County is a participant in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). The goal of the program is to
implement educational and program initiatives, and regulatory measures to minimize damages and financial losses
due to floods. Our efforts have led to a Community Rating Service (CRS) Level 5 which qualifies unincorporated
county residents to a 25 percent discount on their premiums for flood insurance.
Transit Services
Public Works operates transit services in the Tahoe Area under the name Tahoe Area Regional Transit (TART) and
in Western Placer County under the name of Placer County Transit (PCT).
TART provides year-round bus service on the north shore of Lake Tahoe from Sugar Pine Point State Park to the
Hyatt in Incline Village. TART also provides a year-round route between Truckee and Tahoe City and a winter
route on Highway 267 between Truckee and Kings Beach. Additional service is added in the summer season.
TART transports 360,000 passengers every year.
PCT provides five permanent fixed route lines connecting Alta, Auburn, Sierra College, Roseville Galleria, Lincoln,
and the Watt Avenue Light Rail Station. We also supply bus services under contract for the City of Rocklin, Town
of Loomis, and City of Colfax. Additionally we operate a commuter bus service with five trips daily to downtown
Sacramento and coordinate ten commuter vanpools. Dial-A-Ride services are also provided by PCT. PCT
transports 475,000 passengers every year.
Fleet Service
Public Works is charged with providing safe, reliable, and cost effective transportation for county operations
including:
? Vehicle repair and maintenances services.
? Short and long term vehicle rentals.
? Vehicle purchasing.
? Fleet regulatory compliance.
? Fuel purchasing and distribution.
The County has 468 automobiles and light trucks that drive over 4.5 million miles per year and utilize over 500,000
gallons of fuel a year. We also maintain over 250 pieces of equipment including environmentally friendly alternative
fuel busses and heavy construction equipment used to maintain our roads and infrastructure.
The focus for the Department in the upcoming fiscal year is to stabilize our service levels at a sustainable level to
match our revenues; particularly within our road programs. We also will begin construction on key roadway
projects including the last phase of the Auburn-Folsom Road Widening Project and the Kings Beach Commercial
Core Improvement Project.
Providing the best public safety services with the resources available continues to be a priority for the Sheriff.
Public safety is a core function within the County and a priority as stated by the Board of Supervisors. Financial
constraints resulting from a struggling economy have hampered Sheriff’s Office operations for the past several
years. Although the fiscal climate has shown some signs of improvement, significant challenges face the Sheriff’s
Office at both state and local levels. This budget reflects our continuing effort to efficiently and effectively deliver
the services our constituents expect. Primary initiatives reflected in this budget are the continuing impacts of Public
Safety Realignment, transition to the South Placer Adult Correctional Facility (SPACF), and keeping pace with
technology.
The shift of responsibilities related to Public Safety Realignment has had a significant impact on the Sheriff’s Office
and the way services are provided. The Sheriff’s Office has just begun to feel the impacts of the shift and
associated increase of inmates who would previously have been housed by the State. The final affects may not be
fully realized for years. It is imperative to stay proactive in the manner in which we meet these challenges.
Providing the appropriate staffing, technology, and inmate housing and resources will help ensure our ability to
provide services in the most efficient and effective manner possible.
A major effort for the Sheriff’s Office has been the development of a cost effective method to begin utilizing SPACF.
Numerous models have been evaluated and this budget reflects a plan that is cost effective and will result in
increased jail beds system-wide. Phase 1 of the plan can begin immediately and, barring any significant delays,
the first inmates could be moved to the facility in early 2014. We continue to work closely with the County
Executive Office to develop funding scenarios for this transition.
Meeting the ever-changing technology needs of a modern sheriff’s office continues to be a challenge with reduced
resources. Changes required to meet FCC radio requirements, implementing New World Systems regional
dispatch/records/mobile computing system, upgrades to the 9-1-1 system, and maintaining efficient equipment are
just some of the challenges facing the Sheriff’s Office in the coming year. This office remains committed to
incorporating technology in ways that increase efficiencies and maintain and enhance officer safety.
Full staffing of funded positions and funding to meet base operational needs are required to meet the above
priorities. The Sheriff’s Office continues to utilize cost savings strategies to get us through these difficult and
changing economic times while moving forward with our public safety initiatives.
The Sheriff’s Office looks forward to, and is committed to, working with the Board of Supervisors and County
Executive Office along with our allied agency partners to maintain and promote public safety programs that will
continue to provide the highest level of service possible with the available funding. The sluggish economy is
challenging yet it also provides opportunities for efficiencies and innovation. We will continue to provide proactive
solutions to delivering public safety services to the community.
The Treasury provides banking services for all county departments, all school districts in the County, and certain
special districts.
? Received, balanced, and recorded over 14,900 deposit transactions in FY 2011-12.
? Over $1.750 billion in deposits were received and processed in FY 2011-12.
? 2,239 wire transfers were sent from the Treasury in FY 2011-12.
The Treasury provides cash management and investment/portfolio management services for depositors, including
the County, all school districts in the County, and certain special districts. Investment activities include purchase
and sale transactions and investment analysis related buy/sell/hold.
? Managed an average $1.305 billion on deposit in FY 2011-12.
? Conducted approximately 350 investment related transactions in FY 2011-12.
? Reconciled approximately 88 investments daily to the County’s General Ledger System.
The Treasury assists the County, school districts, and special districts in the analysis and feasibility of various types
of financing and in the issuance and marketing of municipal bonds.
Administered 64 bonds for school districts (41 General Obligation Bonds, 17 School Facility Improvement
District Bonds, and six Community Facilities District Bonds).
? Administered seven bonds for the County (two 1915 Act Bonds, one Community Facilities District Bond,
one Tobacco Securitization, three Certificates of Participation).
? Administered two bonds for special districts/JPAs (one Eastern Regional Landfill Authority Landfill Closure
Revenue Bond, one Tahoe Forest Hospital District General Obligation Bond).
The Treasury administers and processes dry period financing requests from school districts and other special
districts pursuant to the California Constitution. Dry period financing provided by the Treasury prevents undue
financial hardship due to fluctuations in revenue cash flows.
? Ten applications were processed during FY 2011-12.
? Total amount processed was $39.3 million in FY 2011-12.
The Treasury provides technical financial analysis and financing to the County, schools, and special districts for
unique financing related to special projects.
? Placer County Sheriff’s helicopter ($888,443; 2016 maturity).
? Middle Fork Relicensing and capital projects ($71,672,486 to date; 2036 maturity).
? mPOWER Placer bonds ($1,046,718; various maturities).
? City of Colfax Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements ($3,000,000; 2013 maturity).
? Rocklin Redevelopment Agency Successor Agency Low Income Housing Project financing ($ 2,500,000;
2018 maturity- in process).
? Sewer Maintenance District #3 Regionalization Project financing ($2,800,000; 2043 maturity- in process).
? School District Energy Project Related Financial Analysis financing (in process).
The Tax Collector bills, collects and accounts for real and personal property taxes throughout the County.
? Assisted over 43,500 callers in FY 2011-12.
? Processed over 403,000 tax payments in FY 2011-12 resulting in the collection of over $702 million dollars.
? Processed over 3,800 refunds totaling over $6.285 million in FY 2011-12.
? Monitored and intervened on approximately 130 active taxpayer bankruptcies in FY 2011-12.
? Managed over 750 payment plans for taxpayers during FY 2011-12.
The Tax Collector is responsible for the issuance and renewal of all commercial and home based business licenses
in the unincorporated areas of the County and for issuance of snow chain installer license.
? Processed new business license applications resulting in the issuance of 1,911 new business licenses
2011-12.
? Processed renewals for 5,750 business licenses in FY 2011-12.
? Processed and issued 52 snow chain installer licenses in FY 2011-12.
mPOWER Placer is a countywide program which provides financing to property owners for the installation of
energy efficiency, water conservation, and electrical generation improvements. The financing is repaid as an
additional charge on the annual property tax bill.
? 15 projects were reviewed and three applications were in process as of 6/30/12.
? Six commercial projects completed with a total financing amount of $711,078.30.
? Total adjusted kWh savings from the commercial projects of 5.7 million.
? Total adjusted BTU savings from the commercial projects of 19,5 billion.
The Veterans Service Office (VSO) serves Placer County Veterans, their dependents, and survivors in
understanding U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefit eligibility and assists them with the VA claim
process. By walking in or telephoning our office, a veteran or dependent can receive help with completing VA claim
forms, obtain assistance in understanding VA correspondence, and obtain referrals to other VA-related services at
no charge.
We also collaborate with a broader community of over 60 partner agencies that provide services including mental
health counseling, education benefits, buying, selling or rehabilitating homes, and finding employers who are
veteran-friendly.
Working with government and business leaders, we pursue a veteran-friendly agenda to ensure good jobs are
available to veterans. We coordinate with federal, state and local governmental entities to assist them with military
or veteran-related issues. This type of help includes partnering with the California Department of Veterans Affairs
(CalVet), and Local Interagency Network Coordinators (LINCs), to determine where veterans are settling after
service in order to educate them about their benefits.
Our office directly submits and tracks claims. In just the first three months of 2013, the following results were
generated for Placer County’s veterans and families:
? 100 new claims.
? $645,000 in retroactive payments.
? $70,000 in ongoing monthly benefits.
