The Administrative Services Department provides a broad spectrum of services to county departments and to the
public. The Department is comprised of six diverse divisions and during the development of the Department’s
FY 2015-16 budget, Division managers focused their efforts on maintaining core business functions, staffing levels,
supplemental costs attributed to the transition of the Information Technology Division to an Internal Service Fund
and the continued implementation of the Information Technology Strategic Plan.
The three General Fund divisions include:
? Administration
? Procurement
? Revenue Services
The three Internal Service Fund divisions include:
? Central Services
? Information Technology
? Telecommunications
Priorities and challenges facing this Department during FY 2015-16 include the delivery of information technology
services and solutions based on an Internal Service Fund (ISF) methodology. As an Internal Service Fund the
Information Technology (IT) Division will realign program costs in accordance to the services utilized by County
departments.
Major accomplishments during FY 2014-15 include infrastructure upgrades to the County’s Enterprise Data
Network, implementation of a Countywide Security Awareness Training Program, successful deployment of My
Placer intranet, updated the County’s Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax webpage, migrated general government
agencies onto the Interoperable Radio Network, implemented a new Records Management pricing structure, and
concluded the County’s Procurement Card “pilot” project.
Agriculture Enforcement
The Department strives to prevent harmful invasive insect, weed, and disease pests from becoming established in
Placer County, and subsequently statewide. These activities protect our farmers, landscapes and natural areas and
reduce the need for pesticides. Program activities include:
? Evaluating over 40,000 shipments of incoming plant materially annually.
? Servicing 1,500 insect detection traps to screen for harmful invasive species.
? Performing noxious weed control on 250 infestation sites.
The Department is responsible for regulating Placer County’s certified farmers’ markets, certified producers and
organic growers. The Department enforces strict rules to ensure that fruits and vegetables purchased at a farmers’
market are actually grown by the farmer selling them. Organic regulations ensure the integrity of produce
advertised or sold as “organic.” Annual activities include:
? Issuing nearly 60 Certified Producer’s Certificates.
? Approving 18 Certified Farmers’ Markets.
Pesticide Use Enforcement
Approximately 250,000 pounds of pesticides are used in Placer County each year. The Department is the primary
agency responsible for ensuring that these pesticides are used in a manner that is safe, legal, and protects the
environment, through the following activities:
? Ensuring pest control operators are properly trained, licensed, and permitted.
? Conducting inspections of structural, agricultural and landscape maintenance pesticide applications and
employee safety and pesticide dealer records.
? Annually registering approximately 370 licensed pest control businesses and issuing nearly 300 pesticide
use permits.
Weights and Measures
Approximately $1 Billion in trade takes place over commercial weighing and measuring devices in Placer County
annually. The Department’s weights and measures programs actively inspect gasoline pumps, grocery store
scales, propane dispensers and other devices to ensure consumers get what they pay for, and businesses operate
in an equitable marketplace. Activities include:
? Inspecting approximately 6,000 weighing and measuring devices annually.
? Inspecting approximately 5,000 items for accurate pricing annually.
? Implementing variable frequency inspections of retail fuel dispensers and computing scales, which will
allow the Department to focus on lower compliance areas of quantity control and price verification.
Wildlife Services
The Department’s Wildlife Services program works to assist citizens, businesses, schools, public agencies and
farmers and ranchers with wildlife-related issues. Program activities include:
? Annually responding to 2,500 requests for assistance.
? Offering technical aid for behavior modification, use of repellents, exclusion, habitat modification and
removal of problem animals.
Agricultural Marketing
The Agricultural Marketing program seeks to promote sales and profitability of agricultural products produced by
Placer County farmers and ranchers. The program is conducted through the efforts of the county’s contractor,
Merlot Marketing, and in cooperation with the non-profit PlacerGROWN organization. The program is currently
operated as a PR and Social Media campaign and all efforts are branded as “PlacerGROWN.”
The Assessor’s Office is responsible for administering the property tax assessment program that serves as a key
revenue stream for Placer County, incorporated jurisdictions within the county, special districts, and the public
school system. As part of this program, the Assessor maintains assessment parcel maps, and values real and
personal property for property tax assessments as mandated by the state. The Assessor delivers an annual and
supplemental assessment roll that ultimately results in property tax revenue that funds key local government
services. The 2014-15 assessment roll was in excess of $58.3 billion in property value, which is net of over $2.4
billion in property tax exemptions as administered by the Assessor. Staff is comprised of licensed property tax
appraisers, auditor appraisers and technical support staff with an understanding of the revenue and taxation code,
property tax rules, pertinent court cases, administration of new legislation and ultimately with a goal of service to
the public.
The California property tax system can be very complicated, particularly as the real estate market has changed
dramatically over the last decade. It is our mission in the Assessor’s Office to keep the public informed, provide
information that is accurate, easily understood and accessible for all property owners in the county.
Since 2007, the Assessor’s Office has recognized properties where a temporary decline in assessed value is
indicated. Currently, over 43,600 of the 175,500 assessments in the county have seen this temporary decline and
are assessed at less than their Proposition 13 base year value. The Assessor’s Office utilizes technology and
appraisal expertise in developing mass appraisal methodologies to assess each of these properties at market value
as of the annual January 1st valuation date.
As the real estate market recovers and assessed values continue to increase, our office will maintain proactive
communication by sending out value notices to each property owner in July, informing them of their assessed
values and soliciting their feedback. Last year, 36,600 residential property owners saw assessed value increases
due to real estate market recovery after receiving temporary relief with market declines in prior years; we anticipate
that this recovery of value will continue. Property owners may request a review of their assessed value through a
streamlined process that can be requested on the Assessor’s website from July 1st through December 31st of each
year. This review process is no charge and is an additional option to the Assessment Appeal Process that is
administered through the Clerk of the Assessment Appeal Board. We are happy to explain how and why a property
tax valuation increased, decreased or stayed the same.
Our website is one of the most frequently accessed in the County, with over 15,800 visitors per month. We provide
information by parcel, Frequently Asked Questions by topic, county assessor’s map information, and a variety of
other informative resources. Our forms are provided for public convenience in a user fillable Adobe format. E-fling
of Business Property Statements is now also offered as an additional service. Supplemental assessments are a
particularly confusing area; to provide assistance to new property owners, we have developed a supplemental tax
estimator that has received excellent customer response. The Assessor’s Office receives thousands of property
owner inquiries each year, and it is our goal to answer each letter, email, phone call or visit to our lobby with
courtesy, clarity, and respect.
The Auditor-Controller‘s Office provides a broad range of financial accounting and auditing services to all County
Departments, in addition to agencies and districts whose funds are kept in the County Treasury. The
Administration Division of the office provides administrative, functional, technical and secretarial support to divisions
providing services as follows:
? General Accounting
? Financial Reporting
? Internal Audits
? Payroll
? Property Taxes
This office has continued to experience a decrease in staffing and resources while demands for assistance have
increased in all of the above divisions. Even with our current staffing restraints, we continue to be committed to
providing quality and timely professional services to our customers and to be a reliable resource for County
departments.
Significant challenges in the upcoming year will strain our ability to provide quality and timely services. Those
challenges include:
? Additional Auditor-Controller duties being proposed by the State Department of Finance related to ABX1 26
“RDA Dissolution”.
? Managing succession-planning efforts that are critical to the on-going effectiveness of operations, including
recruitment of new staff and retention of existing staff.
? Providing training to our customers regarding new policy and reporting requirements, as well as training to
our ACORN and PAS users.
? Implementing several ACORN (payroll system) configuration changes as a result of mandates and
negotiations.
? Correctly interpreting and applying increasingly complex legislative mandates in the property tax, payroll
and financial accounting and reporting arenas.
? Continuing to implement cost saving methods including, but not limited to, implementation of various
ACORN and PAS (accounting system) modifications to further motivate and enable County departments to
utilize self-service functionality and to become more paperless.
? Ensuring countywide compliance with existing and newly adopted policies.
Assisting parents and children with legal services, while balancing legal requirements with acceptable solutions, is
the focus of the Placer County Department of Child Support Services. Our child support professionals work
collaboratively with both parents to ensure that children’s financial and medical needs are supported. The
Department’s commitment to excellent customer service focuses on taking the time to effectively communicate the
child support process with customers. The intent is to educate our customers to be part of the solution, which leads
to greater outcomes.
Federal Performance Measures: The State Department of Child Support Services establishes the goals for each
local child support agency based on five federal performance measures plus an additional measurement for
distributed collections. The following table captures the past year’s performance and the goals set for the current
Federal Fiscal Year (FFY) 2014.
? In 2014, of the $22.3 million collected $20.2 million was paid to families.
? Child support is the second largest source of income for families receiving it.1
We are continuously exploring ways to deliver better service and reduce costs where possible, through operations,
technology, and collaboration with our customers:
? For every dollar spent, the Department collects $3.86 on behalf of families, compared to the statewide
average of $2.43.
? Court proceedings are video-conferenced with court orders produced, signed, and served when the
proceedings take place, getting support to families up to six weeks faster.
? Customers can access their child support account online or through our lobby kiosk to make payments,
view account balances, and even view jobs and apply for work.
? Customers are greeted in our lobby or on the telephone by a specialist who is prepared to handle complex
issues to reach a swift resolution.
The Federal Office of Management and Budget rates child support as the best managed and most effective social
service program in the nation. When children can count on their parents for the financial and medical support they
require, their future becomes much brighter.
After several iterations over the past years, the proposed budget for FY 2015-16 has finally consolidated the
Administrative team staffing such that all clerical and support staffing is located within the Administrative Services
Division. While this reorganization has increased the staff within the Administrative Services Division, there is a
corresponding decrease in staff in the other technical divisions.
Over the past year, to further the Board’s vision to have all land development activities led by the Agency team, the
Agency has taken the lead County role in the preparation/negotiations on Development Agreements, Tax-Sharing
Agreements, Annexations, Fiscal/Financial Negotiations on new development projects, CFD/CSA formations,
oversight of the County’s Bond Screening Committee, and other similar activities.
With these additional responsibilities, the Agency has added two new staff members to provide the day-to-day
oversight needed to manage these activities. Included within the Base Budget for the Administrative Division is an
allocation for an accountant/auditor II position which was recently filled to assist with the new workload associated
with processing Development Agreements and fiscal/financial studies. In conjunction with these new
responsibilities, the Administrative Services budget has also included a Supplemental Budget Request for $125,000
for fiscal/financial work to support staff in the preparation of Development Agreements, Fee/Assessment Programs,
Tax-Sharing Agreements, and annexation requests.
Also included within the Base Budget is funding for a senior technology solutions analyst position to oversee the
new Accela program. The County has not had a position dedicated solely to the oversight and maintenance of this
program, and the filling of this position will allow the County to focus its efforts on how to more thoroughly utilize this
important program.
Major Budget Adjustment(s): FY 2015-16 Proposed Budget
? One administrative clerk journey and one administrative secretary and $156,562 in salary and benefit costs
are transferred from other CDRA appropriations into this division, in order to flexibly apply department-wide
support resources.
? Increase expenditures $121,051 to fund one additional accountant auditor II as part of the Agency’s lead
role in land development agreements and fiscal studies.
? Increase expenditures $70,674 for one additional information technology specialist in order to enhance the
viability of the automated permitting and tracking program (Accela). Cost is half-year.
? Increase expenditures $125,000 for contract fiscal work in support of land development studies.
? Expenditures are increased $238,184 to fund a new administrative position for the implementation of the
Placer County Conservation Plan.
? Increase revenues $87,638 in charges to development projects.
Program Purpose: The Building Services Division reviews construction drawings, conducts on-site inspections,
performs emergency service functions, maintains inspection records, responds to citizen requests for information
(public record requests), and reviews complaints for potentially hazardous violations of construction codes and
standards throughout the unincorporated Placer County.
Department Comments
Once again, the Building Services Division has continued to experience year-over-year revenue and workload
increases, and staff anticipates FY 2015-16 will again show an increase in workload and revenues as the housing
and commercial markets gain strength throughout the greater Sacramento region.
To address the ongoing demand for plan reviews and inspections, the Building Services Division has included two
new Building Inspector II positions in its Base Budget. With the multitude of new Code changes, the Agency has
concluded there is a need to have inspectors working at a higher level, and filling these building inspector II
positions will provide that higher level of review.
As requested by the Board of Supervisors, the Building Services team will be providing a building inspector to
assist with the required inspections for the construction of the new Animal Services Building. It is anticipated that
Facility Services will provide 50% of the funding for this position.
Consistent with the Board’s direction to improve Code Enforcement Services, the Base Budget for Building
Services includes a new Code Enforcement Supervisor position. This position has not been filled for almost seven
years, and the Agency has been using a series of patchwork solutions to provide supervision to the Code
Enforcement team. As Code Enforcement activities become more important to the Board, it is timely to once again
fill this supervisory position.
To assist the Department of Health and Human Services, the Building Services Division has volunteered to take
over the Dangerous Buildings requirement currently included within the responsibilities for HHS. An amendment to
the Placer County Code is currently being prepared to officially transfer this responsibility to the Agency. To
address this new work requirement, $40,000 has been requested in the Supplemental Budget Request to fund this
new work assignment.
Major Budget Adjustment(s): FY 2015-16 Proposed Budget
? One community development technician and $91,000 is transferred to the Administration Division
appropriation 22240, in order to flexibly allocate resources among department-wide needs.
? Increase Salary and Benefit expenditures $219,496 to increase the building inspector series by a net two
additional positions, in order to address the increased workload from the residential and commercial
markets.
? Increase Salary and Benefit expenditures $129,176 to fund one supervising code enforcement officer for
performance oversight of the new weekend event enforcement and the ongoing workload of the two code
enforcement hearing bodies (Administrative Citation, and Hazardous Vegetation).
? Construction permit revenues are increased $436,000 based on projected residential and commercial
construction.
Program Purpose: The Engineering and Surveying Division (ESD) participates in the Placer County Land
Development Process in a number of ways. ESD assists in the environmental review of discretionary projects and
participates as members of the Development Review Committee (DRC) on the public hearing process for
discretionary permit. ESD is also a part of the County’s Design / Site Review Committee (DS/RC) that evaluates the
site improvements on properties that are subject to design/site review. ESD is also responsible for the review and
approval of improvement plans for the various residential and non-residential projects as well as reviewing the
Final/Parcel Maps for residential subdivisions and boundary line adjustments between properties. Lastly, ESD is
responsible for enforcement of the County’s Grading Ordinance, surface mining reclamation requirements, and for
providing the situs addresses of properties.
Department Comments
As land development projects move from the entitlement process to actual development, the Engineering Services
Division is seeing increased work activity, from Final Maps to Improvement Plans. As with other divisions within the
Agency, and based upon projected workloads, Engineering and Surveying is projecting increases in its at-cost
revenues for both land development applications and map checks.
To address a significant increase in Final Map reviews (including the Placer Vineyards project and Final Maps at
Northstar), the Engineering and Surveying budget includes a new Assistant Surveyor position in its Base Budget.
As there are known retirements within the Plan Check Division, it is anticipated that the Agency will be requesting
these positions be refilled to maintain adequate staffing.
Major Budget Adjustment(s): FY 2015-16 Proposed Budget
? One executive secretary and $80,657 is transferred to the Administration Division appropriation 22240, in
order to flexibly allocate resources among department-wide needs.
Program Purpose: The Planning Services Division encompasses a variety of roles that are often grouped under
the headings of current (i.e., new development) and long-range planning. Current planning activities evaluate
applications for development entitlements, while the long-range planning focuses on the preparation of the County’s
General Plan, community plans, natural resource planning documents (e.g., the Placer County Conservation Plan),
and other policy-related matters related to a long-term perspective on growth and the implications of growth on the
need to provide governmental facilities and services, and the impacts of growth on the environment. In practice,
these two planning functional areas are intertwined so that recommendations and interpretations of codes are
guided by adopted policies, programs and standards. In addition to implementing the County's General Plan and
Zoning Code, the Planning Services Division is responsible for County compliance with the California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), as well as the State Subdivision Map Act and State Planning and Zoning Law.
Department Comments
The Planning Services Division continues to see an increase in land development applications throughout all areas
of the County. The challenge facing the Planning Services team – as with most of the Agency’s divisions – is that
the current workload rivals the workload from 2007, with fewer staff than that year.
Even though the Agency is seeing a marked increase in land development projects, the budget for the Planning
Services Division has only identified a very conservative increase (9.3%) in at-cost revenues. This conservative
estimate will guard against any unanticipated changes in the real estate market and an associated need to adjust
staffing levels.
To address current and anticipated workload demand, a new assistant/associate planner position has been
incorporated into the Base Budget, and a new assistant/associate planner position has been included as a
Supplemental Budget Request.
Regarding new Professional Services monies, the Planning Services Division is requesting $175,000 to allow for
the completion of the Tahoe Basin Area Plan, and $832,000 to complete the Placer County Conservation Plan.
While this is a large up-front expenditure for the PCCP, it is important to note that these monies will be reimbursed
over time through fees associated with the PCCP.
Major Budget Adjustment(s): FY 2015-16 Proposed Budget
? Within base budget, increase expenditures $122,411 to fund one additional associate planner to meet the
increased workload demands of current residential and commercial development projects, offset by
increased application/permit revenue noted below.
? Increase expenditures $104,260 to fund an assistant planner to support Advanced Planning projects in the
Tahoe Basin Area Plan, the Sunset Area Plan, Housing Element Implementation, Placer Legacy/PCCP
implementation, and Climate Action Plan.
? Remove $1.5 million in FY 2014-15 one-time costs from the Sunset Area Study ($500,000), the PCCP
($525,000), the Tahoe Basin Community Plan ($318,000), and the Low Impact Development Standards
Manual ($217,000).
? Increase one-time expenditures $1,079,333 for the following Advanced Planning projects consulting and
professional services: Tahoe Basin Area Plan (Facilitation $150,000, CEQA/NEPA $25,000); PCCP
(chapters completion $350,000, completion of final EIR/EIS $100,000, finance plan coordination $75,000,
strategic planning support $24,000) and PCCP implementation tasks and depressional index ($333,000)
and Placer Legacy Miners Ravine/Cottonwood Dam Removal Grant Match ($55,000).
? Increase revenues $435,533 including $250,000 one-time federal Section 6 grant for the PCCP
implementation tasks and depressional index; $137,000 in increased permits, applications, and at-cost
project fees; and $48,000 in various reimbursements.
Program Purpose: The Low and Moderate Income Housing Asset Fund assets and liabilities were assumed and
are now overseen by the Housing Successor of the former Placer County Redevelopment Agency. These activities
include construction projects in North Tahoe (Kings Beach Housing) and Auburn (Quartz Ridge) and low-mod loans
provided to households and organizations, loan portfolio administration, auditing and reporting of fund assets,
obligations and expenditures.
Department Comments
Over the past year, staff with the Housing Services Division has been working cooperatively with the developer of
the Quartz Ridge Family Apartments project to provide the needed funding to allow for the construction of this
affordable housing project. The Countywide housing bonds that made up the majority of this budget have been
loaned to the project, which commenced construction this year. The balance of the monies are derived from
repayments to the Housing Asset Fund after the initial funds in this account were transferred to the County and
taxing entities with the dissolution of the County’s Redevelopment Agency.
As directed by the Board of Supervisors, the Housing Services Division is now working with the Martis Fund, a nonprofit
entity committed to providing affordable housing in the eastern portion of the County. Additionally, the
Housing Services team will be taking the lead on the preparation of a housing needs assessment for
affordable/employee housing in the Tahoe/Martis Valley area. The Martis Valley area continues to be challenged
with the ability to provide housing opportunities for workers at the ski resorts and hotels. As a result, employees
are commuting in from the Reno area. The purpose of this needs assessment is to identify ways to provide
affordable housing opportunities in proximity to where the employees actually work.
Major Budget Adjustment(s): FY 2015-16 Proposed Budget
? The $1.8 million in housing bonds that made up the majority of this budget in the prior fiscal year have been
loaned to the Quartz Ridge Family Apartments, LLC.
? The balance of the funds are derived from repayments to the housing asset fund after the initial funds in
this account were transferred to the County and taxing entities with the dissolution of redevelopment.
Program Purpose: The Community Development Grants and Loans Fund provides financial assistance for
homeownership programs, housing and public service programs benefitting low to moderate-income households
and communities.
Department Comments
The Agency’s Grants and Loans team continues to pursue local, State and Federal grants to support the County’s
Low and Moderate Income Housing programs. These monies are made available to individual property owners, as
well as to larger housing projects such as the Quartz Ridge affordable housing project.
Major Budget Adjustment(s): FY 2014-15 Proposed Budget
? Increase $300,000 Community Development Block Grants (CDBG) loan activity, funded by the federal
CDBG program.
The Clerk-Recorder is pleased to serve the citizens of the County by performing duties related to the recording and
indexing of real property and vital records. This service includes the issuance of certified copies of official
documents, maintenance of specified registrations, and securing permanent filmed and imaged records of all
recorded and filed documents. These services are provided to the public and to title companies and other agencies
involved in property transactions.
The Registrar of Voters is responsible for conducting federal, state and local elections, conducting voter outreach
and registering voters. In addition, the office provides related services for citizens, candidates and public officials in
the County, including election services for cities, school districts and special districts.
Real Property Land Records
Documents related to real property are accepted for recordation in the office and become a part of the
permanent database of real property records for the County. Numerous types of documents are recorded
daily and include deeds, deeds of trust, reconveyances, liens and maps. In 2014, there were 94,767
documents recorded.
Recorded documents are scanned and indexed for posterity. Copies and certified copies of recorded
documents are available for viewing or purchase in the office. The searchable index is available online or at the kiosks located in the office lobby. Last year, the office issued 23,740 copies of recorded documents
and 3,835 copies of recorded maps.
The office provides for the preservation and continuity of permanent records. Records are stored digitally,
on microfilm / microfiche, and in original historical record books. Microfilm and digital records are also
stored offsite in a secure location to preserve the essential record of real property documents.
Vital Records
The office is the repository for birth, death and marriage vital records. Upon receipt, the vital records are
scanned and indexed and become a part of the permanent record. Certified copies of birth, death and
marriage certificates are available by application only, as prescribed in Government Code. The office
provided 14,857 copies of vital records in 2014. Like real property records, the vital records are stored
digitally, on microfilm / microfiche and in original historic record books. The microfilm and digital records
are also stored offsite in a secure location.
Marriages
The County Clerk-Recorder provides many services related to marriage. In addition to maintaining the
marriage vital records, the office issues marriage licenses, performs marriage ceremonies, and deputizes
members of the public to perform marriage ceremonies within Placer County. Placer County issued 2,125
marriage licenses in 2014 and employees performed 490 marriages on the office grounds. Photos and
DVDs of ceremonies performed at the office are available as well as rings, bouquets and keepsake
certificates.
Filings / Registrations
In addition to real property records, the office accepts documents for filing and public information / viewing.
The filings include environmental impact reports, fictitious business name statements and various bonds
and certifications. There were 2,782 fictitious business name statements and 282 environmental
documents filed in 2014.
Passport Acceptance Agent
The office is an authorized passport acceptance agent and accepts applications for new passports on
behalf of the U.S. Department of State. In 2014 the office processed 2,190 passport applications. As an
added convenience, passport photos are available for purchase at the office.
Elections
The office is responsible for conducting federal, state and local elections for Placer County. Our mission is
to provide this important service in a manner that is legally compliant, timely, accurate, transparent and
convenient.
The County is legally required to provide polling places for every voting precinct over 250 voters so voters
may cast their vote in person on election day. Local poll workers are recruited and trained to staff those
polling locations. All polling places are ADA compliant and are periodically surveyed as required to verify
compliance.
Placer County has 199,440 registered voters as of April 2015 and 64% of these voters are registered to
permanently vote by mail (PVBM). The office maintains the voter registration database with the PVBM
designation and ensures that the voter is mailed the correct ballot, processes the incoming voted ballots
and other mandated processes. On election day, voted ballots are collected from the post offices
throughout the County to ensure all possible ballots are received.
Voter Registration
The Registrar of Voters provides voter registration services to the voters of Placer County, maintains the
voter registration database and performs various mandated processes related to the database. According
to the Secretary of State’s Report of Registration as of December 31, 2014, 77% of eligible voters are
registered to vote in the County.
Voter Outreach
The office is committed to ensuring that all eligible voters have the opportunity to register to vote and to
cast their ballots on election day. With this goal in mind, the office reaches out to students through our
successful high school voter outreach program. The County high school senior classes are visited each
semester in order to explain the voting process to them. The students are given the opportunity to register
to vote. Also included in the program are speakers representing various qualified political parties who
provide information regarding the party platforms and local elected officials who discuss their role and
experiences in office. The office also regularly visits facilities that enable us to reach out to senior citizen
voters to afford them an opportunity to register to vote or re-register to vote and to sign up as permanent
vote-by-mail voters.
Candidate Services
The office provides election services to candidates and to various special districts throughout the County.
This includes elective term tracking, candidate filing, ballot measure assistance and various administrative
tasks related to elections for the districts and candidates. The office is committed to supporting candidates
for local races through candidate workshops and to further participation in electoral democracy in the
County.
Campaign Disclosure/Statements of Economic Interests
The responsibility for performing filing officer duties related to the filing of FPPC Campaign Disclosure
documents and Statement of Economic Interests (Form 700) forms resides with the office. A few thousand
forms are received each year from various candidates, committees, boards / commissions, special districts,
school districts and Placer County employees. These forms are reviewed, scanned and preserved in
accordance with state law. These documents may be viewed and/or purchased in the Office of the County-
Clerk-Recorder/Registrar of Voters. Additionally, redacted campaign disclosure forms may be viewed
online at the Elections office website.
The office is committed to providing quality and timely professional services to our customers by developing
efficiencies in work processes and incorporating technology to meet our responsibilities. We continue to see an
increase in demand for services, such as vital record and official record copies, filings and registrations and, as the
real estate market recovers, the volume of real property documents submitted for recordation. Implementation of
Government to Government electronic recording has enhanced workload efficiency. Execution of electronic
recording with title companies and other private sector partners will continue this positive outcome. The office is
nearing completion of the state-mandated redaction project well in advance of the 2017 deadline.
The office is looking forward to conducting the June 7, 2016 Presidential Primary Election. Placer County
continues to experience growth in voter registration and an increase in voting by mail. This growth requires
sufficient staffing and increased election materials and resources as needed to meet demands. The office will
continue to translate certain voting materials into Spanish and Tagalog, a requirement imposed by the Secretary of
State. Also, the office is pursuing options to replace aging warehouse facilities.
The County Counsel is the legal advisor for the County, providing legal advice to the Board of Supervisors, the
County Executive Office, the elected and appointed Department Heads and other County managers, as well as to
various county boards and commissions, certain special districts and the Grand Jury. In addition, the County
Counsel’s office represents the County and its officers and employees in civil litigation and administrative
proceedings. The legal services of County Counsel are provided through the following programs:
General Government, Finance and Tax
This program primarily provides legal advice to the Board of Supervisors, county officers and department
management, various boards and commissions, and special districts by attending and participating in meetings and
hearings, by responding to questions with legal opinions both orally and in writing, by reviewing contracts, agenda
items and other documents required for county business and the procurement of goods and services for County
use, and by assisting in the preparation of resolutions and ordinances. This program also provides legal services to
the County Auditor, the Assessor and the Treasurer-Tax Collector regarding property tax assessment and
collection, bond and assessment financing, and the County’s mPower Placer PACE Program, as well as
representation of the Assessor’s Office at assessment appeals that challenge the value of property for property tax
purposes. Legal advice and counsel on personnel and labor relations is also a part of this program and involves
representation of the Personnel Department, the Risk Management Division and County department management
on state and federal legal principles and mandates. This also includes legal advice regarding employee benefits
issues, such as public employee pensions, health benefits and other post-employment retirement benefits and service as legal counsel to the Deferred Compensation Committee. County Counsel provided approximately 3,122
hours of legal services to this program in the last fiscal year.
Land Development and Public Services
This program provides legal advice to a wide variety of County departments and functions involved in land
development and planning activities, and public services and facilities including county owned properties, county
and public roads and drainage facilities, sewers and solid waste management, in order to insure legal compliance
of these County operations. Examples of services include contract review and analysis, legal review of agenda
items prior to public hearings before the Board or the Planning Commission, legal review of zoning, development
and fee ordinances and resolutions, drafting and review of facility and real property transactions, and responding to
requests for legal review of department activities. This function includes representation of the Community
Development Resources Agency, the Department of Public Works and the Facility Services Department, as well as
the County Planning Commission and the County Agricultural Commission. This program area is also called upon
to provide legal services in support of Board initiatives such as the Middle Fork Project Public Finance Authority,
Mid-Placer Regional Sewer Project, Tahoe development incentives, and for newly created entities such as the
Successor Agency of the former Redevelopment Agency. This program also includes legal advice to certain
special districts, including the Western Placer Waste Management Authority and the Placer County Flood Control
District. County Counsel provided approximately 5,452 hours of legal services to this program in the last fiscal
year, which equates to about 22% of the total services provided.
Public Protection
This program provides legal support to the Sheriff Office and its Corrections Division, the Probation Department,
the District Attorney, the Criminal Justice and Indigent Defense Services Programs administered by the County
Executive Office, and the Grand Jury. These services include legal advice on the legal compliance of department
activities with state and federal law, including the recent AB 109 criminal justice realignment, and day-to-day
department activities related to the jail, records requests, subpoenas and Pitchess motions. County Counsel is also
mandated to provide civil legal services to the Grand Jury and to provide timely enforcement of bail bond forfeiture
matters, including collection of money due to the County pursuant to summary judgment against bail bond
companies. County Counsel provided approximately 2,162 hours of legal services to this program in the last fiscal
year.
Health Services and Dependency
County Counsel provides on-going legal advice to Placer County Health and Human Services Department and
Division management on legal compliance with state and federal regulatory matters, such as HIPAA, the Affordable
Care Act, other public health and social services initiatives, provider service contracts, and general requests for
legal advice. The program also provides legal support to the Public Administrator and Public Guardian, and
provides legal support for mental health proceedings under the Lanterman-Petris-Short (LPS) Act and other
statutory enactments. County legal services are mandated for LPS conservatorships, probate cases, decedent
estate issues, and elder abuse cases. County Counsel provided approximately 2,860 hours of legal services to
these adult protection programs in the last fiscal year. In addition, County Counsel staff is legally mandated to
appear in certain juvenile dependency hearings on behalf of the HHS Children’s System of Care. Legal support for
juvenile dependency matters includes: general legal advice, preparation of search and seizure warrants,
appearances in hearings before the Placer County Juvenile Court, and participation in writ actions in the Court of
Appeal. County Counsel also provides training of social workers on legal issues involved in juvenile dependency
activities. County Counsel’s office has three full time attorneys with support staff dedicated to juvenile dependency
work, which prosecuted 364 petitions and assisted in over 354 warrants over the last fiscal year. County Counsel
provided approximately 5,112 hours of legal services to this program, which equates to about 22% of the total
services provided by our office. The costs are funded by HHS and approximately 90% of charges are reimbursed
from Federal and State revenues.
Litigation
The litigation program provides legal defense of the County in all civil legal actions filed against the County, its
departments and employees. The County Counsel also represents the County in prosecuting recovery actions
protecting the integrity of the expenditure of public funds. Government Code Section 25203 requires County
Counsel to represent the County in all civil matters unless there is a conflict of interest or other legal concern, in
which case the Board of Supervisors may retain outside attorneys to assist the County Counsel. This program also
prosecutes and defends all personnel administrative matters, including civil service hearings, PERB hearings and
writ of mandate actions in Superior Court. The majority of funding for this program is provided from the Risk
Management insurance fund billings. County Counsel provided approximately 6,110 hours of legal services to this
program, which equates to about 25% of the total services provided. In particular for this program, there is a
significant and documented savings to having these legal services provided by in-house counsel.
Concluding Comments
The recovering local and regional economies have resulted in increased activity in land development and related
transactional legal services. New legislative initiatives such as public employee pension reform and the Affordable
Care Act, and new state law changes in the employment and labor negotiation areas, have caused an increasing
demand for legal advice in the personnel and labor relations program. In addition, continuing implementation
issues have evolved as a result of criminal justice realignment, and the opening of the South Placer jail facilities
that will drive new demands for legal services in the public protection program. In order to meet these challenges,
the County Counsel must have the staff and the resources necessary to provide timely and appropriate legal
support for County activities to avoid adverse impacts to the County and its residents.
The District Attorney’s Office continues to maintain and improve the quality of life for all residents of Placer County
by prosecuting serious and violent crimes in Placer County, as well as directing resources to prosecute criminal
misconduct. Based upon past years’ experience, we can expect to receive 10,500-12,000 criminal referrals in
FY 2015-16, resulting in approximately 65,000-70,000 court appearances on behalf of The People of The State of
California. Our Investigative staff will receive approximately 8,100 service requests to augment investigations in
those matters where appropriate or mandated by law. We will continue to advise, assist, and review criminal
investigations completed by law enforcement and other federal, state, and local agencies.
Approximately 4,000 of our Placer County citizens will suffer victimization as a result of criminal conduct. Our office
provides aid and assistance to victims, witnesses, and their families to help guide them through the criminal justice
process and to overcome the negative effects that those crimes have had on their lives. Under the recently enacted
Marsy’s Law, victims of crime are guaranteed certain constitutional rights and to receive specific services including
the right to legal standing, protection from the defendant, notification of all court proceedings, and restitution. The
Placer County District Attorney’s Victim Services Unit works with each of these victims to assure these services are
provided and that their constitutional rights are protected.
We look forward to continuing to collaborate with our Criminal Justice Partners to develop innovative and proactive
approaches to public safety issues.
The Facility Services Department manages and administers the programs and operations of its seven core
divisions of Administration, Building Maintenance, Parks and Grounds, Museums, Capital Improvements, Property
Management, and Environmental Utilities. Through the Administration division, the Department carries out the
policy directives of the County Executive Office and the Board of Supervisors to assure the Department functions in
the most appropriate, effective, and efficient manner possible in providing services to the public and other county
departments. The Department’s divisions are identified below with each highlighting their most integral
responsibilities and continued initiatives to support countywide operations.
Building Maintenance
The Building Maintenance Division is charged with maintaining county facilities in a safe and healthy condition for
the use of the public and employees. In discharging this duty and obligation, Building Maintenance provides
maintenance and custodial services, monitors the condition of county facilities, and plans for service and
preventative maintenance and upgrades. This responsibility includes:
? Management of 300 diverse facilities encompassing approximately 1.3 million gross square feet of building
area spread geographically from Roseville to Tahoe.
? Performance of preventative maintenance.
? Development of private sector contracts to assist with custodial and specialty services such as HVAC and
building controls, fire detection and suppression, security electronics, elevators, and generators; and to
provide timely and cost effective services.
? Construction of projects when it is determined to be the most effective delivery method.
? Monitoring utility charges and pursuit of all reasonable means to achieve utility cost savings.
Parks and Grounds
The Parks and Grounds Division provides planning, operation, maintenance, and construction services at park
facilities and beaches in unincorporated Placer County, and provides complete grounds maintenance services for
all other County owned facilities. The Division also plans, constructs, and maintains County trails and public open
space, which are developed in partnership with community organizations and development projects. To fulfill these
responsibilities, Parks and Grounds:
? Ensures provision of adequate parkland consistent with the standards in the Placer County General Plan.
? Supports public/private recreation providers and community groups to further the common mission of
programming and providing parkland.
? Designs and maintains County landscaped grounds and natural open space areas to conserve water,
enhance aesthetics, minimize labor, and promote fire safety.
? Works with citizens, developers, neighboring agencies, and contractors to plan and construct multiple-use
trails throughout Placer County.
? Collaborates with regulatory and planning agencies to maintain the public’s legal rights to access the
County’s beaches at Lake Tahoe.
Museums
The Museums Division currently operates six County museums and the Archives and Collections Facility. In the
summer of 2015 artifacts from the Gold Country Museum will relocate to the Auburn Depot building, where the new
Gold Rush Museum will facilitate interpretation of the railroad’s impact on the gold rush and increase visitation due
to its centralized location. In the fall of 2015 the DeWitt History Museum will open, bringing the total to seven
County museums. The Division is dedicated to providing education programs, access to the County’s historic
objects and archival materials, and historic preservation. To accomplish this mission, Museums:
? Provides education programs, including Living History, Gold Rush and School Tours serving more than
3,500 school children each year.
? Sponsors and manages the Heritage Trail Tour which makes 20 museums available to the public free of
charge over a weekend in August.
? Regularly rotates exhibits in the museums to interpret new facets of Placer County History.
? Produces and installs temporary exhibits in public spaces to reach a broader audience.
? Operates the Archives and Collections Facility which provides the public with access to the County’s
collection of 16,500 objects, 18,500 photographs, and 21,000 documents.
? Staff Curators and volunteers expertly process research requests from all over the world.
? Supports local historical preservation societies by providing advice on collection conservation and museum
operations.
? Relies on more than 200 trained volunteers who provide visitor services in County museums, support
education programs, assist with special events, and help with conservation of objects at the Archives and
Collections Facility.
Capital Improvements
The Capital Improvements Division provides planning, design and construction services to County Departments to
support delivery of services to the public. These services include new construction, additions, remodels, and tenant
improvements. Examples include the following:
? Identify space, adjacency and facility requirements that support County Department facility needs. Perform
needs assessments, architectural programming, master planning, project scoping and cost modeling.
? Assess and recommend the most appropriate project delivery method.
? Perform project environmental studies and secure entitlements.
? Perform hazardous materials investigations and abatement / remediation.
? Deliver cost effective and responsive design solutions for new facilities, renovations and tenant
improvements.
? Provide and manage space planning, architectural and engineering design services, construction
documentation, specifications and detailed cost estimates.
? Design for safe, operationally efficient, accessible, and energy efficient public facilities.
? Manage the timely delivery of sustainable, responsibly designed and high quality civic facilities that serve
the citizens of Placer County, through effective consultant and construction management.
Property Management
The Property Management Division performs a broad range of specialized real estate and property management
services. This includes management of county-owned property, leasing privately-owned facilities for county
functions, leasing county-owned properties for revenue generation, finding and purchasing real estate to support
County operations and public services, and functioning as a one-stop resource for county property issues.
Examples of these services include:
? Lease surplus properties at the Placer County Government Center in Auburn for revenue generation.
? Sale of selected Kings Beach properties formerly owned by the Redevelopment Agency on behalf of the
Successor Agency
? Property Management and disposition of County-owned properties in the Kings Beach Town Center to
facilitate future private development in a manner consistent with zoning, area plans and to promote and
catalyze urban renewal in the Kings Beach area.
? Secure Tourist Accommodation Units through the acquisition of blighted lodging stock located in the Tahoe
Basin’s stream environment zones to encourage redevelopment and revitalization of Kings Beach and
Tahoe City Town Centers.
? Locating privately-owned facilities to accommodate County programs; negotiation of favorable lease
agreements with private property owners; and construction management of tenant improvements to
address specialized program requirements.
? Implement recommendations of the Placer County Fairgrounds Assessment including the solicitation of a
new operator through a Request for Proposal Process.
? Acquire property rights to preserve the open space, agricultural and recreational values in support of the
Placer Legacy Program and the Placer County Conservation Plan.
? Negotiate with private land owners to preserve and protect the public’s rights to shorelines fronting Lake
Tahoe.
Environmental Utilities
Environmental Utilities administers garbage collection and recycling services, environmental monitoring and
maintenance at closed landfill sites, as well as engineering, operation and maintenance of the County’s wastewater
collection and treatment facilities. The Division also operates and maintains domestic drinking water systems in
Sheridan and at the Eastern Regional Landfill. Examples of the services Environmental Utilities provides include:
? Recovering recyclables from 430,000 tons of garbage annually at two Material Recovery Facilities.
? Reducing the amount of garbage landfilled Countywide by 69% through reduction, reuse, and recycling
programs and partnerships.
? Conducting periodic environmental inspections, monitoring and reporting, and ongoing maintenance at four
closed landfill sites to ensure complete compliance with State and federal requirements. Currently
achieving 99% compliance across all of the closed landfill sites.
? Reviewing land development proposals and working with developers to ensure adequate capacity for new
development without impacting our existing customers. Currently coordinating with developers on 40
active projects with a total of 34,000 equivalent dwelling units.
? Evaluating existing facilities, and planning and implementing improvement projects to repair aging and
damaged infrastructure. Current projects include the Midwestern Placer (North Auburn) Regional Sewer
Project, the Auburn Jail Lift Station Project, and the Saddleback Lift Station Project.
? Providing 28 million gallons of clean drinking water and processing nearly 1.4 billion gallons of wastewater
annually.
? Evaluating existing facilities and performing preventative maintenance to ensure proper operation of our
facilities and infrastructure.
Placer County’s UC Cooperative Extension staff continues to provide a wide range of high quality educational
services to thousands of local residents. Working under the philosophy of “helping people to help themselves,” with
up-to-date research-based information, achievements during the past year have been impressive. The Farm
Advisor Department is able to leverage the budget support from the County to receive over $700,000 in grant
funding to improve the lives of Placer County residents. Program activities and accomplishments include:
CDFA Specialty Crop Grant to Increase Local Specialty Crop Consumption with County Residents
? A $387,796 CDFA Specialty Crop grant was received ($153,567 for this year) to increase local produce
consumption by county residents. The grant has run for two and a half years and holds tasting and
sampling events for the general public, low-income, and senior audiences. The project is called Eat Local
Placer Nevada.
? This project has reached a total of 109,045 consumers at tasting events, community dinners, school
events, farm tours, fairs, and through our Eat Local Placer/Nevada website and Facebook page.
? Recipes made with local specialty crops were tasted by 21,936 consumers at 143 sampling events. Of
those, 23 were held at school sites. We developed 34 specialty crop recipe cards and distributed 38,100 to
consumers.
? We trained 992 producers to use the recipes and nutrition information to increase sales.
? We purchased $35,975 of specialty crops from 85 local farmers; $20,950 of that were produce vouchers
redeemed by consumers at farmers' markets.
? Specialty crops sales increased between 12 to 74% after a tasting event.
? We conducted 36 consumer surveys. Results showed that after an outreach event, 60.4% of consumers
bought the featured specialty crop; 32.6% bought more local produce; and 64.4% bought new or different
specialty crops (targets were 20% increase for each). Of those surveyed, 86.4% said that recipe cards
make it easier to prepare and eat local produce.
? We trained 51 volunteers, who donated 276 hours assisting with tasting events.
USDA Risk Management Grant to Help Beginning Farmers
? Livestock and Horticulture/Small Farms Advisors received a $72,557 USDA Risk Management grant that
targeted beginning farmer and rancher training.
? We held 55 workshops for 1,031 producers that included; beginning farming academies, series of
marketing workshops, risk management production workshops, and an advanced farm business planning
class. Several on-farm workshops and demonstrations were held to build competence in these beginning
farmers and ranchers including drought planning, integrated pest management, soil health, grazing
management, and animal husbandry.
USDA Risk Management Extension Grant to Help Beginning and Experienced Farmers
? Livestock and Horticulture/Small Farms Advisors received a $36,000 USDA Risk Management Extension
grant that targeted beginning farmer and rancher training for marketing and business planning.
? Two marketing tours were held to help farmers understand new marketing channels. Participants learned
about the operation of a grower-directed aggregation and distribution business, as well as a traditional
distribution business focusing on serving high-end restaurants and small-scale farmers.
? Six farmer-to-farmer mentoring breakfasts were held to provide an opportunity for informal mentoring,
sharing information, and learning from other farmers. Breakfasts featured: farm tours, guest speakers who
spoke about building to scale and planning to take advantage of marketing opportunities, farm taxes, and
insurance needs.
Foothill Farming Website
? This website (http://ucanr.org/foothillfarming) was developed to provide production, marketing, risk
management, drought management, and business management information to both beginning and
experienced farmers and ranchers. The website has become a key referral route for new clientele and
reached 10,480 sessions, 7,812 users, and 28,864 page views.
CalFresh Nutrition Education in Placer County Schools
? The CalFresh Nutrition Education program received $302,251 in funding to provide nutrition information,
teaching, curriculum, and produce tasting activities to over 2,000 children in low-income schools.
? Nutrition information was distributed to 5,500 adults through newsletters, web pages, and social media.
? Over 200 parents and caregivers completed a workshop series geared toward adults who qualify for
CalFresh benefits on meal planning, understanding food labels, saving money, and menu planning for a
week.
? Workshops were held covering a variety of topics including; Rethink Your Drink, Make Half Your Plate
Fruits and Veggies, Be Active 60 Minutes Every Day, Whole Grains, and Budgeting. These workshops are
being conducted at the Auburn WIC office and Placer County Interfaith Food Closet.
Nutrition BEST Program Helped Placer County Families with Children Zero to Five Years of Age
? Placer County First 5 Commission provided $153,567 in funding for the UC Nutrition BEST program.
? Completed eight parent trainings, two of which were about container gardening and one childcare provider
training.
? Issued a total of 634 sets of Foothill Farmers’ Market produce vouchers to WIC families.
? Nutrition BEST's Family Garden Day/Farm Tour was held in July 2014. There were 110 attendees who
toured the farm, enjoyed fun gardening and planting activities, learned about composting and beneficial
bugs, and sampled recipes made from produce grown on the farm.
Delivered Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) produce boxes to 96 Early Head Start families (EHS).
These boxes went to Lincoln, Loomis, Auburn and Kings Beach EHS families. Families received produce
boxes along with recipes, samples and education on preparation.
4-H Youth Development
? The 4-H Youth Development program saw 658 youth participating in over 2,000 projects.
? A total of 221 adult volunteers provided over 18,000 hours of mentoring and support to these 4-H projects.
? A total of 71 youth serve as junior and teen leaders and 120 serve as club officers.
? 4-H Summer Camp was held for over 150 youth and volunteers.
4-H Embryology
? The Placer County 4-H program provides 120 incubators and eggs to teachers, home-schooled parents,
and 4-H families. This project is used to teach children about science and how an egg evolves into a chick
or a duckling.
? Over 439 teachers, parents, and 4-H families worked with 4,300 youth to experience hatching eggs using
an incubator.
Master Gardener Program Provides Garden and Composting Information to Placer County Residents
? The Master Gardener program provided home horticulture and composting education and support to over
6,500 county residents.
? The 110 volunteers of the Placer County Master Gardener program provided over 7,000 hours of service
through answering home garden questions at the Farm Advisor office, demonstration garden presentations,
school gardens, and manning various events with an informational booth.
? Our office continues to provide coordination and support for the Senior Community Garden. There
continues to be a waiting list for available plots in the garden.
? The Master Gardeners have established a demonstration garden within the Senior Community Garden to
provide gardening education through over 15 workshops. The garden featured workshops on waterefficient
landscapes.
? The Placer County 2015 California Dreaming: Beautiful Gardens with Less Water calendar had a drought
theme. The website contains comprehensive information on gardening during a drought.
Health and Human Services (HHS) provides a broad spectrum of unique mandated services to more than 60,000
Placer County residents annually. HHS proactively adjusts the methods used and the array of services provided to make best use of emerging technologies and to assure that the department is responsive to changing community
needs.
HHS delivers services through a combination of contracts with local businesses and non-profit organizations and a
dedicated team of public servants focused on providing cost effective, high quality services to County residents and
businesses. It is that dedication to the public good, to fostering a positive and community-based services approach
between our employees and the women, children, and men in our community that has led Placer County to
consistently receive federal and State recognition as a model of excellence in service delivery – the “Placer Model”.
The “Placer Model” reflects the foundational belief that the services HHS provides must be research-based, cost
effective, culturally informed, and fiscally sustainable. The Department is pleased that its innovative approaches
have resulted in reduced dependency on County general funds and increased self-sufficiency of the residents
served.
Current fiscal challenges and the Library’s on-going structural budget deficit have left the infrastructure
deteriorating. The Library is currently unable to effectively adjust to the constantly changing landscape of modern
librarianship. What that means for library users is that there are fewer resources to borrow, longer waiting lists for
popular materials; fewer open hours in the Auburn, Loomis, and Rocklin Libraries with fewer staff to assist patrons
and to engage the communities; limited programming opportunities; and limited technology with no new formats
being offered for patrons to borrow such as tablets and e-readers.
The Library Collection
The Placer County Libraries hold more than 350,000 items. Those items are continuously being purchased,
processed, and distributed to one of twelve library facilities including the mobile library or bookmobile. All materials
shelved in any library location may be remotely requested by members through the library’s website or in person
and delivered for convenient pick up. Materials are selected, displayed, and removed by library staff to ensure that
the collection remains vital and relevant to users. Refreshing the collection over the past few years has been
extremely challenging. The library’s collection budget, one of its few discretionary funds, has been reduced nearly
60% since 2008 from $412,000 to $258,000 in FY 2015-16. It is important to note that the $258,000 budgeted in the
current fiscal year includes an estimated $60,000 in anticipated revenue from donations from the various Friends of
the Library groups. This year the Library has requested supplemental funds to help support popular electronic
formats including downloadable audio-books and e-books. The Library will also introduce downloadable
magazines and music to the library’s website; dipping a toe into the pool of “stream-able” resources customers can
access from home.
Technology
The Library maintains 90+/- personal computers available to members free of charge at its branch locations
throughout the County. This year the Library successfully consolidated its network with Information Technology
Services (County IT). This consolidation has reduced redundancy and offers a more effective and efficient way to
provide modern technology for the community. This is a positive move forward as technology continues to rapidly
advance and the community need for computers and support in the library continues to grow. The Library is
dedicated to providing aid to members while offering technologies that are user friendly, popular, and up to date.
Additionally, consolidation allows the Library to explore with County IT new and innovative ways to serve its
members. FY 2015-16 will bring an expanded Broadband capacity which will offer faster library services on the
website for remote users.
The Facilities
The community expects clean, attractive, and thoughtfully planned library facilities with convenient hours of
operation. The Library has worked with Capital Improvements to complete carpeting projects in both the Auburn
and Tahoe City Libraries. In FY 2015-16, focus will be on improving the environment in the Auburn Library and
making enhancements to both the interior and exterior spaces to add efficiency and comfort. All other branches will
be evaluated for future library facility needs and added to the list of infrastructure priorities as appropriate.
The Staffing
The Library is currently understaffed and has an over reliance on temporary employees to operate its 12 facilities.
Hours reductions in the Auburn, Loomis, and Rocklin Libraries were approved by the Board of Supervisors in
January 2015 to help mitigate this issue. Over the past year, the Library has worked with the CEO’s Office and
Personnel to brainstorm appropriate and sustainable staffing models. Library Administration is poised to make solid
recommendations for the conversion of temporary staff to permanent staff. However, currently that conversion is
based on both potential closures of libraries and a substantial on-going contribution from the General Fund. Library
Administration will continue to consult the CEO’s Office and Personnel to assists in making recommendations for a
healthy library workforce moving forward.
Library Programming
Major events include early literacy programs such as baby storytimes (Mother Goose on the Loose), toddler
storytimes, pre-school storytimes, and the annual Summer Reading Program which draws approximately 10,000
participants annually. In addition to on-going children’s services, the Library also offers teen programming, adult
reading programs, book clubs, and one-on-one technology training. Again this year, the Library has partnered with
the Auburn Rotary and the Placer County Office of Education to present the second annual One Book, One
Community event. This event unites the community around collectively reading the same books and enjoying
planned programming centering on the books themes. This year’s selection is The Beekeeper's Lament: How One
Man and Half a Billion Honey Bees Help Feed America by Hannah Nordhaus.
More than 600,000 people visit a Placer County Library annually. The Library is a direct service provider for the
County and a go-to spot for new residents and people traveling through.
Recognizing that human capital is one of the County’s greatest resources and expenses, the Personnel
Department accomplishes its mission by providing effective leadership in the management and engagement of the
County’s human resources to effectively and efficiently serve the general public.
The Personnel Department has two divisions, Department Support Services and Operations. The Department
Support Services division assists in hiring, staffing, and supporting employee relations as related to County Code,
relevant Memorandums of Understanding, Civil Service rules and applicable federal, state and local laws. The
Operations Division administers the County’s benefit programs, including retirement, and processes all bi-weekly salary, benefit and leave of absence transactions for approximately 2700 individuals. Both divisions play an
integral role in labor relations activities with the County Executive Office by recommending, researching, evaluating,
and implementing new labor relations provisions for the Deputy Sheriff’s Association (DSA) and Placer Public
Employees Organization.
Personnel continues to seek best practices and alternative approaches to providing the most efficient and effective
services in the areas of staffing and hiring, human resource and benefit administration, workforce productivity, and
labor and employee relations. To this end, the Personnel Department has actively participated in compliance and
fiscal audits undertaken by the Auditor Controller’s Office in addition to an organizational analysis to assess human
resource functions and their placement within the County’s organizational structure while acknowledging the
County’s charter which includes the provision for a Civil Service Commission.
In the upcoming year as the organizational analysis ensues, the Personnel Department will continue to develop
internal organizational capacity, play a critical role in supporting departments to build a quality sustainable
workforce, contribute to effective labor relations, and administer benefit and payroll transactions with the goal of
maintaining excellent customer service. Additionally, the Personnel Department will partner with County
departments to implement new features and functionality that will occur as a result of the upgrade to the PeopleSoft
software system including the introduction of ePerformance – a new online performance evaluation software
program.
The Department will continue to be a significant resource and partner with County Departments and the workforce
in light of pension reform, continued implementation of the Affordable Care Act and other legislative changes
impacting employers and their workforce.
Probation contributes to the overall effectiveness of the criminal justice system through cost effective business
practices and collaborative partnerships with the Court, District Attorney, Public Defender’s office, Sheriff’s Office,
local police departments, Health and Human Services, Placer County Office of Education, and local treatment
providers. Organizational functions are broken down into the following Divisions:
? Adult Services
? Juvenile Services
? Correctional Food Services
Adult Services provides services in five core program areas: Court Services, Pretrial Services, Community
Supervision Services, Adult Alternative Sentencing, and the Placer Re-Entry Programs (PREP). Court Services
staff conducts Pre-Sentence Investigations, and provided the court with over 2,287 comprehensive reports with
recommendations on sentencing, treatment, supervision, and victim restitution.
Supervision Services conducts offender risk and needs assessments, develops case plans based on these
findings, and supervises offenders in the community to ensure compliance with court orders. Probation’s use of
evidence-based supervision and treatment practices improves the likelihood of successful transitions by offenders
back into our communities.
In order to address these unique needs of Placer County’s changing adult offender population, Placer County
Probation has collaborated with the Sacramento County Office of Education, The Placer County Sheriff’s Office,
Placer County Health and Human Services Department, and Northern California Construction Training (NCCT) to
provide evidence based services via our PREP (Placer Re-Entry Program) Center to offenders who are either in
custody or out of custody. Probation expects to provide evidence based programming and services to 200
offenders while in custody, as well as 400 who are re-integrating back into the community.
During 2014, Adult Services supervised over 3,200 offenders, conducted approximately 13,956 home contacts and
22,858 office contacts, and filed over 1,099 violations of probation. In addition, Adult Services administered inhouse
programming such as Job Seekers, and Courage to Change.
Alternative Sentencing provides opportunities for carefully screened offenders to serve their sentence on one of
Probation’s community programs, such as Electronic Monitoring (EM) and Adult Work Release (AWR). Electronic
monitoring participants are confined to their residences and monitored through GPS devices, where they receive
intensive supervision, random drug testing, and are subject to search and seizure. The program allows participants
to retain their employment and participate in evidence-based treatment programming to enhance their likelihood of
success. The AWR provides offenders the opportunity to complete their sentences while working at one of our
approved community worksites. Use of these alternative sentencing programs equated to 61,196 in jail bed days
saved over the last year. If these programs were not in place, approximately 170 additional offenders per day
would need to be housed in the Placer County Jail.
Juvenile Services staff works closely with youth and their families, juvenile justice agencies, law enforcement,
schools, community-based treatment organizations, and victims of crime to ensure accountability while providing
early intervention and prevention services to youth in the justice system. Juvenile Services provides services in five
core program areas: Delinquency/Crime Prevention Services, Juvenile Supervision Services, Juvenile Alternative
Dispositional Services, and Juvenile Detention and Treatment Services.
As a result of collaborative efforts between Health and Human Services Children’s System of Care and Probation’s
Juvenile Services, Probation and Health and Human Services initiated a Mental Health Services Act (MHSA)
funded Reintegration Wraparound service which is a process that partners with adult probationers, children, and
their families to ensure self-sufficiency and stability. MHSA Reintegration Wraparound supports families in making
positive life choices and focuses on families that continue to experience multi-generational criminality, parents who
have been incarcerated and re-integrating back with their children, and the child is exhibiting behavioral/adjustment
issues related to a mental health diagnosis. The goal of MHSA Reintegration Wraparound is to intervene before the
child enters the system to stop the cycle of criminality in the family.
The 78 bed Juvenile Detention Facility (JDF) continues to operate in an efficient and cost effective manner. In
collaboration with other county departments, the facility provides secure custody services and programming for
detained youth. Programming within the facility includes education, health, mental health, and special programs.
Three years ago, the facility implemented Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports in collaboration with the
University of Oregon and Placer County Office of Education. The program seeks to change youth behavior using
positive reinforcements with extensive use of verbal re-direction and affirmation. The results have been a decrease
in serious violent incidents among youth in the facility. Staff also becomes more engaged with youth as they
dialogue with them about other options they may have to their current misbehavior. Through the Children’s System
of Care collaborative, out-of-home placements continue to trend at historically low levels, averaging 15 at any given
time, at an average savings of $8,500 per month, per placement.
The Correctional Food Services division insures all persons held in custody by Placer County law enforcement are
fed in accordance with federal and state mandates. Correctional Food Services uses a cook chill system to produce
meals in bulk quantities. With 13 full-time staff, augmented with inmate labor, approximately 59,000 meals were
served monthly over the past year. Offender participation provides meaningful work related experience, increasing
their ability to gain or retain employment upon their release from custody. Approximately 30 offenders per month
complete an in-house culinary program and receive a safety and sanitation certification that may also be used to
strengthen employment opportunities.
Public Works provides various municipal services to citizens of the unincorporated portions of the County including:
? Road Planning, Engineering, Operations and Maintenance
? Transit Services
? Stormwater Permit Compliance and Floodplain Management
? Tahoe Environmental Improvement Program
? Fleet Maintenance/Services for County Departments
Road Maintenance
Public Works operates and maintains approximately 1,050 miles of roadways throughout the unincorporated
County from the farmlands west of Lincoln to Lake Tahoe. Approximately 200 miles of roadways exceed an
elevation of 5,000 feet and require regular seasonal snow removal at an average annual cost of $2.5M/year. Road
Maintenance is responsible for several subprograms associated with maintaining County rights-of-way including:
? Maintain Pavements
? Traffic Control Devices (signing, striping and signals)
? Vegetation Management
? Roadside Drainage
? Maintain Bridges
? Snow Removal
? Issuing Transportation/Encroachment Permits
Engineering
Our engineering groups are responsible for planning future transportation facilities, managing and designing capital
improvement projects on our roadways, environmental projects in the Tahoe basin as well as providing engineering
services for other departments or entities.
Roadway and bridge engineers will be working on planning, designing or constructing 19 bridge replacements, nine
road widening or safety projects, and eight pedestrian/bikeway projects for an approximate value of $40 million.
Our traffic engineers/planners are responsible for traffic engineering, transportation planning and Land
development review.
1. Traffic engineering functions include annual review and evaluation of accidents on our roadways
(particularly locations with the highest rates of traffic accidents), assisting communities with local traffic
issues as part of our neighborhood traffic management program, investigate citizens’ traffic safety
concerns and operating our traffic signals at optimum levels.
2. Transportation planning functions include the transportation elements of community plans for planning
our future roadway system, cooperating with partners on regional transportation improvements,
administering traffic impact fee programs and programming of transportation funding.
3. Land development review consists of reviewing proposed private development projects to insure
adequate and safe regional roadways are provided.
Public Work engineers in Tahoe are responsible for delivering Placer County’s share of the $1 billion+ Tahoe
Environmental Improvement Program (EIP) whose ultimate goal is to improve clarity in Lake Tahoe and the quality
of water running into the lake. We’ve completed over 50 water quality projects since 1984 at a cost of over $50
million. We continue to deliver critical water quality improvement projects in the Lake Tahoe Basin along with
coordinating with other agencies and the private sector to improve storm water runoff conditions in Placer County.
Stormwater Permit Compliance
The County is currently subject to three different stormwater quality permits issued by the State for the following
areas:
? Lake Tahoe Basin
? Lower Truckee River Watershed
? Western Placer County.
? Stormwater Permit Compliance and Floodplain Management
? Tahoe Environmental Improvement Program
? Fleet Maintenance/Services for County Departments
Road Maintenance
Public Works operates and maintains approximately 1,050 miles of roadways throughout the unincorporated
County from the farmlands west of Lincoln to Lake Tahoe. Approximately 200 miles of roadways exceed an
elevation of 5,000 feet and require regular seasonal snow removal at an average annual cost of $2.5M/year. Road
Maintenance is responsible for several subprograms associated with maintaining County rights-of-way including:
? Maintain Pavements
? Traffic Control Devices (signing, striping and signals)
? Vegetation Management
? Roadside Drainage
? Maintain Bridges
? Snow Removal
? Issuing Transportation/Encroachment Permits
Engineering
Our engineering groups are responsible for planning future transportation facilities, managing and designing capital
improvement projects on our roadways, environmental projects in the Tahoe basin as well as providing engineering
services for other departments or entities.
Roadway and bridge engineers will be working on planning, designing or constructing 19 bridge replacements, nine
road widening or safety projects, and eight pedestrian/bikeway projects for an approximate value of $40 million.
Our traffic engineers/planners are responsible for traffic engineering, transportation planning and Land
development review.
1. Traffic engineering functions include annual review and evaluation of accidents on our roadways
(particularly locations with the highest rates of traffic accidents), assisting communities with local traffic
issues as part of our neighborhood traffic management program, investigate citizens’ traffic safety
concerns and operating our traffic signals at optimum levels.
2. Transportation planning functions include the transportation elements of community plans for planning
our future roadway system, cooperating with partners on regional transportation improvements,
administering traffic impact fee programs and programming of transportation funding.
3. Land development review consists of reviewing proposed private development projects to insure
adequate and safe regional roadways are provided.
Public Work engineers in Tahoe are responsible for delivering Placer County’s share of the $1 billion+ Tahoe
Environmental Improvement Program (EIP) whose ultimate goal is to improve clarity in Lake Tahoe and the quality
of water running into the lake. We’ve completed over 50 water quality projects since 1984 at a cost of over $50
million. We continue to deliver critical water quality improvement projects in the Lake Tahoe Basin along with
coordinating with other agencies and the private sector to improve storm water runoff conditions in Placer County.
Stormwater Permit Compliance
The County is currently subject to three different stormwater quality permits issued by the State for the following
areas:
? Lake Tahoe Basin
? Lower Truckee River Watershed
? Western Placer County.
Providing the best possible services within available resources, while meeting critical and growing public safety
needs in Placer County, continues to be the Sheriff’s focused priority. This budget reflects the Sheriff’s continued
commitment to delivering unparalleled public safety services while accomplishing our mission of maintaining the
quality of life our citizens enjoy.
Priorities within this budget reflect our office’s on-going efforts to address the evolving climate of Public Safety
Realignment and further transition to the South Placer Jail (SPJ). Resources, including staffing, field operations,
technology, inmate housing, and support services have been evaluated, reallocated, and balanced across the
appropriations where necessary to meet the demands of a shifting public safety environment, while continuing to
work towards the long term goal of fiscal sustainability.
The shift of responsibilities related to Public Safety Realignment continues to have a significant impact on the
Sheriff’s Office and the way services are provided. Providing the appropriate staffing, technology, inmate housing,
and resources will facilitate our ability to continue providing services in the most efficient and effective manner
possible. Funding to meet base operational needs and adequately staff allocated positions is paramount as we
strive to meet these priorities. Wherever possible, cost efficiencies have been maximized, and grant funding, as
well as other revenue sources, have been leveraged to facilitate meeting these goals.
Our office continues to diligently search for efficiencies within overall operations to maximize all available resources
possible. We are committed to working collaboratively with the Board of Supervisors and the County Executive
Office in the development of strategies which will enable us to deliver the best possible services to the residents of
Placer County, while meeting the demands of an ever changing public safety environment.

The Treasury provides banking services for all County departments, all school districts in the county, and certain
special districts. In FY 2013-14:
? Received, balanced, and recorded over 16,531 deposit transactions totaling over $1.884 billion.
? Processed and transmitted 1,886 electronic transfers through the Treasury.
The Treasury provides cash management and investment/portfolio management services for depositors, including
the County, all school districts in the County, and certain special districts. Portfolio management and investment
activities include purchase and sale transactions and investment strategy and analysis related to buy/sell/hold. In
FY 2013-14:
? Provided portfolio management and market evaluation for portfolio averaging $1.1 billion.
? Provided investment analysis and technical support to process approximately 300 investment transactions.
? Provided investment administration and accounting support to maintain and reconcile approximately 111
investments daily.
The Treasury provides bond administration for over 76 outstanding bond issues for the County, school districts and
special districts in accordance with various state and federal regulatory requirements and Governmental
Accounting Standards Board. This bond administration includes:
? Securities and Exchange Commission annual disclosure requirements.
? Internal Revenue Service annual arbitrage compliance.
? Municipal Securities Rule Making Board municipal advisory service requirements.
? GASB investment valuation and financial statement presentation requirements.
The Treasury administers general obligation bonds, certificates of participation, community facilities district and
assessment district bonds. Outstanding bond issues administered by the Treasury in FY 2013-14 include:
? 64 bonds for school districts (54 General Obligation Bonds, six Community Facilities District Bonds, and
four Tax Revenue Anticipation Notes).
? Six bonds for the County (two 1915 Act Bonds, one Community Facilities District Bond, one Tobacco
Securitization, and two Certificates of Participation).
? Two bonds for special districts/JPAs (one Eastern Regional Landfill Authority Landfill Closure Revenue
Bond, one Tahoe Forest Hospital District General Obligation Bond).
? Three Placer County Redevelopment-Successor Agency Bonds.
? One City of Rocklin Successor Agency Revenue Bond.
The Treasury provides technical assistance and feasibility analysis on various types of financing and has a lead
role in the issuance and refinancing of debt issued by the County, and provides review and comment on the
issuance and refinancing of certain school debt. In FY 2013-14:
? Refinanced two COPs, for NPV savings of $1,777,976.
? Continuous issuance on mPOWER drawdown bond.
? Middle Fork Bond variable rate bond reset.
The Treasury provides Dry period financing to school districts and special districts which prevents undue financial
hardship due to fluctuations in annual cash flows. The Treasury processes and administers dry period financing
requests from these districts pursuant to the California Constitution. Ten applications were processed and $19
million in dry period financing was provided to school and special districts during FY 2013-14.
The Treasury provides financing, financial analysis and technical support to the County, schools, and special
districts for unique financing related to special projects. Past finance projects include:
? Placer County (Sheriff’s helicopter, $674,413, maturity 2016).
? Middle Fork Public Financing Authority (Middle Fork Project Relicensing and capital projects, $80,127,261,
maturity 2036).
? mPOWER (PACE financing, $23.5 million; various maturities).
? City of Colfax (Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements, $1,007,134, maturity 6/30/14.)
? Rocklin Redevelopment Agency Successor Agency (Low Income Housing Project, $1,470,104, maturity
2019).
? Ackerman Charter School District (Land for site expansion, $380,000, 2019 maturity).
? Mid-Placer Public Schools (two school buses, $232,432, 2019 maturity).
? Placer County Redevelopment Successor Agency Bond refinancing (N Tahoe, N Auburn Improvement
Areas and Countywide housing, $20,295,000, maturity, 2036) (in process).
The Tax Collector bills, collects and accounts for real and personal property taxes throughout the County. In
FY 2013-14:
? Assisted over 34,000 callers.
? Processed over 403,000 tax payments totaling over $758 million.
? Processed over 3,600 refunds totaling over $7.9 million.
? Monitored and intervened on approximately 100 active taxpayer bankruptcies.
? Managed over 750 payment plans for taxpayers.
The Tax Collector is responsible for the issuance and renewal of all commercial and home based business licenses
in the unincorporated areas of the County, and for the issuance of snow chain installer licenses. In FY 2013-14:
? Processed new business license applications resulting in the issuance of 1,155 new business licenses.
? Processed renewals for 6,332 business licenses.
? Processed and issued 52 snow chain installer licenses.
mPOWER is a countywide program which provides financing to property owners for the installation of energy
efficiency, water conservation, and electrical generation improvements. The financing is repaid by adding the
annual repayment amount to the annual property tax bill. In the first nine months of FY 2014-15:
? Four commercial projects completed with a total financing amount of $1.25 million.
? Accepted over 894 applications totaling over $24.4 million and disbursed over $14.67 million.
Veteran Service Office continues to serve Placer County Veterans, their Dependents, and survivors in
understanding US Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) benefit eligibility and assists them with VA Claims
Processes. By walking in or making appointments, a veteran or widow can receive help with completing VA claim
forms, obtain assistance in understanding written communication as well as receive referrals to other related
services at no charge.
The office collaborates with the broader community partner agencies that provide services including mental health
counselling, education benefits, and employment opportunities for our veterans.
Working with Federal, State and local leaders, we strive to pursue a veteran friendly agenda to ensure good jobs
are available to our veterans and their families. This type of help includes partnering with California Department of
Veteran Affairs, as well as other Federal and State organizations.
Department staff directly submits and track claims. We are also able to check VA internal systems to ensure claims
work is being properly processed though VA.
With a small staff we were able to realize the following results in the first three months of 2015:
? 250 new claims.
? $480,000 in one time lump sum payments.
? $60,000 in per month in NEW granted benefits.
