There are no budget changes for FY
13/14. The administration is actively
looking at refunding possibilities to reduce tax liability for the property owners within the
community facilities and assessment districts.

These contributions total about $50 million in the recommended budget and support ongoing
and one-time needs. The largest contribution is for debt service to the County of Riverside
Asset Leasing Corporation (CORAL) for various county facilities. Included also is a $10
million subsidy for the county medical center, paid from tobacco settlement revenue. The
County of Riverside Enterprise Solutions for Property Taxation (CREST) project has also
been included ($7.9 million). As outlined in the CREST project plan that was approved by the
Board, part ($6.1 million) of the funding for this contribution will be drawn from the general
fund commitment designated for this project. Funding in this budget unit also supports the
homeless program ($2.5 million) and deferred maintenance ($0.6 million).

In prior years, the Assessor was able to mitigate the impact of the reduction in general fund
support by restructuring business processes and with support from the Clerk-Recorder
division. For FY 13/14 and beyond, the department will require $2 million in additional
general fund support due to a reduction in revenue from the Property Tax Administration Fee
(PTAF).

The Auditor-Controller has met its budget challenges for the last few years by restructuring
operations, deferring equipment purchases, and reducing costs where possible. This cost
savings measures resulted in the department using less general fund support than allocated.
To meet the fiscal challenges of FY 13/14, the department continues use cost saving
measures to offset labor cost increases. Additional general fund support may be requested if
the Auditor-Controller believes the shortfall will materially affect the department’s ability to
perform its mandated responsibilities.

The project continues to progress with anticipation of Thomson Reuters’ first planned release
of a new Government Revenue Management system in the county’s test environment early in
the fiscal year. Work continues in earnest on other project tasks in the areas of system
design, data conversion, infrastructure build-out, testing, and report writing. There are no
significant budget changes for this fiscal year.

Over several fiscal years, the Treasurer-Tax Collector has absorbed more than 63 percent
reduction in general fund support. The department has met the challenge by restructuring
operations to function at the most efficient, cost effective levels; closing its phone center
satellite office; embracing its IVR/IWR system technology; and cross-training and utilizing
staff in intra-departmental functions.

Purchasing is absorbing salary increases by reducing expenses in areas that will not affect
service levels (e.g. training, carpool, office supplies, communication services, professional
services). The department is seeking more revenues to offset general fund support by
entering into MOUs with county departments to pay for dedicated purchasing staff. Budget
reductions in previous fiscal years have made it difficult for the department to provide basic
county-wide oversight and guidance. In FY 11/12, the department explored the advantages.

The Office of County Counsel is offsetting its labor cost increases by focusing on full cost
recovery through our billable rates to chargeable client departments and leaving previously
vacated positions unfilled. The office has also attempted to keep most litigation in-house to
minimize and avoid outside counsel costs and increase our ability to service agencies and
departments with revenue sources outside of the general fund.

In FY 13/14 the department will conduct two major elections. The first major election is the
November 2013 Uniform District Election, followed by the June 2014 Gubernatorial
Primary Election. In addition, a mail ballot election for water districts and fire districts, and
a city election are scheduled for FY 13/14. The suspension of SB 90 reimbursements has
reduced revenue by $1.8 million. The department is actively exploring its options for
expanding facilities to meet the spacing needs for future elections. The department is also
looking into purchasing mail sorting equipment to help process returned vote-by-mail
ballots. Vote counting improvement equipment is also being researched to help speed up
election night vote counting.The budgets for EDA administration and FM administration were consolidated in FY 13/14 for
greater efficiency and cost savings. In the FY 13/14 budget request, the non-administrative
components were moved into a new division called Economic Development Program.
The department plans to absorb increased costs (resulting from labor agreement
negotiations, etc.) without reducing services; however, additional staff reductions are likely.
Slower response times could result from previous and potentially future staff reductions.The five-year agreement with the March Joint Powers Authority terminated in June 2012 and
was not renewed, lessening the draw of general fund revenue and corresponding tax sharing
payments. This budget is increasing by the estimated amount of solar franchise revenue
derived from the Desert Sunlight solar project and related uses of that revenue and prior year
fund balance projected for FY 13/14.

Given the current economy, there are few new general fund projects. Due to the transfer of
capital funds for budget purposes, the CIP has significantly reduced its ability to fund major
department projects. These transfers boosted critical reserves at a time of great economic
turmoil.
In FY13/14, two sub-funds will separately track state grant project fund activity: Eastern
County Detention Center and the Probation Van Horn Youth Facility.
The CIP will continue to focus on the financing of new jail bed construction and operations,
which continues to be the highest capital priority. Several projects will still be under way in FY
13/14, representing about $10 million in outstanding CIP budget commitments and Board
obligations. The construction of the Riverside Public Defender building will be funded by
bond proceeds.
The Executive Office is monitoring all project activity on commitments to determine when a
project commitment may be closed. Remaining commitments from inactive or completed
projects will be transferred to the General Fund for budget stabilization.

Project activity among the remaining project commitments is slowing down, and budgeting is
primarily for the PSEC project, which will be completed within the FY 13/14 fiscal year. Major
expenses will be for the remainder of the Motorola contract obligation.
The Executive Office is monitoring all project activity on commitments to determine when a
project commitment may be closed. Remaining commitments from inactive or completed
projects will be transferred to the General Fund for budget stabilization.

During FY 13/14, the new 2020 Development Impact Fee Nexus study, new fee schedule,
and updated public facilities needs list will be effective. The temporary DIF fee reductions
over the last four years have affected the FY 13/14 operations budget for DIF administration.
Replenishment of fund balances for capital projects on the public facilities needs list will take
time and some projects may be delayed because of insufficient cash flow.Previously accumulated excess fund balance attributable to the Palm Desert project areas
has been fully depleted through funding of construction of capital projects such as the
Coachella Valley Rescue Mission, Indio Volunteer Clinic, Blythe Animal Shelter, Desert Hot
Springs Family Care Clinic, and North Shore Yacht Club. Due to the economically reduced
revenue streams from all project areas, going forward the focus of this budget unit over the
near term will center on maintaining sufficient reserves to make debt service payments on

existing county and finance authority debt obligations, and fully funding the county’s
commitment to the medical school.


Through the collaboration of multiple departments including the Assessor Clerk Recorder,
Flood Control District, TLMA, RCIT and the Executive Office an enterprise license agreement
was signed in late 2012 with ESRI. ESRI is the worldwide leader in GIS information services
and a strategic county partner.
This action initiated a fundamental change to the way GIS information is shared and
accessed by county staff, our business partners and the public. The county has adopted
ESRI’s ArcGIS Online mapping tools. This is a cloud-based mapping system that offers tools
for cataloging, visualizing and sharing geospatial information. These web based services
allow the county to communicate via user friendly tools commonly found on desktop
computers, tablets and mobile phones.


Controlled limits on hiring decreased appropriation 1 authorized staff which, coupled with
curtailment of appropriation 2 services and supplies expenditures, results in a FY 13/14
budget request $218,667 under that of FY 12/13. Full restoration of state budget allocation
revenue in FY 13/14 ensures core services to Department customers will not be impacted.

Court Facilities: The FY 13/14 budget at $4,895,120 is the same as FY 11/12 and FY 12/13
however as costs increase it may be necessary to request additional funding since it is not
possible to modify any state required payments.
Contribution to Trial Court: Fee collection has continued to lessen each year for the past four
based on the severe economic downturn. Although collections are not at the level preferred
by both the court and the county, the court has made numerous improvements to its
collection efforts and continues to provide maximum revenue to the county. Court and county
staff meet to review collections as needed, minimally biannually.
Grand Jury: Until this fiscal year, the court administered the grand jury but due to budget cuts
the court returned oversight to the county. The Executive Office provides administrative and
support functions for the grand jury including payment of per diem and mileage, leasing office
space, providing training and legal advice, clerical support, and ancillary office expenses.

There will be additional workload generated by the transfer of parole hearings to the District
Attorney on July 1, 2013 as a result of AB 109 / Realignment. Additional risks include:
remaining employee relations and risk management claims originating before 2011, lingering
effects of the federal sequester, the impact of the Board’s decision to adopt the “1.2
Doctrine,” and absorbing the impacts of new labor agreements.

Administration is facing a $964,000 structural deficit due to FY 12/13 and FY 13/14
salary/benefit increases that were part of approved bargaining agreements.
Support Services is facing a $1.2 million structural deficit due to FY 12/13 and FY 13/14
salary/benefit increases implemented through approved bargaining agreements.
Patrol is facing an $18.8 million structural deficit due to FY 12/13 and FY 13/14 salary/benefit
increases implemented through approved bargaining agreements. In addition, the Board of
Supervisors directed the Sheriff to increase unincorporated patrol staffing to one sworn officer
per 1,000 residents.
Court Services is facing a $1.7 million structural deficit due to FY 12/13 and FY 13/14 salary
and benefit increases implemented following approved bargaining agreements. The bureau
also needs additional Trial Court Funding to provide security in and around the courthouses
since the state allocation was unchanged from the prior fiscal year and is insufficient to
support the staffing required.
CAC Security is facing a $40,000 structural deficit due to FY 12/13 and FY 13/14
salary/benefit increases implemented following the approval of bargaining agreements.
Ben Clark Training Center is facing a $1.3 million structural deficit due to FY 12/13 and FY
13/14 salary and benefit increases implemented following the approval of bargaining
agreements. The need to conduct additional sworn and correctional academies for field
operations and jail facilities will also increase costs for the training center.

Field Services: As part of the FY 13/14 budget, the Department will continue the
implementation of the AB109 Criminal Justice Realignment, Pre-Trial Services, and Require
Every Convict Occupant Reimburse County Expenses (RECORCE); through the recruitment
and hiring of vacant positions and implementation of new evidence based programs.
The department has absorbed the full impact of the negotiated labor cost increases within the
budget allocation and is working to ensure that service levels comply with all applicable code
sections and regulations. Additionally, the department will continue to monitor and report any
updates regarding the SB 678 Community Corrections Partnership Incentive Act (CCPIA) and
AB109 funds, to your office.
Juvenile Institutions: In August of 2012, the Riverside County Probation Department closed
the Van Horn Youth Center, a treatment facility with a 44 bed rated capacity, serving youth

offenders in Riverside County. Youth housed at the facility were transferred either to the two
residential treatment centers or to private placement. As a result of the shift in population,
the operation costs of the receiving facility increased, resulting in only minor cost savings
from VHYC’s closure. In addition, half of VHYC’s operating budget consisted of one-time
funds. Personnel assigned to Van Horn Youth Center were reassigned to other
detention/treatment facilities to offset existing vacancies and reduce overtime.

Due to increased permit compliance costs, chiefly in the Santa Margarita and Whitewater
Regions (two of the three), the Executive Office has had to request budget adjustments to
cover these legally enforceable obligations. As new permit provisions are adopted by the
Regional Water Quality Control Boards, associated programs typically increase in cost and
complexity.

With the incorporations of Eastvale and Jurupa Valley in FY 10/11, the unincorporated
population of the county dropped 28 percent. As a result, AB2766 revenues fell about 16
percent. Although revenue is expected to remain flat, expenses continue to rise. Currently
funded programs include Rideshare, Teleconferencing, WRCOG Clean Cities, and a
contribution to CVAG for street sweeping. At the current level of spending, significant cost
reductions will be necessary in FY 14/15.

Absorption of salary and benefits increases will limit the department’s ability to upgrade
vehicles, servers and computers that are operationally necessary and reaching the end of
their useful life. Animal Services is in discussions with the City of Indio and may possibly
provide contracted shelter, field, and licensing services to their residents.

Efforts are being made to enhance the use of grant program revenues that focus on
abandoned vehicles. More staff is being assigned to cost recovery efforts to process as
many cases as possible prior to fiscal year end. FY 13/14 net operating position problems
may be addressed through additional layoffs in the new fiscal year to balance Code
Enforcement's budget. The department is proposing to eliminate its French Valley office
operation and consolidate staff in its remaining offices. Fiscal staff and responsibilities are
being integrated with TLMA Administration which will result in efficiencies and produce a net
savings in staffing costs for Code Enforcement.

The Coroner bureau is facing a potential
budget shortfall due to the labor cost
increases over the last two years. The
department will monitor its budget and
provide updates during the fiscal year. Additionally the department has a need to expand
coroner services to meet the increase in number of cases.

Over the past several years, there have been fluctuations in the tonnages received from
certain landfills mostly due to decreased economic activity which has slowed the pace of land
acquisitions for habitat. However, the local economy is continuing to improve, and thus
tonnages may increase and this fund will receive increases in associated revenue.

Administration: TLMA Administrative Services will be integrating fiscal staff and
responsibilities with the inclusion of fiscal staff from Code Enforcement, Planning,
Environmental Services, RCHCA and Building and Safety. This integration will result in
efficiencies and will produce a net savings in staffing costs for impacted departments.
Consolidated Counter Services: Budget Appropriation is requested for $1,100,000 for phase
2 of CAC 2nd floor construction to improve customer efficiencies at the Riverside public
counter.
TLMA will be vacating its current Palm Desert Office August 1 as part of the Indio jail project.
The new location will offer significant reduction in rents, allowing savings to be passed along
to all TLMA departments that occupy space there.

Detention Program: Mental Health received additional funding for inmate services realigned
under Assembly Bill 109. Although the recruitment process has been challenging, the
department is working with Human Resources in order to enhance recruitment efforts, and
anticipates filling all vacant positions by the beginning of FY 13/14.
Substance Abuse: The Department continues to receive federal Block Grant funding for
treatment and prevention services, and is closely monitoring the federal funding uncertainties
surrounding these funds. Mental Health Substance Abuse also continues to monitor the
recently Realigned Substance Abuse Drug Medi-Cal entitlement programs.
Treatment Program: Mental Health continues to prepare for the implementation of the
Affordable Care Act that will go into effect January 1, 2014. The Department has been
working to expand mental health clinics and services throughout the county with funding
received from the Mental Health Services Act (MHSA).

The department was able to meet its budget target and limit its general fund support. In order
to accomplish this, the department absorbed its cost-of-living allowance (COLA’s) and step
increases. Salary increases were included in many of the contract renewals which reduced
the amount of labor cost increases it needed to absorb with other cost saving methods. In
addition, some public health nursing programs were discontinued in FY 12/13 have been
restored. In FY 12/13 the ten primary care family care centers were transferred from Public
Health to the Riverside County Health System (RCHS) and are now under the administration
of the Riverside County Medical Center.

In response to continued caseload growth in CalFresh and in preparation for Medi-Cal
expansion related to healthcare reform, the Department continues to hire eligibility staff and
plans are in place for additional hiring prior to the end of this fiscal year. Additionally, staff
have been hired in children services to fill recent vacancies and to utilize available funding
from the 2011 Realignment. DPSS anticipates filling additional positions to bring staffing up
to anticipated funding levels, which will also help keep caseloads more manageable.
Additional operational changes will include implementation of: state policy changes related to
the CalWORKs redesign; state policy changes in child welfare related to the core practice
model and expansion of mental health services related to the Katie A. settlement; and, the
Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI) in the In Home Supportive Services program.



Categorical Aid: The California Fostering Connections to Success Act was signed into law
September 30, 2010 through Assembly Bill (AB) 12 and beginning January 1, 2013, foster
youth can remain in foster care up to the age of 20 years of age, and starting January 1, 2014
up to age 21. The department anticipates an increase in foster care costs as a result of this
legislation.
Mandated Client Services: Recently, the state received federal approval to proceed with
implementation of the Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI) with a few modifications to the scope
of the pilot and an effective implementation date no sooner than October 1, 2013. Included in
the CCI is a Duals Demonstration project that will focus on persons eligible for both Medicare
and Medi-Cal. The department’s IHSS program will coordinate the care efforts with local
managed health care plans. As part of the CCI, an IHSS Maintenance of Effort (MOE) was
established for IHSS administrative costs, IHSS provider services, and the IHSS Public
Authority (PA). The FY 13/14 IHSS MOE is established at $42.4 million and has an annual
inflator of 3.5 percent effective July 2014.
Other Programs: AB12 – allows foster care children to remain in placement or transitional
housing until the age of 21. Prior to the legislation, foster youth who the courts deemed not
ready to emancipate were ordered to remain in care and became county only funded. AB 12
will reduce the amount of county funded foster care placements when emancipation was the
determining factor.In FY 12/13, the budget utilized fund balance to maintain service levels for cold weather and
emergency shelters. Due to the impact of the IHSS maintenance of effort, the public
authority contribution from other funds of $368,880 for FY 13/14 was redirected to the
Homeless budget to maintain current service levels. Although all of our Older American Act (OOA) programs were cut impacted by sequestration,
these spending cuts severely impact the agency’s programs which provides congregate and
home delivered meals to frail, isolated seniors in need. The department received $212,000
in additional funded to partially offset these cuts.

Appropriations totaling $11.5 million and
180 positions are budgeted for FY 13/14.
Revenue is generated through billing
county departments and some outside
agencies for custodial services provided.

Appropriations totaling $17.8 million and
162 positions are budgeted for FY 13/14.
Revenue is generated through billing
county departments and some outside
agencies for maintenance services
provided.

During FY 13/14, the department’s focus will be key initiatives and enterprise solutions as
directed and approved by the Board of Supervisors. These initiatives will reflect collaboration
in strategic planning and promote proactive leadership for cost effective long-term growth.
These interdepartmental collaborations and partnerships will remain essential elements for 

continued success in selecting and implementing technology that will contribute to the ability
to provide services to county residents.

Fleet Services is working with the
Executive Office and county departments
to reduce the overall size of the fleet and
better utilize existing vehicles.

RCRMC will begin FY 13/14 with little or no fund balance. The budget includes county
support of $5 million in redevelopment tax increment pass-through revenue from the city of
Moreno Valley, obligated toward debt service on the facility. In addition, $10 million in
tobacco tax revenue has been designated for hospital use. The department projects a deficit
of $51.3 million primarily related to salary increases and uncompensated services provided to
mental health patients and RCRMC jail ward inmates. RCRMC is exploring the availability of
other funding to offset the shortfall and is working with Mental Health and the Sheriff’s Office
to maximize reimbursement from the Low Income Health Plan (LIHP), which may offset a
portion of the cost of providing services.
Notable events that affect the budget revolve around the Affordable Care Act (ACA)
scheduled for implementation January 1, 2014. Many policy decisions needed for the

implementation have yet to be made. As a result, there may be impacts to revenues based
on the following key assumptions:
? No reduction in state health realignment revenue in FY 13/14.
? Revenue for Medi-Cal and Medicare managed care remains the same amount as
current payments. However, federal and state policy decisions yet to be made, may
have significant impacts and will likely affect the Disproportionate Share Hospital
(DSH) and Safety-Net Care Pool (SNCP) revenues.
? Insurance revenues for the health insurance exchange, Covered California, remain
unchanged
? Implementation of the ACA, will not change the patient workload
? Solutions for uncompensated jail costs, projected to be $10 million for FY 13/14, will
be found to replace the one-time support received in FY 12/13
? Additional funding has been included in the budget for the state Treatment
Authorization Request (TAR) process, the University of California, Riverside Internal
Medicine Residency Program and the Low Income Health Program (LIHP).
As the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) and the California Department of Health
Care Services (DHCS) make policy decisions necessary to implement the ACA, RCRMC will
provide budget updates to reflect those decisions.
Future capital projects not already funded by the CORAL 2012 Lease Revenue Bonds, will
likely need financing to conserve cash for hospital operations. Cash flow timing issues are
expected to continue to affect RCRMC due to the process for obtaining federal matching
dollars. RCRMC is required to transfer significant funds, several times per year, to the state
through Inter-Governmental Transfers (IGT) in order to receive federal matching dollars. This
process can take several weeks, leaving the hospital with insufficient cash to offset expense
claims.

During FY 13/14, costs are expected to increase from previous year as follows:
? Salaries and Benefits: Increase is due to renegotiated labor union contracts which
include pay increases ranging from 2.71% to 5.5% throughout the fiscal year.
? Services and Supplies: The increase is primarily due to higher cost for tires and fuel
consumed by landfill equipment.
? Fixed Assets: Landfill expansions will be constructed at both the Badlands and Lamb
Canyon landfills. In addition, to comply with In-Use Off-Road Diesel regulations, the
Department must replace many of the units within its landfill fleet before 2021. The
Department plans to phase the required replacement of equipment fleet over several
years.


The total budget for the Parks program remains stable with a 19 percent reduction in
operating expenditures over the last year. Reductions were taken in the administrative,
business operations, and planning and construction programs. The Interpretive program’s
overall expenditure budget was reduced by 15 percent to match revenue expectations. The
recreation program budget is 41 percent higher than the prior year due to the addition of the
Perris Aquatic Center, which is expected to open for its first operating season in summer
2014.
Despite large budget reductions in FY 13/14, the District’s Business Operations is continuing
to grow its Volunteer Management program, develop partnerships to support activities, and is
actively pursuing all available grant opportunities from federal, state, and private
organizations to fund infrastructure and capital improvement projects, trails planning, and fee
waivers for underserved county residents. As part of the implementation of the District’s fiveyear
Strategic Plan, organizational adjustments are continuing to be made in the Parks and
Recreation programs to allow for adequate management and supervision of expanded
program offerings.
In the district’s operating fund, interest earnings continue to decline when compared to prior
years, and concession revenue from two recreational vehicle parks in the Blythe area has
been decreasing over the past two years. However, user fees at some major parks were
increased during FY 12-13, resulting in increased Parks program revenues. Management is
currently performing a district-wide fee study to assess cost recovery and determine a fair
and equitable fee structure for all programs.

A FY 12/13 mid-year budget modification
was approved by the F5R Commission. It largely reflects anticipated operational expense
savings and previously approved increased funding for services.
The Commission’s ECE Access and Quality Initiative was implemented in 2012-13 with $17.3
million over a 3.5 year period allocated for scholarships to increase access to childcare. To
complement scholarship funding, an additional $7.2 million will be allocated for quality
improvements beginning in 2013-14. In addition, 53 Health and ECE contracts, including $5
million to increase pediatric provider capacity through UCR’s School of Medicine, were
awarded in 2012-13, and will continue through 2015-16.

The total budget for the Parks program remains stable with a 19 percent reduction in
operating expenditures over the last year. Reductions were taken in the administrative,
business operations, and planning and construction programs. The Interpretive program’s
overall expenditure budget was reduced by 15 percent to match revenue expectations. The
recreation program budget is 41 percent higher than the prior year due to the addition of the
Perris Aquatic Center, which is expected to open for its first operating season in summer
2014.
Despite large budget reductions in FY 13/14, the District’s Business Operations is continuing
to grow its Volunteer Management program, develop partnerships to support activities, and is
actively pursuing all available grant opportunities from federal, state, and private
organizations to fund infrastructure and capital improvement projects, trails planning, and fee
waivers for underserved county residents. As part of the implementation of the District’s fiveyear
Strategic Plan, organizational adjustments are continuing to be made in the Parks and
Recreation programs to allow for adequate management and supervision of expanded
program offerings.
In the district’s operating fund, interest earnings continue to decline when compared to prior
years, and concession revenue from two recreational vehicle parks in the Blythe area has
been decreasing over the past two years. However, user fees at some major parks were
increased during FY 12-13, resulting in increased Parks program revenues. Management is
currently performing a district-wide fee study to assess cost recovery and determine a fair
and equitable fee structure for all programs.

A FY 12/13 mid-year budget modification
was approved by the F5R Commission. It largely reflects anticipated operational expense
savings and previously approved increased funding for services.
The Commission’s ECE Access and Quality Initiative was implemented in 2012-13 with $17.3
million over a 3.5 year period allocated for scholarships to increase access to childcare. To
complement scholarship funding, an additional $7.2 million will be allocated for quality
improvements beginning in 2013-14. In addition, 53 Health and ECE contracts, including $5
million to increase pediatric provider capacity through UCR’s School of Medicine, were
awarded in 2012-13, and will continue through 2015-16.

The total budget for the Parks program remains stable with a 19 percent reduction in
operating expenditures over the last year. Reductions were taken in the administrative,
business operations, and planning and construction programs. The Interpretive program’s
overall expenditure budget was reduced by 15 percent to match revenue expectations. The
recreation program budget is 41 percent higher than the prior year due to the addition of the
Perris Aquatic Center, which is expected to open for its first operating season in summer
2014.
Despite large budget reductions in FY 13/14, the District’s Business Operations is continuing
to grow its Volunteer Management program, develop partnerships to support activities, and is
actively pursuing all available grant opportunities from federal, state, and private
organizations to fund infrastructure and capital improvement projects, trails planning, and fee
waivers for underserved county residents. As part of the implementation of the District’s fiveyear
Strategic Plan, organizational adjustments are continuing to be made in the Parks and
Recreation programs to allow for adequate management and supervision of expanded
program offerings.
In the district’s operating fund, interest earnings continue to decline when compared to prior
years, and concession revenue from two recreational vehicle parks in the Blythe area has
been decreasing over the past two years. However, user fees at some major parks were
increased during FY 12-13, resulting in increased Parks program revenues. Management is
currently performing a district-wide fee study to assess cost recovery and determine a fair
and equitable fee structure for all programs.

A FY 12/13 mid-year budget modification
was approved by the F5R Commission. It largely reflects anticipated operational expense
savings and previously approved increased funding for services.
The Commission’s ECE Access and Quality Initiative was implemented in 2012-13 with $17.3
million over a 3.5 year period allocated for scholarships to increase access to childcare. To
complement scholarship funding, an additional $7.2 million will be allocated for quality
improvements beginning in 2013-14. In addition, 53 Health and ECE contracts, including $5
million to increase pediatric provider capacity through UCR’s School of Medicine, were
awarded in 2012-13, and will continue through 2015-16.