Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Establish a District Attorney satellite office in South San
Diego to expand the number and diversity of communitybased
organizations providing services to the public. (SC2)
? Implement the Ugly Truth multimedia public service
campaign to educate the community on the realities of
Human Trafficking. (SC3)
? Establish a Conviction Review Unit to formalize and expand
the District Attorney’s ability to pursue justice during and
after a conviction of a crime. (SC3)
? Support the goals of Prop 47, Criminal Sentences.
Misdemeanor Penalties. Initiative Statute. (2014), by
working to remove filing deadlines allowing eligible
petitioners to apply to have their sentences reduced. (SC3)
? Provide educational outreach to the community on the
dangers of drunk driving and conduct technical trainings
for law enforcement officers and prosecutors on best
practices in DUI investigations and court testimony. (SC3)
? Continue to expand the elder abuse mandatory reporter
training for law enforcement, social service agencies and
emergency room staff on legal updates, reporting
requirements and reporting methods. (SC3)
? Fully implement a balanced-approach model that reduces
crime by holding offenders accountable while providing them
access to rehabilitation
? Continue to expand the use of Collaborative Court to
better address specific criminal behaviors that may lead to
drug addiction and/or mental illness. (SC7)
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges
? Deploy a community outreach campaign in multiple
languages to reach a diverse segment of the population
with information about victim services available through
the District Attorney’s Office. (SE6)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Collaborate with the California District Attorney
Association to develop a week-long cybercrime conference
to be held in San Diego to deliver best practices training on
high tech crime to prosecutors, investigators and forensic
examiners.
Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Increase case clearances for Part I Violent Crimes by 5%.
Eight Part I crimes, or “Index Crimes” are tracked by
Traditional Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) guidelines.
These crimes include: homicide, rape, robbery, aggravated
assault, burglary, larceny theft, motor vehicle theft, and
arson. Those categorized as violent crimes include:
homicide, rape, robbery, and aggravated assault. Case
clearance rules are dictated by the UCR Guidelines and
include those cases with the disposition of arrest,
exception, and unfounded. (SC3)
? Participate in regional prevention outreach to those offenders
at risk for homelessness and mental health issues.
? Expand collaboration with the Probation Department and
conduct routine compliance checks to enforce the terms of
supervision and actively pursue offenders who are noncompliant
with their terms of release, with the goal of
ensuring public safety in our communities. (SC3)
? Expand data-driven crime prevention strategies and utilize
current technologies to reduce crime at the local and regional
level
? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse
? Continue prevention outreach and increase identification
of at-risk youth. (SC6)
? Fully implement a balanced-approach model that reduces
crime by holding offenders accountable while providing them
access to rehabilitation
? Build access to assessment, referral and treatment for
inmates with mental health disorders and substance abuse
needs, in order to better facilitate rehabilitation. (SC7)
? Provide additional training to primary health care providers
in detention facilities to better recognize and manage mental
health issues.
Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Increase education and training on injury in the workplace
in order to better prevent injury and expedite recovery
from injury and return to work.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Increase customer service with targeted outreach and
follow-up with residents who have frequently called for
service.Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to individuals’ needs
? Ensure the percentage of cases with parentage established
is at 100%, consistent with the Statewide goal.
? Maintain the percentage of open cases with an enforceable
order at or above 89%, consistent with the Statewide goal.
? Maintain the percentage of current support collected to
current support owed at or above 71% ($112 million of
$158 million).
? Increase the percentage of arrears cases with a collection
at or above 70%.
? Explore a partnership with an educational institution to
educate future professionals in the child support field.
? Maintain collections for child support at or above $177
million.
? Promote family self-sufficiency by partnering with additional
organizations to ensure supportive services are available
to families.
? Pursue policy and program change for healthy, safe and thriving
environments to positively impact residents
? Implement a college savings account program for
dependents of child support customers to help advance
academic success and facilitate self-sufficiency in
adulthood. (HF4)
? Leverage internal communication resources, resource groups
and social media to enhance employee understanding of the
County’s Live Well San Diego vision
? Increase internal communication to employees regarding
the connection between healthy and thriving families and
the work employees do in assisting child support customers.
(HF5)
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Collect at least $3.50 for every $1.00 spent on operations.
? Integrate all administrative and operational facets of the
Public Assistance Fraud investigative function from the District
Attorney’s Office and identify areas to increase operational
efficiency and effectiveness.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Develop an automated self-check-in system to improve the
customers’ office visit experience. (OE3)
? Establish offices at various locations in the community to
better serve customers who reside in those areas. (OE3)
? Partner with other government or community-based
organizations to distribute video messages in their offices
regarding how child support services positively affect
families in the region. (OE3)
? Explore and implement innovative electronic
communication options, increasing department
accessibility and convenience for customers.
Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges
? Increase community awareness of the CLERB through
quarterly stakeholder outreach to include at least four
community-based meetings annually (one meeting per
quarter). (SE6)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Maintain public accountability of Sheriff and Probation
peace officers, to the extent allowed by law, by conducting
timely investigation, review and reporting 75% of citizens’
complaints of misconduct within 330 days of receipt. (OE4)
? Issue and publicly distribute monthly workload reports to
the CLERB, Sheriff’s Department and Probation
Department. Complete a comprehensive annual report
with a thorough accounting of new complaints and case
closures, including an analysis of citizen complaint trends
and recommendations for policy change. (OE4)
? Complete 95% of complaint investigations within one year
of receipt, unless delayed due to lengthy investigations that
may be required for complex cases. (OE4)
? Provide monthly “early warning” reports to the Sheriff’s
Department and Probation Department regarding the
nature of complaints filed and the identity and assignment
of the employees, when known, to enable corrective
action when necessary. (OE4)
? Maintain a transparent and independent citizen complaint
process, to the extent allowed by law, which provides
relevant feedback and recommendations to the Sheriff and
Chief Probation Officer. (OE4)
? Provide redacted case synopses that include relevant
information for the public, while respecting peace officer
confidentiality rights. (OE4)
? Process 100% of new complaints in a timely manner;
maintain a complaint turnaround of two working days or
less, measured from when the complaint was received to
when case documents were completed and returned to the
complainant for signature. (OE4)
? Provide quarterly training on law enforcement issues. (
Encourage and promote residents to take important and
meaningful steps to protect themselves and their families for
the first 72 hours during a disaster
? Conduct one public outreach campaign to increase the
number of AlertSanDiego registrations and SD Emergency
mobile application downloads by 5%. (SC1)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Complete ten tsunami response playbooks for all coastal
jurisdictions, which contain updated plans, procedures and
responsibilities that would be used during a tsunami
advisory, watch, or warning. These playbooks allow for the
implementation of different response scenarios depending
on tsunami size, direction, tide, and other factors. (SC3)
? Facilitate a transportation provider resource inventory and
a pre-approved emergency transportation services list for
use in the event of evacuations during disasters by
establishing new and renewing existing agreements with
transportation service providers. The list may include
providers who serve the general public and those that
specialize in the transportation of older adults and
individuals with disabilities and other access and functional
needs. (SC2)
? Conduct two tabletop exercises, one interoperable
communications exercise and one full-scale disaster
preparedness exercise, which involves multiple agencies
and jurisdictions throughout the region. (SC3)
? Ensure readiness in the region by combining specialized
natural disaster maps into an easy to use, localized, public
hazard risk map. This map would include information on
earthquake, fire, flood, and tsunami risk and would allow
residents to identify multiple hazards affecting their
neighborhood by entering their address onto a web-based
form. (SC1)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Obtain re-accreditation from the Emergency Management
Accreditation Program (EMAP). EMAP evaluates local
emergency management programs using 63 separate and
measurable standards of excellence. Each of these standards
must be met, as evaluated by a peer review process. OES was
originally accredited in 2007 and re-accredited in 2012.
Accreditation is valid for five years. (OE3)
? Expand the number of available emergency power
generator systems to establish a cache of generators and
associated power distribution resources. The power
generator cache would provide emergency power at
specific locations throughout the region for maintaining
medical equipment, providing lighting, and powering
emergency communication systems. (OE3)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Expand the number of disaster service workers trained for
the Advanced Recovery Initiative by 3%. Training will be
focused on increasing available personnel in emergency
sheltering and emergency 2-1-1 telephone operations.Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Gather epidemiology information to address public health
issues and partner with agencies to alert the community on
patterns and trends. These trends will be communicated
through County News Center stories targeting the media
and the public and an annual report published online.
(SC3)
? Contribute to research efforts in Alzheimer’s, Epilepsy,
Autism and Schizophrenia studies by providing tissue to
academic research organizations, with family consent. (SC3)
? Continue to train medical residents, students and first
responders on forensic investigations by fulfilling 100% of
requests, at least 75, within 4 months of the request. (SC3)
? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse
? Contribute to research efforts in childhood death by
providing statistics and case examples, and lending
expertise through active participation in groups including
the San Diego County Child Fatality Committee, the
Methamphetamine Strike Force, PDATF, MECAP, NICHD,
National Missing and Unidentified Persons System, and the
California SIDS Advisory Council. (SC6)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Use advanced forensic imaging to assist in the
determination of the cause and manner of death. (OE3)
? Gather imaging case information to locate objects,
identify John or Jane Does and document fractures,
deformities and post-surgical procedures.
? Use bar coding technology to ensure transfer and
maintenance of specimens, evidence and bodies is
accomplished quickly, efficiently, and accurately.
? Complete 90% of homicide examination reports in 60 days
or less. (OE4)
? Assist in the healing process of those who have lost a loved
one by providing timely and compassionate service and
enable timely sharing of detailed information with
customers (families, law enforcement agencies, hospitals,
insurance companies, media, etc.) regarding the cause and
manner of death. (OE4)
? Notify 90% of next-of-kin for identified Medical
Examiner cases in 12 hours or less.
? Complete 85% of investigative reports in 60 days or less.
? Complete 95% of toxicology reports in 60 days or less.
? Complete 85% of examination reports in 60 days or
less.
? Provide 97% of case report requests within 7 days or less.
? Strengthen the customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Enable timely funeral service for families by making 97% of
bodies ready for release in 7 days or less.
Fully implement a balanced-approach model that reduces
crime by holding offenders accountable while providing them
access to rehabilitation
? Employ practices to provide rehabilitative services to
offenders. (SC7)
? Increase the percentage of high-risk juvenile
probationers linked to community-based services
associated with the juvenile’s assessed needs by 3%
(55% to 58%).
? Increase the percentage of high-risk adult offenders
and Post Release Community Supervision offenders
linked to appropriate intervention services by 4% (70%
to 74%) to address factors that lead to criminal
behavior.
? Continue to provide substance abuse services for at
least 99% of youth assessed to have substance abuse
needs.
? Work to rehabilitate offenders by continuing to provide
employment readiness services to at least 99% of youth
in custody assessed as having an employment readiness
need.
? Employ operational practices to protect community safety
and reduce crime. (SC3)
? Ensure 70% of juvenile probationers complete their
probation without a new sustained law violation.
? Ensure 65% of adult probationers complete their
probation without being convicted of a new crime.
? Ensure 75% of Mandatory Supervision offenders
complete their supervision without being convicted of
a new crime.
? Ensure 60% of Post Release Community Supervision
offenders complete their supervision without being
convicted of a new crime
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Focus on diversion, supportive programs, and community
based options through the use of evidence-based practices
to further reduce the juvenile justice population. (SC2)
? Assist victims who have been harmed by crime by
collecting Court ordered restitution on their behalf. (SC3)
? Collect at least $2.3 million of restitution from adult
probationers for the benefit of crime victims.
? Collect at least $0.25 million of restitution from
juvenile-related cases for the benefit of crime victims.
? Continue collaborating with the Sheriff’s Department in
conducting compliance checks to enforce the terms of
supervision and actively engage offenders with their terms
of release, with the goal of ensuring public safety in
communities. (SC3)
? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse
? Expand juvenile mental health services to youth in the
community through a therapeutic model of in-home
services for youth and their families. (SC6)
? Expand juvenile mental health services to youth in custody
through expanded clinical support and continue to
implement best practice initiatives focused on trauma.
(SC6)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Continue to expand the use of mobile applications to
improve the efficiency of case management and
supervision for officers in the field. (OE3)
? In collaboration with County departments and community
partners, implement the plan to move staff and services
into community-based locations.
The County makes health, safety and thriving a focus of all
policies and programs through internal and external collaboration
? Complete 90% of mental health treatment plans for individuals
about to be released from custody within two
weeks of receiving the referral.
? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse
? Improve opportunities for children and families by assisting
juvenile delinquency clients to be successful in their
rehabilitation programs and on probation. (SC5)
? Use juvenile record sealing statutes to assist juvenile
clients in clearing their records to gain employment or to
participate in training and/or education programs, for 90%
(405 of 450) of requests. (SC6)
? Maintain the number of elapsed days between admission
and sentencing in approximately 2,000 juvenile cases at 28
days or less to accelerate rehabilitation. (SC6)
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? File 475 misdemeanor expungement requests to help
clients obtain meaningful employment. (SE2)
? File 475 felony expungement requests to help clients
obtain meaningful employment. (SE2)
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and find solutions
to current and future challenges.
Develop and maintain partnerships with educational and
community organizations to promote opportunities for
residents to be civically engaged, leverage resources and
address common needs. (SE6)
? Maintain 80,000 hours provided by volunteers.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Improve the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of services by
storing case-related information electronically. (OE3)
? Continue testing eDiscovery with the San Diego City
Attorney, with the goal of developing an eDiscovery
protocol no later than June 30, 2017.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Promote collaborative justice by establishing a professional
rapport and bond of trust with clients, and work with
criminal justice partners to ensure a reasonable and
efficient criminal justice system to obtain the best possible
outcome for the client. (OE5)
? Resolve 90% (45,000 of 50,000) of misdemeanor cases
prior to trial when doing so benefits the client more
than litigation.
? Resolve 65% (10,400 of 15,000) of felony cases prior to
preliminary hearing when doing so benefits the client
more than litigation.
Encourage and promote residents to take important and
meaningful steps to protect themselves and their families for
the first 72 hours during a disaster
? Collaborate with regional partners to improve fire safety by
educating residents on the importance of Defensible Space
on their property and administering Defensible Space
standards on inspected parcels. (SC1)
? Provide outreach and education to property owners in
CSA 135 by mailing 13,000 courtesy notifications and
educational materials regarding Defensible Space.
? Ensure a 90% voluntary compliance rate with
Defensible Space standards on all parcels inspected.
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Work to lower the risk of sudden cardiac death by
providing 14 community CPR classes, CPR training at
participating high schools to all graduating seniors and 10
community blood screening events in CSA 135. (SC2)
? Continue to coordinate with CAL FIRE to increase
recruitment and training opportunities for the Volunteer-
Reserve Firefighter program. (SC3)
? Participate in 12 events to recruit Volunteer Reserve
Firefighters.
? Complete seven Driver Operator-related trainings to
increase the number of trained driver operators in the
field.
? As part of Community Risk Reduction (CRR), which involves
the identification and correction of fire code violations in
existing buildings to reduce the risk and impacts from
unwanted fires in the community, inspect schools and
perform inspections requested by State Community Care
Licensing and Sheriff’s licensing, within CSA 135 and
contracted agency areas, for compliance with the Fire
Code. (SC3)
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Improve 25% of the Insurance Service Office (ISO) 10
classifications to an ISO 8B classification, assigned
following an examination of a community’s fire protection
capability, and improve resident insurance rates based on
classification. (SE1)
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Promote financial literacy of the department on grants,
budget, audits and purchasing and contracting principles
through multiple presentations to staff during bimonthly
staff meetings. (OE2)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Develop a formalized fire station building program
standard in order to set minimum requirements for the
design of new fire stations that address community needs.
(OE3)
? Achieve an overall average response time of 9 minutes and
30 seconds.
Provide paramedic service within 20 minutes’ drive of twothirds
of CSA 135 residents. (OE3)
? Finalize the implementation of Step III of the County’s Fire
and Life Safety Reorganization Report, which will
reorganize the Pine Valley and San Diego Rural Fire
Protection Districts into CSA 135. (OE1)
? Support the State Office of Emergency Services (OES)
migration of the former Next-Generation Incident
Command System (NICS) to a new cloud-based service, the
Situational Awareness and Collaboration Tool (SCOUT).
(OE3)
? Ensure a host environment for NICS is available until
the State OES has secured a new hosting environment.
? Facilitate communication and cooperation between the
State OES and the University of California, San Diego
Supercomputer Center, which is currently hosting NICS.
Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to individuals’ needs
? Process 96% (33,600 of 35,000) of CalWORKs applications
timely. This is a key metric required by the State and is a
first step in assisting families towards self-sufficiency. Target
exceeds the State requirement of 90%.
? Process 91% (177,450 of 195,000) of Medi-Cal applications
timely. This is a key metric required by the State and
assists families in meeting their health care insurance
needs. Target exceeds the state requirement of 90%.
? Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Increase by 9% (from 22,500 to 24,525) the number of
seniors, including those living in rural areas, that receive
CalFresh benefits in order to reduce the number of seniors
who self-report food insecurity. Accomplish this goal
through strategic partnerships with community-based
organizations. (HF2)
? Process 92% (116,840 of 127,000) of CalFresh applications
timely to help eligible families and individuals buy food
and improve their nutrition. Target exceeds the State
requirement of 90%.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Enhance customer service by promoting alternative
pathways for individuals and families to access information
about self-sufficiency programs and their ability to provide
information electronically by increasing by 90% (2,500 to
4,750) the number of status reports and renewals that are
submitted electronically through Benefits CalWIN. (OE3)
? Enhance customer service by promoting alternative
pathways for individuals and families to access information
about self-sufficiency programs and their ability to provide
information electronically by increasing by 5% (209,000 to
219,450) the number of individuals and families who use
the self-service telephone feature at the Access Customer
Service Call Center. (OE4)
? Enhance customer service by promoting alternative pathways
for individuals and families to access information
about self-sufficiency programs and their ability to provide
information electronically by increasing by 5%
(33,500 to 35,175) the number of customers served via
email at the Access Customer Service Call Center.
Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to individuals’ needs
? Ensure 90% (14,400 of 16,000) of initial eligibility determinations
for IHSS are completed within the 45-day program
mandate so individuals can remain safely in their
own home.
? Ensure 97% (24,638 of 25,400) of IHSS annual reassessments
are completed timely so older adults and persons
with disabilities receive the appropriate level of care to
remain safely in their own home, exceeding the State performance
expectation of 90%.
? Maintain 98% (539 of 550) participation in the Multipurpose
Senior Services Program case management program by providing
resources and/or assistance that help avoid, delay or
remedy inappropriate placement in nursing facilities.
? Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Ensure 82% (246 of 300) of graduates report adopting one
or more healthy habits during the 6-week Healthier Living
Program that provides older adults and others who wish to
attend nutritional education. (HF2)
? Reduce from 25% to 23% (437 of 1,900) the number of
older adults who self-report food insecurity through
increased outreach and services, such as CalFresh
education. (HF2)
? Pursue policy and program change for healthy, safe and thriving
environments to positively impact residents
? Ensure action on the Alzheimer's Project implementation
plan and initiate ongoing actions to prevent and address
elder abuse and help community members plan for their
financial health and end-of-life needs. Create a regional
strategy to improve services for those with Alzheimer’s
disease by coordinating community responses to incidents
of wandering, identifying affordable and available care
services for those with the disease, providing support to
caregivers and furthering efforts to find a cure for the
disease. (HF4)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Ensure 100% (1,815) of PA/PG/PC investigations begin
within 2 business days of assignment to an investigator to
ensure protection and well-being as mandated by the
Omnibus Conservatorship and Guardianship Reform Act.
? Complete 100% (510) of assessment notes on conservatorship
investigations within 10 business days of assignment
of referral to minimize risk and loss to the client and
community.
? Conduct 97% (8,817 of 9,090) of face-to-face contacts
within 10 days of receiving an APS referral to provide
timely assistance and resources that help adults meet
their own needs.
? Ensure 96% (48 of 50) of Acutely Vulnerable Adult (AVA)
APS cases are closed with the individual at a stable or
higher rating as measured by the AVA Safety Focused Outcome
Measure.
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Ensure 100% (89) of skilled nursing facilities are reviewed
quarterly by the Long Term Care Ombudsman program to
strengthen protections for vulnerable older adults and
persons with disabilities. (SE2)
? Ensure 90% (566 of 629) of Residential Care Facilities for
the Elderly (RCFE) are reviewed quarterly by the Long Term
Care Ombudsman program, and 100% of facilities are
reviewed at least once annually to strengthen protections
for vulnerable older adults and persons with disabilities.
(SE2)
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges
? Connect 2,050 older adults with volunteer opportunities,
including the Retired & Senior Volunteer Program (RSVP)
and intergenerational programs, to support thriving, a Live
Well San Diego component, which includes volunteerism
and civic engagement.
Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to individuals’ needs
? Collaborate with Aging & Independence Services to serve
9,300 (4% increase) older adults and caregivers who are
vulnerable to mental illness by improving their access to
prevention, early intervention and treatment services.
(HF1)
? Increase to 178 (10% increase from 162) the total number
of physical health care providers using psychiatric
consultation to increase capacity for integrated physical
and behavioral health care to individuals with Medi-Cal
and the uninsured, which is consistent with Whole Person
Care. (HF1)
? Ensure 44% (5,720 of 13,000) of individuals participating
in alcohol and drug treatment complete services, demonstrating
the effectiveness of programs by surpassing the
statewide average of 38%.
? Ensure 80% (6,960 of 8,700) of children and youth who
complete mental health treatment will demonstrate clinical
improvement as measured by the Children's Functional
Assessment Rating Scale (CFARS), a standardized
measurement tool. Although clinical improvement for all
children and youth is emphasized, not all interventions
will be successful due to individual differences in
response to the intervention.
? Ensure availability of treatment for up to 824 homeless
individuals with serious behavioral health conditions. This
will be expanded based on community need to serve
approximately 1,500 in support of Project One for All.
? Pursue policy and program change for healthy, safe and thriving
environments to positively impact residents
? Provide services to 100% of individuals with serious and
persistent mental illness who demonstrate resistance to
participating in traditional mental health treatment and
have been court ordered to the Assisted Outpatient
Treatment (AOT) program for services in accordance with
Laura’s Law. (HF4)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Divert 50% (4,500 of 9,000) of individuals from psychiatric
hospitalization or incarceration through crisis intervention
services provided by PERT, which include linkages to
appropriate services. (SC2)
? Ensure 85% of individuals who are admitted to the San
Diego Psychiatric Hospital (SDCPH) will not be readmitted
within 30 days of discharge, which demonstrates
accountability and commitment to outstanding patient
care. (SC3)
? Ensure 75% (1,725 of 2,300) of individuals who complete
mental health treatment while residing in crisis residential
beds will not be readmitted to a crisis residential program
or hospital within 30 days of discharge, which
supports the individuals successful integration into the
community.
? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse Ensure 90% (1,296 of 1,440) of adolescents entering
nonresidential alcohol and drug treatment programs
receive timely admissions to reduce barriers and increase
the likelihood of completing treatment. (SC5)
? Ensure 95% (1,330 of 1,400) of parents who complete at
least one level of the Positive Parenting Program (Triple P)
report that the program has helped them deal more
effectively with their children’s behavior. Triple P is an evidence
based program designed to assist parents with
interventions they can use with their children who have
childhood social and emotional disorders.
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges
? Provide training to at least 5,000 community members
countywide to enhance community recognition of suicide
warning signs and mental health crises so they can refer
those at risk to available resources. Trainings include
Mental Health First Aid, Question Persuade Refer (QPR)
and Applied Suicide Intervention Skills Training (ASIST).
(SE6)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Ensure 95% (58,900 of 62,000) of calls to the Access and
Crisis Line (ACL), are answered within an average of 60
seconds or less to provide timely access to information,
referral, and crisis intervention services for individuals
seeking behavioral health services.
Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to individuals’ needs
? Ensure 82% (431 of 526) of children, ages 6–17, with a new
case under the supervision of the Juvenile Court are
screened for mental health needs. These efforts will ensure
that children have access to trauma informed mental
health services. (HF1)
? Ensure 100% of all staff at the A.B. and Jessie Polinsky
Children’s Center (PCC) receive trauma informed training.
Ensure an additional 80% (153 of 192) of direct care staff
complete advanced trauma informed training. (HF1)
? Ensure 78% (61 of 78) of youth enrolled in wraparound
services are living in a home-like setting, in accordance
with the California Well-Being Demonstration Project.
? Place 60% (1,320 of 2,200) of foster care children with a
relative or close non-family member, minimizing trauma
to children by maintaining their connections to familiar
environments and strengthening families, exceeding
statewide performance of 46%.
? Ensure 87% (1,479 of 1,700) of children in foster care
have fewer than three placements during the first 12
months in care. Fewer placements minimize the trauma
that children experience and may help lessen negative
impact to their school performance. This meets the federal
standard of 87%.
? Ensure 60% (402 of 670) of child abuse referrals and cases
reviewed are documenting the use of Safety Organized
Practice (SOP), meeting the California Well-Being Demonstration
Project goal of 60% for this year. SOP is a required
statewide strategy designed to enhance social work skills
in family engagement and critical thinking to create sustained
safety for children.
? Increase by 5% (from 423 to 444) the number of adoption
finalizations to achieve permanence for children.
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Increase by 5% (from 605 to 635) the recruitment and
retention of Foster/Resource Families willing to parent
older children or teens, particularly those stepping down
from group home care.
? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse
? Ensure 40.5% (595 of 1,470) of children removed from
the home due to safety concerns achieve permanency
within 12 months to support family strengthening. Federal
standard is 40.5%.
? Increase to 77% (3,619 of 4,700) of families to participate
in quarterly meetings regarding their children for joint
planning with social workers. Families who participate in
joint-case planning are more likely to follow through with
plans and meet safety goals to achieve positive outcomes
for the children.Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to individuals’ needs
? Ensure 93% (2,790 of 3,000) of children in out-of-home
placement receive timely preventive health examinations
to identify and correct health issues. (HF1)
? Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Ensure 61% (159 of 260) of mothers receiving home
visitation from public health nurses continue to breastfeed
their infant up to 6 months of age to promote healthier
outcomes. Target is well above the national average of
49.4% and consistent with the federal Healthy People 2020
goal of 60.6% . (HF2)
? Encourage and promote residents to take important and
meaningful steps to protect themselves and their families for
the first 72 hours during a disaster
? Activate the public health emergency response drills five
times this fiscal year in order to ensure preparedness for
disaster and/or public health threats. (SC1)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Monitor area medical response times to ensure that 90%
(162,000 of 180,000) of emergency responses in which a
transport occurs are answered within established response
time standards. (SC3)
? Immunize 99% (19,800 of 20,000) of children under 18
who are served at Public Health Centers and Clinics to
protect them from diseases such as measles and whooping
cough. (SC3)
? Connect 85% (102 of 120) of individuals with a newly confirmed
HIV diagnosis to primary care with a verified medical
visit within 30 days, thereby increasing access to
health care, and reducing transmission of HIV. Target
exceeds state standards of 45%.
? Ensure 98% (235 of 240) of active tuberculosis (TB) cases
are reported within one working day from start of treatment
to prevent further transmissions, exceeding state
standards of 93%.
? Maintain 100% compliance with accrediting requirements at
the Public Health Services laboratory to ensure protection of
community health and prevention of the spread of disease.
Ensure 92% (2,024 of 2,200) of tuberculosis (TB) samples
received during operating hours will be tested and
reported by the laboratory within one business day to
ensure rapid diagnosis and treatment of tuberculosis,
consistent with federal standards.
? Ensure 90% (1,800 of 2,000) of refugees start their health
assessment process within 90 days, which is the standard
set by the California Refugee Program, to identify health
needs and facilitate access to the local health care system.
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Ensure 90% (41,400 of 46,000) of birth certificates are
registered within 10 days of birth to maintain accurate
Census data.
? Investigate 100% (estimated 270) of reported selected
communicable disease cases within 24 hours to reduce
the spread of disease.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Ensure 70% (28,000 of 40,000) of referrals to California
Children’s Services are processed through eQuest, a web
referral system, so that children with serious physical limitations,
chronic health conditions and diseases receive
family-centered care coordination and timely approval for
coverage of their medical services.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Conduct at least eight (8) Quality Improvement Projects to
advance operational excellence and meet standards of
public health accreditation process, while creating a culture
of continuous improvement in which staff are engaged in
identifying and resolving barriers to success. 
Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to individuals’ needs
? Assist 68% (8,568 of 12,600) of students entering
kindergarten by increasing the number of children
identified with a developmental, social emotional or
behavioral need and provide them the resources necessary
to reduce the occurrence of undetected and/or untreated
conditions in children entering school. (HF1)
? Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Educate 95% (7,315 of 7,700) of parents receiving First 5
San Diego services so that they positively report having the
knowledge and capacity to advocate for their child's health
needs and encourage the healthy development of children
ages 0 through 5. (HF2)
? Pursue policy and program change for healthy, safe and thriving
environments to positively impact residents
? Support a 10% increase (from 175 to 193) in the number of
recognized Live Well San Diego partners in order to
improve outcomes across the Live Well San Diego
measurement framework which measures the impact of
collective actions by partners and the County to achieve
the vision of a region that is building better health, living
safely and thriving.
Help employees understand how they contribute to Live Well
San Diego
? Increase by 10% (from 61% to 67%) County employees’
understanding of how their work contributes to the Live
Well San Diego vision. By increasing awareness of their
contributions to Live Well San Diego, employees cultivate
stakeholder relationships and gain public trust as they
work together towards one vision. (HF5)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Ensure at least 1,700 Alternative Dispute Resolution
mediation services to community members looking for
help resolving issues, problems, disputes and conflicts in a
way that is non-adversarial and less expensive than formal
legal proceedings through outreach, education and
receipt of referrals.
? Develop an information exchange, and where possible, use a
single system that provides data so County agencies can
deliver services more efficiently
? Achieve major milestones targeted for the Fiscal Year
2016–17 development and implementation of
ConnectWellSD, an electronic information exchange
system, that will link information systems within the
County. ConnectWellSD will facilitate the provision of
exceptional customer service. (SC4)
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Engage approximately 360 work ready refugees in
vocational English as a second language to facilitate their
adaptation to a new environment and increase their ability
to find employment. (SE1)
? Increase by 4% (from 22,000 to 22,880) the number of
interviews provided to veterans and dependents with
benefits counseling, information and referral services.
? Increase by 4% (from 3,957 to 4,115) the number of compensation
and pension claims processed to allow veterans
and their dependents to thrive by promptly facilitating
their access to needed benefits.
? Foster an environment where residents engage in recreational
interests by enjoying parks, open spaces and outdoor
experiences
? Promote efforts such as the 2017 Live Well San Diego 5K
Walk/Run and Resource Fair and other public events to
encourage residents to exercise and enjoy the environment
while receiving health and wellness information. The Live
Well San Diego 5K event is expected to reach over 3,000
residents. (SE5)
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges
? Invest in building capacity for policy, systems and
environmental change by: (SE6)
? Providing six (6) Live Well San Diego Resident
Leadership Academies (RLAs), each with the capacity to
train up to 25 community residents in effective
advocacy for policy, systems and environmental
changes that improve outcomes for the community.
(SE6)
? Convening six (6) Live Well San Diego Resident
Leadership Academy (RLA) Council meetings that
provide supplemental education and development
opportunities to support the ongoing efforts of RLA
graduates across the region, as they identify and
implement community improvement projects that
increase the health, safety, and well-being of their
neighborhoods.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Conduct 26 comprehensive financial reviews of contractors
to ensure they complied with standards and had financial
controls in place. Each review consists testing of financial
material, review of contractor financial systems and
controls and observation of contractor systems, activities
and processes. This activity helps to assure that the County
is maintaining fiscal stability. (OE1)
? Coordinate and attend 8 financial trainings comprised of
budgetary topics impacting program operations such as
funding streams and fiscal impacts to service delivery.
Improve financial competency of staff and management by
conducting presentations on funding and financial issues
that affect operations and service delivery. These trainings
provide staff with the knowledge to make better-informed
decisions. (OE2)
? Train a minimum of 125 HHSA employees (to include
Contracting Officer Representatives and support staff), in
partnership with the Department of Purchasing and
Contracting, on contract administration topics to develop,
strengthen and maintain the procurement knowledge and
effectively improve contractor performance and host a
Contractors’ Forum to engage contractors, share new
trends, and provide additional training support. (OE2)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Increase the number of unique visitors to the Live Well San
Diego website (LiveWellSD.org) by 25% (from 24,216 to
30,270) by providing access to timely, relevant news and
materials that engage partners and other stakeholders;
expanding the reach of Live Well San Diego education
messages; and providing public access to Live Well San
Diego Open Performance Data and other community level
data. (OE4)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Issue the Customer Experience survey to all Agency
customers (AIS, BHS, CWS, PHS, SSS, Admin Support) and
achieve a minimum average satisfaction rating of 3 (1 to 4
scale). In areas where the rating is lower than 3 develop
and implement an improvement plan. (OE5)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Ensure 100% of new employees are trauma informed
through a New Employee Orientation to ensure a
welcoming atmosphere for all new hires to feel valued,
become engaged and integrated into the shared vision of
Live Well San Diego. Providing new hires the opportunity
to feel valued increases retention and a produces a
workforce with an increased appreciation toward their
contributions in the lives of our customers.Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Pursue equity in the local food system by increasing the
availability of fresh produce and healthy food options for
underserved populations. (HF3)
? Support harvest/gleaning groups by providing
informational flyers on harvesting by gleaning
organizations to residents with fruit trees participating
in Pest Detection’s trapping program. Flyers will be
distributed in a pilot area of the region in coordination
with city governments and the San Diego Food System
Alliance.
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Contribute to environmental justice and protect people in
the region, regardless of race, age, culture, income, or
geographic location, from adverse environmental and
health effects of pesticides. (SC3)
? Respond to pesticide complaints within two business
days and complete related investigations in an average
of 75 days, surpassing the State’s guideline of 120 days.
? Monitor structural fumigations (which use the most
frequent fumigant reported in the county) by
conducting 40 undercover surveillance inspections, 380
unannounced field inspections, and an employee safety
and business records audit of the 35 companies
conducting structural fumigations and headquartered
in the county.
? Conduct two outreach activities to inform hazardous
material inventory site operators of strategies to reduce the number of sites, threshold amounts of materials,
and types of chemicals stored as part of their business.
? Provide and promote service and systems that increase consumer
and business confidence
? Increase the number of retail businesses charging accurate
prices (no overcharges) from 80% (five year average) to
82%, when customers pay for merchandise at the cash
register. (SE2)
? Conduct four outreach activities to educate businesses
and the public about the price verification services we
provide to ensure a fair marketplace.
? Increase the number of recycling businesses that pay out
the correct amount of money, when customers sell
recyclable beverage containers, from 76% (five year
average) to 78%. (SE2)
? Increase the number of undercover test sales of
recyclable beverage containers from 50% (72 locations)
to 60% (86 locations) of the approximately 143
recyclers.
? Perform 100% of annual accuracy verification
inspections of scales used by these recyclers.
? Conduct two outreach activities to educate businesses
and the public about the undercover test sale services
we provide to ensure a fair marketplace.
? Increase the number of taximeters charging the correct
fare to customers from 95% (five year average) to 97%.
(SE2)
? Inspect 100% of all taximeters (approximately 1,467).
? Conduct four outreach activities to educate businesses
and the public about the taximeter inspection services
we provide to ensure a fair marketplace.
? Complete 100% of approximately 30,000 annual inspections
(initial and new) for retail fuel meters, taximeter,
water dispensers, computing scales and counter scales to
ensure devices found to be overcharging customers are
fixed before being used again; and devices found to be
undercharging customers are fixed in order to stop financial
harm to the business.
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Prevent the introduction of invasive pests, which costs California
more than $3 billion annually to control.
? Maintain and inspect 9,750 detection traps to facilitate
timely pest detection, reducing the possibility of
invasive pest quarantines and the costs to stakeholders
associated with eradicating the pests.
? Protect and promote agricultural industries by reducing the
establishment of invasive pests in wholesale nurseries.
Increase compliance with nursery laws and regulations
through outreach and inspections.
? Conducting two outreach activities focusing on small
nurseries and inspecting 33% (43 of 129) of nurseries 1
acre or less in size.
? Protect California’s $61.5 billion wine and grape industries
by ensuring that all certified grape plant shipments from
San Diego County arrive at destination counties without
live Glassy Winged Sharpshooter. The Glassy Winged Sharpshooter
is an invasive pest which transmits Pierce’s Disease,
a detrimental fungal grapevine disease.
? Intercept invasive pests at our borders (or shipping facilities)
and prevent their establishment in the environment,
preventing costly plant quarantines and pest eradication
efforts.
? Increase root sampling inspections for plant pathogens on
out-of-state plant shipments by 5% (from 380 to 400).
? Increase permission rate to open U.S. First-Class mail identified
by Agricultural detector dogs from 30% to 38%,
which will increase the chances that serious invasive pests
will be detected and prevented from being established in
the environment.
? Foster an environment where residents engage in recreational
interests by enjoying parks, open spaces and outdoor
experiences
? Implement San Diego County’s Honeybee Protection Program
to promote public health and safety while ensuring
managed hives are maintained in a responsible manner for
the health of local European bee populations.
? Increase beekeepers awareness of responsible
beekeeping by conducting 10 outreach activities.
? Conduct 100 apiary inspections to verify safe and
proper beekeeping practices.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Develop and implement a web-based system that will
enable industry to submit the approximately 18,500
required notifications of structural fumigations online. The
system will replace the current procedure of faxing in,
tabulating and managing the data manually with a time
saving system for both industry and the County. (OE3)
? Launch a 3-1-1 style mobile application for the public to
submit complaints to AWM. This mobile application will
provide the public with increased ability to notify AWM of
their concerns. The application is being developed with the
APCD and PDS departments to enhance customer service.
(OE3)
? Ensure consumer confidence by tracking and reporting
compliance rates of Certified Farmers’ Markets and
Certified Producers.
? Design and develop a tracking tool in the Business Case
Management System to document the compliance
levels of Certified Farmers’ Markets and Certified
Producers and make results available to the public.
? Reduce the response time for customer inspection
requests by increasing customer electronic scheduling of
inspections.
? Conduct four outreach activities to engage and inform
industry of online opportunities to request export
certification and import inspections.
? Ensure superior, uninterrupted service delivery to our Agricultural
Water Quality program customers by creating a
standardized inspection procedure that inspectors will follow
for data entry/payment processing, inspection and
annual reporting.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Work towards full cost recovery of services in accordance
with Board Policy B-29, Fees, Grants, Revenue Contracts -
Department Responsibility for Cost Recovery while
continuously looking for opportunities to gain business
process efficiencies within our department and for our
customers. (OE1)
? Build the financial literacy of the workforce in order to promote
understanding and individual contribution to the
County’s fiscal stability
? Continue employee participation in financial literacy
classes offered by LUEG or County training to at least 15%
of staff, in order to increase our staff’s understanding of
their individual and collective contribution to the County’s
fiscal stability.
Pursue policy and program change for healthy, safe and thriving
environments to positively impact residents
? Collaborate with the Sherman Elementary School in the
City of San Diego, where installation of an APCD air quality
monitoring station is planned, to conduct an informational
event for students about the air quality management
program. This event will support clean air by creating early
awareness of the causes and effects of air pollution and
the importance of measuring air quality in a community
that is vulnerable to pollution exposure. (HF4)
? Collaborate with the Health and Human Services Agency
and other Live Well San Diego partners to develop a
program to encourage walking or bicycling. Encouraging
people to get out of their cars more often by walking or
bicycling can lead to improved individual health and
improved air quality. (HF4)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Expend at least 50% of the financial incentives from the
Carl Moyer Program, on a cumulative basis, for air quality
projects that benefit communities that are considered the
most vulnerable to pollution exposure, as identified by the
California Environmental Health Screening Tool. This
objective will help to protect the health of residents that
may be disproportionately affected by air pollution and
help communities to thrive. (SC3)
? Collaborate with the Department of Environmental Health
(DEH), Planning & Development Services, the cities, and
others to provide early identification of demolition or
renovation projects that may result in a disturbance of
asbestos-containing materials, and to enhance outreach
and community awareness of health-protective procedures
for handling such materials. Asbestos is commonly found in
building materials and, when disturbed, releases toxic
fibers that can be inhaled and cause lung cancer and other
diseases. Educating stakeholders and the community on
how to safely handle asbestos-containing materials will
contribute to protecting public health and maintain
communities that are safe and thriving. (SC3)
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Complete the development of a comprehensive air quality
plan to reduce ozone-forming emissions throughout the
county. This plan began in Fiscal Year 2015–16 and will provide
for the expeditious attainment of the 2008 national
standard (limit) for ozone, and the associated benefits to
public health and the environment, by no later than 2020.
? Provide incentive grants for projects that remove high
polluting vehicles and engines from service and reduce air
pollution emissions in the San Diego air basin by at least
230 tons per year. Reducing air pollution emissions
improves air quality to protect public health, the
environment, and helps our region thrive. (SE3)
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Conduct a comprehensive analysis of services provided to
the public and corresponding fees to provide those services,
and develop a cost recovery proposal that provides
for full and equitable cost recovery, maintenance of excellent
service levels, and compliance with federal and State
mandates for healthful air quality.
? Build the financial literacy of the workforce in order to promote
understanding and individual contribution to the
County's fiscal stability
? Continue employee participation in financial literacy
classes that are offered by LUEG or County training to at
least 15% of staff, in order to increase our staff’s
understanding of their individual and collective
contribution to the County’s fiscal stability.? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Deploy digital inspection forms for use by the APCD when
inspecting permitted facilities to verify compliance with air
quality regulations. These digital forms will streamline
inspections and reduce paper inspection forms, providing
more efficient service delivery. (OE3)
? Provide a new online process for permitted facilities to
submit notifications of air pollution control equipment
breakdowns. This online process will increase convenience
for permitted facilities that experience equipment
breakdowns, and improve the APCD's response times for
investigating breakdowns and ensuring corrective actions
are taken to minimize emission impacts. (OE3)
? Fully implement an online system for facilities to inventory
and report their emissions of criteria and toxic air pollutants.
This online system will replace a paper-based emissions
reporting system, improving customer service and reducing
the time and cost associated with submitting and processing
information that is used to assess and mitigate air pollution
impacts in neighboring communities. (OE3)
? Process 85% of all permit applications received, for
construction of new or modified facilities or equipment,
within 60 days of receipt of a complete application.
Surpassing (for the large majority of permit applications) a
90-day target and a 180-day deadline for processing permit
applications will help to minimize delays in the applicants'
project construction schedules and ensure a positive
customer experience. (OE3)
? Launch a LUEG 3-1-1 style mobile application for the public
to submit complaints to APCD. This mobile application will
provide the public with increased ability to notify APCD of
their concerns. The application is being developed with the
Agriculture, Weights and Measures (AWM) and the
Planning & Development Services (PDS) departments.
(OE3)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Enhance customer service by inviting two external
stakeholder groups to discuss their specific customer
service needs. Other LUEG departments that serve the
same customers will be invited to participate. This will
enable the development of strategies to deliver on
customer service needs and better ensure a positive
customer experience across departments. (OE5)
? Continue and expand departmental participation in “Team
LUEG” to leverage interdepartmental efforts in the areas of
workforce development; communication and outreach;
and customer and stakeholder focus. Team LUEG comprises
all LUEG departments and is aimed at providing a
“service before self” organization that works seamlessly
across departments to meet varying customer needs and
ensure a positive customer experience.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged, and trusted
? Maintain diversity and inclusion of staff as high priorities by
regularly discussing the importance of these values in staff
meetings at all levels of the department, by providing
quarterly staff trainings to enhance education and
awareness, by sustaining a workforce development team
that is open and promoted to every employee, and by
encouraging staff participation in employee resource
groups and informational events held by the Office of
Ethics and Compliance. Employees will feel valued,
engaged, and better prepared for career advancement
opportunities, and will be better prepared to maintain
exceptional service levels for the APCD's diverse
customers. 
The County makes health, safety and thriving a focus of all
policies and programs through internal and external collaboration
? According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) each year approximately one in six Americans
(or 48 million people) get sick, of these 128,000 are hospitalized,
and 3,000 die of foodborne diseases. The top five
major risk factors observed during routine retail food facility
inspections conducted in the San Diego region during
Fiscal Year 2014–15 were: improper holding temperatures,
food contact surfaces not clean and sanitized, hot or cold
potable water not available, improper cooling methods,
and the presence of vermin. DEH is committed to preventing
foodborne illness in the region through various food
safety program activities with the goal of reducing risk factor
violations that contribute to foodborne diseases by 5%
(95 of 1,903) in San Diego County during Fiscal Year 2016–
17. This goal will be supported by:
? Reviewing 100% of plans submitted for all new and
remodeled retail food facilities within an average of 10
business days.
? Ensuring that all types of retail food facilities in the
county are inspected at a minimum annually.
? Responding to 100% of reported foodborne illness
complaints within 3 business days.
? According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) in the past two decades, there has been a substantial
increase in the number of recreational water illness
outbreaks associated with swimming. Well maintained
public pools can reduce the risk of recreational water illness.
DEH is committed to preventing the risks associated
with the use of public pools in the county. Through its various
program activities, DEH has the goal of working with
pool operators to achieve a reduction of 5% (68 of 1,357) in
the number of pool closures due to serious health code
violations such as improper chlorine levels during Fiscal
Year 2016–17. This goal will be supported by:
? Reviewing 100% of plans submitted for all new and
remodeled public pools within an average of 10
business days.
? Responding to all public pool-related complaints within
three business days.
? Inspecting 100% of (4,069) public pools at a minimum
annually.
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Worldwide, nearly 4 million people die each year from
various mosquito-borne diseases. By monitoring and
reducing mosquito populations, DEH protects public health
and promotes an environment where residents can enjoy
parks, open spaces and other outdoor activities. In 2015,
there were 43 people in the San Diego region who were
diagnosed with West Nile Virus (including three “probable”
and 40 confirmed cases). The goal of DEH, in collaboration
with the County’s Health and Human Services Agency’s
Public Health Services, through the implementation of
various program activities, is to reduce the number of
people with probable or confirmed cases of locally
acquired mosquito-borne diseases to a level of less than 1
per 100,000 people. The state reports the disease levels (1
per 100,000 people) based on a calendar year frequency.
(SC3)
This goal will be supported by:
? Preventing sustained increases in mosquito populations through bi-weekly trapping during April and October.
? Routine monitoring, and application of larvicide
treatments if warranted, at known breeding sources at
a frequency in accordance with duration of active
ingredients.
? Conducting targeted outreach based on number of
calls, types of service requests and complaint type to
identify, reduce or eliminate mosquito breeding
sources.
? Responding to 100% of reported cases of mosquitoborne
disease within 24 hours of receiving notification
from Public Health Services.
? Implementing mosquito control within 48 hours of high
tide events at 100% of lagoons, estuaries, and refuges.
? With approximately 14,000 permitted Unified Program
facilities of hazardous materials handlers, hazardous and
medical waste generators, underground storage tanks,
aboveground storage of petroleum, DEH protects public
health and the environment from improper handling,
storage, and transportation of hazardous materials and the
illegal disposal of hazardous and medical wastes. (SC3)
This goal will be supported by:
? Identifing unpermitted facilities with hazardous
materials, hazardous waste and medical waste
throughout San Diego County to ensure safe
communities and consistent regulation of all facilities.
? Increasing the number of California Environmental
Reporting System (CERS) submittals for permitted
facilities in the Unified Program to 95% (13,034 of
13,720) by assisting facilities with submittals during
inspections or workshops, to provide accurate and
reliable information for first responders in the event of
an emergency.
? Increasing the overall compliance rate for facilities with
violations at or above 90% by tracking outstanding
violations and following up with facilities to ensure
effective implementation of the Unified Program.
? Notifying underground storage tank operators at least
one month prior to their annual certification date to
decrease the number of violations related to annual
underground storage tank monitoring certifications by
20% (53 to 42 violations) in order to prevent releases of
hazardous materials to the environment.
? DEH’s Small Drinking Water Systems program protects
public health by helping water system owners and
operators provide pure, safe and reliable drinking water by
preventing waterborne diseases, identifying risks of
bacteriological, chemical and/or radiological
contamination, conducting inspections, providing technical
assistance, and working in partnership with the small
drinking water systems in San Diego County, in response to
the California declared State of Emergency related to
prolonged drought conditions. DEH has a goal of requiring
drought management plans for all 162 DEH regulated small
public water systems by June 30, 2017. (SC3)
? Of the 162 DEH-regulated small public water systems,
81 plans were received in Fiscal Year 2015–16. The
remaining 81 plans will be submitted by June 30, 2017.
? Foster an environment where residents engage in recreational
interests by enjoying parks, open spaces and outdoor
experiences
? Our beaches are a precious natural resource to those that
live and visit San Diego County. Poor water quality at our
beaches not only threatens the health of swimmers and
beachgoers but also hurts San Diego’s ocean-dependent
economy. DEH protects the public health of millions of
residents and visitors each year through beach water
testing, public education, outreach, and beach postings.
Beach postings can include water contact advisories and
closures when necessary. A goal of DEH is to provide the
public access to beach water quality information that is
reliable, quickly understandable, and available 24/7 to
enable the public to make informed decisions about when
it is safe to enter the water. (SE5)
This goal will be supported by:
? Monitoring the County’s beaches to protect public
health and warn the public when water quality may
cause illness by sampling and analyzing data from 45
locations weekly (April 1 – October 31) and at 16 high
risk sites weekly (November 1 – March 31).
? Increasing the annual web traffic on the Beach and Bay
Water Quality web page by 100% (100,000 to 200,000
web hits).
? Providing 10 recreational water quality training classes
each year to surfing or other ocean sports enthusiasts,
personnel of local military bases, and environmental
groups including children attending surf camps or other
summer camps (e.g., junior lifeguard programs). The
trainings will enable these groups to make informed
decisions about where and when it is safe to enter the
water and how to find current information regarding
local beach water quality.
? Leading a multi-disciplinary stakeholder workgroup to
develop a rapid beach water quality testing method for
use in California. Develop a beach vetting process and
gain approval for the rapid testing method to be used at
San Diego County beaches by April 1, 2017. The beach
vetting process is required to ensure that rapid beach
water quality testing methods are equivalent to existing
testing methods and protective of public health.
Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? DEH will increase innovation by adding eForm technology
to at least one additional program, and improve data
quality, customer service and program operations. (OE3)
? DEH will increase public access to information online and
meeting customer requests for information ensuring
consistency, transparency and customer confidence by
providing instant online access to over 200,000 hazardous
waste site clean-up case files and monitoring well permit
files to save time and reduce costs to the public and staff.
(OE4)
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Work towards full cost recovery of our services in
accordance with Board Policy B-29, Fees, Grants, Revenue
Contracts - Department Responsibility for Cost Recovery
while continuously looking for opportunities to gain
business process efficiencies within our department and
for our customers. (OE1)
? Build the financial literacy of the workforce in order to promote
understanding and individual contribution to the
County's fiscal stability
? Continue employee participation in financial literacy
classes that are offered by LUEG or County training to at
least 15% of staff, in order to increase our staff’s
understanding of their individual and collective
contribution to the County’s fiscal stability. (OE2)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Continue and expand departmental participation in “Team
LUEG” to leverage interdepartmental efforts in the areas of
workforce development; communication and outreach;
and customer and stakeholder focus. Team LUEG comprises
all LUEG departments and is aimed at providing a
“service before self” organization that works seamlessly
across departments to meet varying customer needs and
ensure a positive customer experience.
Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Conduct nutrition education for 500 low-income families
with children to reduce the risk of childhood obesity and
chronic diseases such as diabetes, heart disease and high
blood pressure through lifestyle change related to diet and
physical activity residents with local food sources, nutrition
education, and nutrition assistance. (HF2)
? Conduct nutrition education for 2,000 children and youth
from low income and limited resource families to promote
nutrition and physical activity for a healthy lifestyle that
can reduce the risk of childhood obesity and chronic
diseases such as diabetes and heart disease. (HF2)
? Disseminate science-based food safety information to
consumers on issues including home food preservation.
(HF2)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Recruit and train 350 adult and teen 4-H volunteers to
deliver positive youth development experiences to youth
ages 5–19 years which will enable youth to reach their full
potential as competent, confident leaders of character who
contribute and are connected to their communities. (SC1)
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Provide business and risk management education to
agricultural producers in areas such as financial
management, food safety, and business management
through a minimum of two outreach activities to the
agricultural community. (SE1)
? Conduct research projects on high-density avocado
plantings to maintain the viability and profitability of
avocado production in San Diego County. (SE1)
? Assist families in achieving and maintaining financial selfsufficiency
through household savings and debt reduction
through a minimum of two outreach activities to San
Diego County residents, various agencies, and other
cooperators. (SE1)
? Expand market opportunities for agricultural producers in
San Diego County through agricultural tourism, direct marketing,
and value added activities to assist with increasing
business confidence by conducting four outreach activities
to agricultural producers.
Develop and implement a new a training program for
returning and disabled veterans on agricultural production
systems, entrepreneurship, and business management
using different knowledge transfer strategies. Collaborate
with sustainable food systems stakeholders as well as veteran
groups and agriculture support groups.
? Support the development and updating of agricultural
related policies, legislation and regulations, technical
research and analysis, providing subject matter expertise
and/or participating in briefings and public hearings.
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Provide residents and the agricultural community concrete
ways or methods to reduce water usage and/or Total Maximum
Daily Load (TMDL) impacts through a minimum of
four outreach activities.
? Identify threats to aquatic and riparian ecosystems from
pollution, invasive species, and climate change and provide
a minimum of three outreach activities to residents and
other collaborators providing concrete ways to reduce
these threats to riparian ecosystems.
? Identify problems and potential solutions for endemic and
invasive pests such as insects, diseases, weeds, etc. impacting
San Diego agriculture, nursery, ornamental horticultural
and landscapes though a minimum of four outreach
activities to nursery and ornamental horticulture growers,
residents and agricultural community members.
? Maintain, support and manage the volunteer Master Gardener
program to provide research-based information in
the areas of home gardening, community gardening, landscaping,
water conservation and pest management to San
Diego County residents through a minimum of 400 office
consultations, 10 educational exhibits and 4,000 hours of
volunteer service.
? Encourage adoption of local research-derived invasive
plant management methods to enhance restoration of natural
habitats. Collaborate with Department of Parks and
Recreation to encourage management or eradication of
invasive plants through outreach activities and utilize largescale
field demonstrations.
? Educate natural land owners, managers and staff on appropriate
invasive plant control methods through a minimum of
five outreach activities including presentations
Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to individuals’ needs
? Partner with four military assistance organizations to create
programs that provide a therapeutic component through
outdoor recreational or work experiences for active and
retired members of the military and their families.
? Pursue policy and program change for healthy, safe and thriving
environments to positively impact residents
? Ensure new parks will meet active living standards for
healthy communities and provide added flexibility to
developers by incorporating best practices and a developer
tool box in the recommendations for the Park Lands
Dedication Ordinance update which will create healthy
spaces for recreation that engage nearby residents. (HF4)
? Leverage internal communication through resource groups
and social media to enhance employee understanding of the
County’s Live Well San Diego vision
? Improve employee wellness through increased
engagement in Live Well San Diego. (HF5)
? Encourage employee participation in Live Well San
Diego by hosting at least four fitness/wellness-based
events serving a minimum of 200 individuals through a
partnership with the Department of Human Resources
and County Employee Resource Groups.
? Promote wellness opportunities available at County
parks by publishing a minimum of 22 features through
internal and external communication platforms such as
County Insite, DPR Dispatch, Live Well newsletter, DPR
e-newsletter, Facebook, and Twitter.
? Encourage and promote residents to take important and
meaningful steps to protect themselves and their families for
the first 72 hours during a disaster
? Increase County and resident disaster readiness by
partnering with the Office of Emergency Services (OES) to
provide essential resources. (SC1)
? Collaborate with the OES to establish Local Assistance
Centers at three DPR facilities for use in the event of a
disaster.
? Partner with the OES to offer a community event
featuring disaster preparedness information and
resources.
? Improve DPR’s disaster readiness by developing a
departmentwide crisis communication plan using the
existing plans and procedures outlined by OES and the
County Communications Office to establish response
protocols for various threats.
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Improve quality of life for all residents through the planning,
construction, and maintenance of safe, healthy, and
inclusionary amenities throughout the park system. (SC1)
? Improve accessibility for users of all abilities by
implementing phase one of the DPR ADA Transition
Plan to construct improvements at three County parks.
? Modernize park infrastructure at two campgrounds in
order to improve the visitor experience and expand
services to those with contemporary recreational
vehicles.
? Support the physical and social benefits of active play
for visitors of all abilities by installing a fully inclusive
playground that will be co-located with the existing
Miracle Field at San Dieguito Park.
? Enhance the safety of trail users through the removal of
dead trees due to drought or disease along two miles of
high use trails in the Tijuana River Valley Regional Park.
? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse
? Foster positive youth development by creating five additional
recreation programs for a minimum of 50 youth that
increase physical, intellectual, social and emotional skills.
? Leverage partnerships to support and enhance strategies
to improve public safety and reduce recidivism. (SC6)
? Provide opportunities for inmates to gain marketable
landscaping skills to reduce recidivism by partnering
with the Sheriff’s CIVICS Greenhouse program to
cultivate native plants and trees for restoration projects
at seven park facilities.
? Improve public safety by expanding the Uniform Bike
Program in partnership with the Sheriff’s Department
to obtain additional bikes and maintenance services at
no cost enabling increased ranger patrols on trails and
maintaining high visibility at five parks.
Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Promote an environment where communities can prosper
and residents can enjoy parks, open spaces, clean air and
water, and outdoor experiences.
? Improve air and water quality, control flooding, provide
habitat for wildlife, and continue the no net loss tree
program by planting a minimum of 200 mature trees
with deep root drip irrigation systems and soil moisture
sensors.
? Increase awareness and reporting of invasive tree pests
by partnering with Agriculture, Weights and Measures,
UCCE (formerly Farm and Home Advisor), and regional
partners to distribute educational pamphlets to more
than 150 locations including Community Centers,
Recreational Centers, County and city Libraries, and
Family Resource Centers.
? Improve water quality at Lindo Lake by installing
pollution prevention measures through a partnership
with the Department of General Services which will
decrease harmful sediment and pollutants reaching the
lake.
? Increase park sustainability and reduce the carbon footprint
of facilities by continuing to implement energy efficiency
and water conservation measures through early
identification of infrastructure issues, and the construction
and installation of artificial turf, wells, and photovoltaic
systems.
? Continue regional leadership in land management, responsible
stewardship, preservation education and biological
monitoring of open space preserves while meeting recreational
needs.
? Protect and preserve the region’s natural resources
through our commitment to an exceptional park
system by acquiring acres for conservation and
recreation, effectively managing 49,173 acres of
parkland, and responsible stewardship of 374 miles of
trails. The Board of Supervisors adopted in 1997 the
Multiple Species Conservation Program (MSCP). The
County has provided various levels of ongoing funding
since 1997 and since Fiscal Year 2008–09, the annual
amount to fund the MSCP program has been $10.0
million ($2.5 million from General Purpose Revenue
and $7.5 million from General Fund fund balance).
? Protect biological and cultural resources by completing
Resource Management Plans for two DPR preserves
ensuring conservation efforts are appropriately
prioritized.
? Ensure open spaces are thriving by implementing
comprehensive monitoring in ten preserves which
include species specific surveys (plant, animal, and
habitat) and implementation of adaptive management.
? Foster an environment where residents engage in recreational
interests by enjoying parks, open spaces and outdoor
experiences
? Sustain the natural environment by providing exceptional
parks, open space, trails, programs, and recreational
opportunities for all residents and educate the public on
how to preserve these resources. (SE5)
? Expand the use of DPR programs in elementary schools
by aligning DPR environmental education curriculum
with Next Generation Science standards to develop
youth with a sense of stewardship.
? Foster nature engagement, environmental education,
and physical fitness in youth and maintain the national
lead in number of participants through the expansion
of the Track Trails Program at two additional parks, to
serve over 4,000 youth.
? Enhance community engagement by increasing
participation by 10% in DPR organized or co-sponsored
special events that activate public spaces.
? Engage communities and property owners in efforts to
connect regional trails by acquiring land and easements
that will link at least two segments in the County trails
program.
? Continue efforts to create a contiguous trail system
through the San Luis Rey River Park through two
acquisitions to enhance public access.
? Plan a balanced trail system in the east Otay area by
working with stakeholders and identifying possible key
connections to regional and community trails.
? Encourage the responsible use of resources and
promote protection of the natural environment by
educating the public through four presentations on
conservation and ecological concerns.
? Continue to protect natural habitat and preserve
biological value of open space while providing public
access for recreation in the Escondido Creek Preserve
by opening trail systems previously closed to the public.
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and find solutions
to current and future challenges
? Instill a sense of civic responsibility and connection to the
environment by partnering with County departments (San
Diego County Library, Health and Human Services Agency
and others), County employee resource groups and public
agencies to engage 1,000 youth and their families in
volunteer events, interpretive programs, and special
events.
Build the financial literacy of the workforce in order to promote
understanding and individual contribution to the
County's fiscal stability
? Continue employee participation in financial literacy
classes offered by LUEG or County training to at least 15%
of staff, in order to increase our staff’s understanding of
their individual and collective contribution to the County’s
fiscal stability. (OE2)
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Leverage strategic partnerships with five local organizations
to provide donations of services and supplies that
enhance customer experience and increase participation at
special events in order to maintain fiscal stability and
improve service delivery.
? Conserve financial resources by using volunteers to support
parks and facilities resulting in annual cost savings of
$2.4 million.
? Provide a modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resource to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Improve efficiency and service delivery to customers
through the implementation of a comprehensive asset
inventory (Accela) and an integrated internal work order
system resulting in improved strategic forecasting of
equipment and maintenance needs. (OE3)
? Protect the value of existing park infrastructure through an
annual $3.0 million ($2.0 million ongoing General Purpose
Revenue and $1.0 million of DPR resources) major maintenance
program to ensure high quality park amenities.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Reinforce strong departmental customer service skills by
presenting the HEART (Helpfulness, Expertise,
Attentiveness, Respect, Timeliness) approach to service
delivery at an all-employee event. (OE5)
? Continue and expand departmental participation in “Team
LUEG” to leverage interdepartmental efforts in the areas of
workforce development; communication and outreach;
and customer and stakeholder focus. Team LUEG comprises
all LUEG departments and is aimed at providing a
“service before self” organization that works seamlessly
across departments to meet varying customer needs and
ensure a positive customer experience.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, diverse workforce by
providing opportunities for our employees to feel valued,
engaged and trusted
? Develop a dynamic and innovative workforce through the
delivery of a Ranger Academy series comprised of best
practices, current trends, operational knowledge, and
functional threading opportunities to a minimum of 50 fulltime
staff.
Pursue policy and program change for healthy, safe and thriving
environments to positively impact residents
? Continue to improve knowledge, processes and functional
threading to plan, design and maintain livable, sustainable
and healthy communities within the unincorporated areas
of San Diego County. Specifically, PDS will work with other
departments throughout the County, including departments
within Health & Human Services Agency, to share
best practices with a goal of improving overall land use programs
and processes to positively impact residents within
the unincorporated county.
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Create opportunities for safe access to places that provide
community connection and engagement through the
Active Transportation Plan that will assist in prioritizing
pedestrian sidewalk gaps in proximity to community
facilities and further improve bike and trail pathways
within the county.
Ensure high quality safe communities are achieved through
the discretionary permit review process that balances
community, economic and environmental interests.
? Reduce risks to lives by ensuring buildings and improvements
are designed and constructed in accordance with
building safety codes. This includes reviewing building
plans, explaining code requirements to customers, and
conducting building inspections.
? Improve public health and safety by: (SC3)
? Resolving 40% of debris and waste complaints within
six months of initial notice to the property owner.
? Ensuring strong functional threading through
participation on the Land Use and Environment Group
Compliance Team.
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Ensure ongoing customer and stakeholder engagement
through proactive outreach, regular stakeholder and
industry group meetings and continuous communication
through a variety of formats in order to anticipate
customer expectations and demands. (SE2)
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Promote water quality through implementation of the new
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4) Permit.
? Collaborate with other Departments to implement the
new MS4 permit.
? Develop new and update existing building permit
processes and forms to comply with the new MS4
permit.
? Train staff in Building, Code Compliance, Land
Development and Project Planning divisions on the
new MS4 permit requirements.
? Conduct customer and stakeholder outreach regarding
the new MS4 permit requirements.
? Improve the efficiency of land use programs that guide the
physical development of land within the unincorporated
areas of San Diego County through a balance of growth
and conservation while collaborating with communities.
? Complete the North County MSCP program for Board of
Supervisors consideration in Fiscal Year 2017–18.
? Improve customer service by increasing consistency and
ease of interpretation of County Planning policy documents
through periodic updates to the San Diego County
General Plan.
? Complete biennial General Plan Clean Up by Winter
2016.
? Present recommended land use designations that
incorporate the now expired Forest Conservation
Initiative lands into the General Plan by Fall 2016.
? Complete updates to two community plans to improve
consistency and thread the community plans to the
General Plan’s goals and policies in Fiscal Year 2017–18.
? Protect the environment and preserve community character
through the efficient application of planning, engineering
and environmental regulations in the management of
land development permit applications for discretionary
projects.
? Continue implementation of the PACE program, which
supports the local agriculture industry and the
preservation of community character, with a goal of
preserving 230 additional acres.
? Promote green building, including sustainable building
practices, renewable energy and energy efficiency through
streamlined permit processing.
? Promote renewable energy generation in the
unincorporated areas of the county through the plan
check and inspection of solar system capacity of 50,000
kilowatts. This is enough energy to power roughly
5,300 California homes.
? Launch at least one major community outreach event
to promote local energy efficiency and conservation
programs.
? Continue drafting the updated Climate Action Plan,
including stakeholder outreach and engagement.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Provide adequate resources to customers through fiscal
discipline and dedication to operational excellence.
? Implement a process for the tracking of housing for
entitled discretionary projects to support General Plan
annual reporting and ensure adequate housing supply
for residents in the unincorporated areas of the county.
? Manage workload and staffing levels by balancing land
development market fluctuations with fiscal and
customer service stability.
? Work towards full cost recovery of our services in
accordance with Board Policy B-29, Fees, Grants,
Revenue Contracts - Department Responsibility for Cost
Recovery while continuously looking for opportunities
to gain business process efficiencies within our
department and for our customers.
? Build the financial literacy of the workforce in order to promote
understanding and individual contribution to the
County's fiscal stability
? Continue employee participation in financial literacy
classes offered by LUEG or County training to at least 15%
of staff, in order to increase our staff’s understanding of
their individual and collective contribution to the County’s
fiscal stability.
Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Use new technology to improve customer service and gain
efficiencies. (OE3)
? Develop project schedules through the use of current
technologies which will improve the accuracy of
discretionary project forecasting.
? Create an automated report tool to be utilized when
scoping discretionary permit applications.
? Develop online tools that allow customers to complete
applications online, reducing the time they spend at
County offices. Specifically, a tool wil be developed and
implemented for online permit renewals.
? Launch a 3-1-1 style mobile application for the public to
submit complaints for PDS Code Compliance cases. This
mobile application will provide the public with increased
ability to notify PDS of their concerns. The application is
being developed with the Air Pollution Control District and
the Agriculture, Weights and Measures departments and
will enhance customer service. (OE3)
? Collaborate in the implementation of the Land Use and
Environment Group Enterprise Asset Management
System (LEAMS) and integrated asset management
system with geographic information system (GIS) maps
for public access.
? Continue development of the performance management
program, and when applicable provide information access
to all customers ensuring consistency, transparency and
customer confidence. (OE4)
? Create automated reports for monitoring and tracking
performance in the Project Planning and Code
Compliance divisions.
? Expand the discipline of publishing results on the public
facing website by adding results for the Land
Development division.
? Through the application of proactive case and project
management principles and techniques, achieve the
PDS target time standards for processing land
development projects. Target time standards are
available to the public on the external PDS website.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Ensure a positive customer experience by: (OE5)
? Maintaining an average Permit Center wait time of 20
minutes.
? Maintaining an average Permit Center counter
transaction time of 30 minutes.
? Maintaining an average turnaround time of 15 days for
the first review of residential building plans.
? Continue departmentwide focus on improving customer
service. (OE5)
? Participate in the Customer Experience Initiative.
? Through the application of organizational change
processes, establish functioning teams that balance
PDS workload, promote a sustainable work
environment and improve customer service by
streamlining the discretionary permit process.
? Develop a public engagement strategy that
demonstrates key milestones in project processing and
identifies when public engagement should occur with
multiple customers and stakeholders.
? Develop customer and stakeholder outreach materials
to communicate the overall land development process.
? Increase the number of cases closed through voluntary
compliance by 10%, thus increasing customer satisfaction
and reducing customer cost.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Implement the PDS Workforce Development Program, that
includes participating in LUEG-wide Workforce
Development programs, to cultivate, retain and attract a
workforce that has the skills, talent and commitment to
achieve organizational excellence. (OE6)
? Continue deployment of a follow-up Case & Project
Management training tailored to specific processes and
functions within PDS.
? Identify opportunities for the Team LUEG Workforce
Development subgroup to collaborate with the
Diversity and Inclusion Champions to create and
implement training and/or engagement programs for
LUEG staff.
Every resident has the opportunity to make positive healthy
choices that reduce preventable deaths
? Increase opportunities for bicycles and pedestrian safety by
incorporating appropriate bike and pedestrian facilities in
100% of road capacity improvements (projects that widen
road or add lanes or features to handle increased traffic
volume).
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? To prevent health risks to the public and protect the
environment, operate the sanitary sewer system with zero
Sanitary Sewer Overflows (SSO) that reach surface waters
or exceed 1,000 gallons. (SC1)
? Clean 390 miles of 12 inch diameter sewer lines to
prevent overflows from clogs.
? Inspect 25 miles of targeted sewer mains within the
sewer system via closed-circuit TV to identify sewer
defects and facilitate proactive repairs to the
infrastructure.
? Ensure that County bridges are safe for public use. (SC1)
? To provide for public safety, ensure 100% of eligible
County bridges are budgeted for repair or replacement
in the Federal Highway Bridge Program to ensure timely
construction and maintain the confidence of the
traveling public.
? Working with law enforcement and other agencies, road
maintenance crews will ensure safe, open roads within 24
hours of an emergency 100% of the time by implementing
immediate responses to inclement weather, roadway hazards
and natural disasters.
? Maintain County roadway infrastructure in good condition
(by keeping our average Pavement Condition Index at 70 or
higher) to provide for reduced impact to vehicles,
enhanced roadway safety, and improved transportation
facilities for our customers.
? To ensure that public and privately-initiated development
projects within the County adhere to the latest engineering
standards for safe and proper drainage design, staff will
develop and make available online a Hydrology Manual
guidance document.
? Sustain an efficient inspection and maintenance program
that achieves a 95% runway availability rate at the County's
five largest airports which support emergency responders,
local, regional and international businesses and aviators.
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention, and strategic planning
? Engage businesses, residents and County staff to promote
clean water so that by the end of 2017, water quality
would be improved by achieving a 10% reduction in urban
runoff (pollution) into County storm drains that continually
flow during dry weather (meaning they are not caused by
rain, but human activity, e.g., car washing, lawn watering,
etc. (SE2)
? To enhance the environment and improve water quality in
the region, perform stormwater inspections using highly
skilled and certified staff to ensure permit compliance
during the construction phase on 100% of private
development and capital improvement projects. (SE2)
? Protect a sustainable watershed by improving the health of
local waters and minimizing downstream pollutants. (SE2)
? To keep debris from entering county waterways and
prevent flooding, road crews will remove 25,000 cubic
yards of debris from culverts, drainage channels and
roads through a systematic cleaning program.
? To improve knowledge about ways to prevent water
pollution, ensure a 70% average score on post-tests
administered to high school students following
watershed education presentations.
? Provide Qualified Stormwater Pollution Prevention
Program (SWPPP) Practitioner (QSP) or Qualified
SWPPP Developer (QSD) training to 100% of privatelyinitiated
construction inspection staff to equip staff
with the necessary knowledge to assure compliance
with stormwater permit requirements on private
construction projects.
? Ensure 100% permit compliance with stormwater
regulations at all DPW Capital Improvement Program
(CIP) construction sites.
? To protect public health and the environment at closed
landfills and burn sites, operate an inspection and maintenance
program that results in zero notices of violation.
? Provide monitoring through monthly inspections at
each of the closed landfill and burn sites, and track
notices of violation.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
customers
? Maintain an effective map checking system to provide
100% map reviews and comments within 20 working days
for professional submittals of Records of Survey and Corner
Records, to provide for planning, development,
infrastructure and services that strengthen the local
economy and increase consumer and business confidence.
(OE4)
? Provide adequate resources to customers through fiscal
discipline and dedication to ensure operational excellence.
? Create a five year workplan for each of the 68
Permanent Road Divisions to analyze the adequacy of
funding for future maintenance.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Work towards full cost recovery of our services in
accordance with Board Policy B-29, Fees, Grants, Revenue
Contracts - Department Responsibility for Full Cost
Recovery while continuously looking for opportunities to
gain business process efficiencies within our department
and for our customers. (OE2)
? Build the financial literacy of the workforce in order to promote
understanding and individual contribution to the
County's fiscal stability
? Continue employee participation in financial literacy
classes that are offered by LUEG or the County training to
at least 15% of staff, in order to increase our staff’s
understanding of their individual and collective
contribution to the County’s fiscal stability. (OE2)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Embrace opportunities through Team LUEG to develop our
workforce through trainings, mentoring and by other
means to help employees grow.
? Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to individuals’ needs
? Participate in a minimum of one veterans and one homeless
event per year
? Promote and conduct a minimum of two vaccination, licensing
and microchip clinics in the department’s top underserved
areas per year in collaboration with those
communities and external partners.
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Ensure that 0% of treatable animals that come into our
shelter are euthanized by providing medical care when
resources allow and placing animals with rescue partners
or adopters. (SC3)
? Achieve a goal of 0% euthanasia of any healthy, friendly
animal by reuniting lost pets with their owner or through
adoption to a new family. (SC3)
? Respond to 96% of patrol calls on time according to
department protocols. (SC3)
? Create procedures, evaluate best practices and implement
the ICE Black Box phone app to investigate suspected
incidents of crimes against animals. 
Partner with the Department of Human Resources to
implement an enterprisewide online training to increase
staff awareness of safety during animal encounters. (SC3)
? Ensure that 80% of an estimated 25,000 sheltered dogs and
cats are reunited with their owner or adopted into a new
home.
? All San Diego youth are protected from crime, neglect and
abuse
? Create a dog bite prevention education video for
distribution to at-risk communities. (SC6)
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges
? Form a Volunteer Program Action Team to implement
business process improvements to enhance the DAS
Volunteer Program and increase volunteer and staff
engagement. (SE6)
? Collaborate with the Registrar of Voters to include DAS
advertisements in the sample ballot for the November 8,
2016 Presidential General Election. (SE6)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service and delivery
to our customers
? Support the procurement and implementation of Phase 1
capital improvements of the County Animal Shelter, Bonita.
(OE3)
? Research and select a vendor to implement electronic field
payments. (OE3)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Ensure customers are provided with superior services by
being responsive, professional, courteous, attentive and
knowledgeable; achieve a customer satisfaction rating of
4.72 (on a scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “excellent”). (OE5)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Conduct a department training needs assessment and
create an annual training program for staff and volunteers
for professional development and consistency in core
competencies.

Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Support the County of San Diego’s Live Well San Diego
Building Better Health initiative by offering more than
20,000 free summer meals to youth under the age of 18 in
high-need neighborhoods during the summer months.
(HF2)
? Support the County of San Diego’s Live Well San Diego
Building Better Health Initiative by offering more than 325
healthy lifestyle programs for all ages every month. (HF2)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Provide students and families a safe place for the pursuit of
education and constructive civic engagement in support of
the County’s Live Well San Diego Living Safely initiative by
offering an average of 300 after-school programs each
month.
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges
? Provide relevant adult programs that promote lifelong
learning and civic engagement by serving more than
150,000 participants.
? Ensure that collections and library materials are current and
relevant to meeting the needs and interests of a dynamic
community by obtaining the planned annual average circulation
of 7.0 times per item.
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Meet the informational, recreational and cultural needs of
the community and actively promote reading and lifelong
learning by ensuring the public has access to library
resources and services and that the SDCL has the capacity to
meet these goals.
? Maintain the planned schedule of library operations.
? Provide virtual library services that are available and
relevant such as e-books, audio downloads, video
downloads and access to premium databases.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Implement a software upgrade in preparation for a new
hosted Integrated Library System (Library’s database)
which will provide faster and more reliable library services
to customers. (OE3)
? Update the Library’s website to maximize customer
usability and access to the library collection and visiting
authors. (OE4)
? Capture and tell SDCL’s stories by highlighting branch
Signature Events through publicity, media coverage, and
photography. (OE4)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Ensure customers are provided with quality programs that
are current, relevant, and engaging by achieving an
average customer satisfaction rating of 4.75 or higher (on a scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “excellent”) for SDCL programs.
(OE5)
? Ensure customers are provided with superior services by
being responsive to customers’ needs, professional, courteous,
attentive and knowledgeable by achieving an average
customer satisfaction rating of 4.60 or higher (on a scale of
1 to 5, with 5 being “excellent”).
Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Provide time-critical (24/7) maintenance response to
emergency requests involving life and safety issues or
those posing an imminent risk to County assets and
infrastructure, by responding to and initiating corrective
action for 100% (1,500) of all emergency requests within 4
hours of notification. (SC3)
? Support client departments in their public safety efforts.
? Maintain availability of County-supported fire
apparatus at 87% (71 of 82). ? Ensure maximum availability of law enforcement patrol
vehicles at 95% (527 of 555).
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Improve County operations through sustainability efforts
such as energy conservation, potable water conservation,
use of alternative energy generation systems, continuing to
require green building design for all new facilities and major
renovations, and through recycling.
? Reduce annual building energy use intensity by 1.5%,
comparing Fiscal Year 2016–17 to Fiscal Year 2015–16.
? Prepare greenhouse gas inventories of County
operations for calendar years 2016 and 2017. Achieve a
1% reduction in total greenhouse gas emissions each
year compared to the prior calendar year.
? Continue to incorporate the strategies of the Green
Fleet Action plan into the annual vehicle replacement
planning process to reduce the County's vehicle-related
greenhouse gas emissions.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Maximize postage discounts by bar coding a minimum of
98% (5,500,000 of 5,600,000) of all presort business letters.
? Monitor leases on County-owned property ensuring rents
are paid within 30 days of due date for 97% (218 of 224) of
the leases.
? Build the financial literacy of the workforce in order to promote
understanding and individual contribution to the
County's fiscal stability
? Assign online financial literacy course to all front line fiscal
staff to be completed by June 30, 2017. (OE2)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Complete 96% (26,500 of 27,600) of targeted preventive
maintenance activities to maximize the operational
efficiency of County assets/infrastructure, as well as
maintain or prolong the design life of these systems. (OE3)
? Coordinate with the San Diego County Fire Authority to
install an appropriate level of fueling infrastructure at
various rural fire stations throughout the county to ensure
access to fuel for fire apparatus and support vehicles.
(OE3)
? Support client departments in relocating to more efficient
facilities located in areas that provide optimal service to
customers. (OE3)
? Relocate the Probation Department from the aging
Ohio Street Office in San Diego to newer facilities with
potential co-location opportunities with other County
departments.
? Relocate Sheriff’s Court Services from the San Diego
Office to either a new leased facility or County-owned
property in downtown San Diego by Spring 2017.
? Relocate HHSA Child Welfare Services from the aging
County-owned North Central Facility at 6950 Levant
Street, San Diego, to a new leased facility by December
31, 2016.
? Relocate the Department of Child Support Services
from downtown San Diego into various offices
throughout the county to better align service locations
to client needs.
? Complete 95% (7,745 of 8,153) of vehicle preventive maintenance
actions in order to maximize vehicle life cycle.
? Complete the construction of the new COC Crime Lab and
Evidence Warehouse in summer 2018.
? Complete the construction of the new Imperial Beach
Library.
? Advertise and award the design-build contract for the construction
of the new Pine Valley Fire Station by fall 2016.
? Advertise and award the design-build contract for the construction
of the new Santa Ysabel Nature Center in summer
2016 for completion in early 2018.
? Advertise and award the design-build contract for the construction
of a new Assessor/Recorder/County Clerk East
County Operations and Archive Facility in Summer 2016 to
replace the current County facility, for completion in fall
2018.
? Advertise and award the design-build contract for construction
of the 4S Ranch Library expansion by 2017.
? Advertise and award the design-build contract for construction
of the South County Animal Shelter in Bonita (Phase I)
by 2017.
? Complete site search and land acquisition for the Lakeside
Library by Fall 2016.
Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to those individuals who have been affected
by traumatic circumstances
? Enhance the HOME Tenant-based Rental Assistance programs
for youth aging-out of the foster care system and
families with children that are participants of the County’s substance abuse treatment programs, by serving up to 50
participants with the addition of a new security and utility
deposit assistance component, eliminating a potential barrier
to accessing permanent housing.
? In cooperation with HHSA and community stakeholders,
play a leadership role in the expansion of the CAHP system
from the downtown and north county areas to the broader
San Diego region. The CAHP system matches persons experiencing
homelessness with appropriate housing.
? Actively participate in Opening Doors, a regional initiative
under the direction of the RCCC targeting chronic homeless
and veterans, by providing leadership to the Opening Doors
Committee and staff support to Regional Continuum of Care
subcommittees.
? Assist individuals and families experiencing homelessness to
obtain stable housing.
? Provide permanent housing for up to 300 eligible
homeless applicants who have been referred by the San
Diego County Continuum of Care or CAHP system who
either meet the definition of homeless or who are
exiting federally-assisted housing programs with no
other permanent housing placement options.
? Provide rental assistance to permanently house up to
526 homeless veterans through the VASH program.
Utilization of these vouchers is dependent upon HCD
receiving referrals from the U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs.
? Provide VASH security and utility deposit assistance
(funded through the Emergency Solutions Grant) to up
to 15 participants, eliminating a potential barrier to
accessing permanent housing.
? Reduce the time veterans with VASH vouchers search
for housing from 60 days to 30 days or less, as well as
locate units to house up to 200 veterans experiencing
homelessness by implementing a program that offers
targeted incentives to area landlords who rent to
homeless veterans.
? Provide permanent housing for up to 100 severely
mentally ill applicants experiencing homelessness
referred by HHSA Behavioral Health Services.
? The County makes health, safety and thriving a focus of all
policies and programs through internal and external collaboration
? Assist families working towards achieving self-sufficiency
? Offer a Live Well Service Plan to 100% of new selfsufficiency
program participants to develop personal
goals in the areas of health, safety, and thriving.
? Provide 18 competitive academic scholarships annually
to heads of household and/or their children who have
established five year family self-sufficiency goals in
academic or vocational self-sufficiency or who reside in
Public Housing.
? Provide first-time homebuyer loans to 45 households
through the regional HOME Consortium Homebuyer Downpayment
and Closing Cost Assistance (DCCA) Program,
which offers low-interest deferred payment loans for qualified
low-income, first-time homebuyers.
? Proactively support fair housing rights and advocate against
discriminatory housing practices.
? Participate in at least four regional fair housing forums
and meetings.
? Publish quarterly educational articles on the topic of
fair housing on the department website, through social
media and newsletters.
? Conduct outreach activities related to national Fair
Housing month, celebrated in April of each year.
? Pursue policy change for healthy, safe and thriving environments
with a special focus on residents who are in our care or
rely on us for support
? Update the County’s Home Repair program to ensure at
least half of the applicants pulled from the program waitlist
are elderly or disabled. In many cases, improvements
funded through this program include ADA, universal design
modifications, or other repairs that allow elderly or
disabled residents to remain in their homes and/or
continue to live independently. (HF4)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Provide information regarding funding opportunities for
affordable housing and community revitalization available
through federal entitlement programs at six community
outreach activities. Community outreach activities could
include online presentations, meetings with community
groups, and participation at community events. (SC2)
? Promote crime-free communities by collaborating with
local police departments and renewing annual Crime-Free
Multifamily Housing Program certificates at the five
Housing Authority-owned residential properties. (SC3)
? Provide Home Repair Assistance to 40 low-income homeowners
and mobile home owners residing in the Urban
County for critical health and safety improvements, accessibility
improvements, and/or other necessary rehabilitation.
The Urban County includes unincorporated communities of
the county and the cities of Coronado, Del Mar, Imperial
Beach, Lemon Grove, Poway and Solana Beach.
? Conduct 100% of required inspections (approximately
7,000) of units assisted through the Rental Assistance Division
and ensure that these units are decent, safe and sanitary,
in accordance with HUD-required Housing Quality
Standards.
Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Assist families to secure safe, decent and affordable
housing through rental assistance subsidies by using 100%
of the anticipated annual funding allocation. Funding
allocation for Fiscal Year 2016–17 is projected to be $99
million. Rental subsidies provide stable housing, creating a
healthy environment and improved opportunities for
families. (OE1)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Support the development of the ConnectWellSD system
and integration of HCD data where permissible. The new
system will link data and participant information from
multiple departments across multiple programs and
improve customer service. (OE3)
? Complete renovation of the HCD Administrative Office,
which replaces aging building systems and incorporates
energy efficient fixtures and customer-focused design elements.
? Develop and implement dashboards to monitor program
trends and outcomes, using business intelligence to adjust
performance resulting in enhanced customer service.
? Evaluate, select, and implement new software to improve
the ability of staff to retrieve and utilize electronic documents
in the daily administration of rental assistance programs,
which will result in more efficient interactions with
program participants by June 30, 2018.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Ensure customers are provided with superior services and
a positive experience through staff who employ
helpfulness, expertise, attentiveness, respect and
timeliness. A key indicator of how well service is provided
will be achievement of a customer service satisfaction
rating of 3.5 or better (on a scale of 1 to 4, with 4 being
“excellent”). (OE5)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Support, encourage, and provide opportunities to foster
employee well-being, inclusion, and development by:
hosting lunch and learn presentations, exercise classes,
and/or wellness events; encouraging staff to participate in
Employee Resource Groups (ERG) and inviting ERGs to
present at Department meetings; performing outreach to
diverse populations in recruitment and education efforts;
and scheduling mandatory and optional professional and
safety training as well as soft skills enhancements.
Leverage internal communication resources, resource
groups, and social media to enhance employee understanding
of Live Well San Diego
? Continue to encourage staff participation in activities
promoted by the County of San Diego Employee Wellness
Program by communicating upcoming events in the
quarterly DPC’s All-Hands staff meetings as well as allowing
staff to share their experience in other wellness events
sponsored by the local community. (HF5)
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Present six vendor/supplier outreach sessions in
cooperation with local business associations and/or other
public agencies. (SE1)
? Publicize and implement DPC’s Small Business Enterprise
(SBE) and Veteran Owned Business (VOB) competitive set
aside. (SE2)
? San Diego is the best managed county in the nation
? Continue to assess DPC’s effectiveness and improve its
procurement processes to increase competitiveness for a
new top tier national industry excellence award for DPC’s
leadership and implementation of world class
procurement. (OE1)
? Continue to offer in-person procurement classes as well as
make additional online training modules available. (OE1)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Select a CAMS solution and begin plan for implementation.
(OE3)
? Work with departments with the highest volumes of
physical records to reduce paper retention. (OE3)
? Ensure all departments have staff trained and the tools
necessary to stay up-to-date and current on all Countywide
Records Management policies and best practices. (OE4)
? Provide an individualized on-site annual training for
each supported County department.
? Ensure all County departments’ records retention
schedules are current.
Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Provide information access to all customers ensuring
consistency, transparency and customer confidence. (OE4)
? Expeditiously wind down the affairs of the former County
Redevelopment Agency, maintaining compliance with all
laws and with the approval of the County Oversight Board.
Develop required documents and materials for Successor
Agency approval. Conduct one Oversight Board meeting for
approval of Successor Agency-approved items, then submit
required materials to California State Department of
Finance in a timely fashion. Under Health & Safety Code
(HSC) Section 34177, Oversight Board meeting frequency
has been reduced from two meetings per year to one meeting,
effective in 2016.
Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Continue to distribute information on how to reduce
environmental risks using “filler” pages printed in the
Sample Ballot and Voter Information Pamphlets provided
to all registered voters for the November 2016 Presidential
General and June 2018 Gubernatorial Primary elections.
(SE3)
? Conserve resources by promoting the sign up of e-Sample
Ballot and Voter Information Pamphlets and refer military
and overseas voters to an online version of their Sample
Ballot and Voter Information Pamphlets. Continue to print
the Sample Ballot and Voter Information Pamphlets on
paper containing as much as 25% post-consumer recycled
paper for all elections conducted in Fiscal Years 2016–18.
(SE3)
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges
? Mitigate challenges to the voter registration process. (SE6)
? Continue to work with volunteers and communitybased
organizations to identify needs and increase
voter registration.
? Continue to identify and develop strategies to address
potential challenges, including application submittal
accuracy, community knowledge and awareness, voter
movement/relocation, cultural expectations, and the
growing senior population.
? Increase the number of poll workers. (SE6)
? Implement an outreach strategy to increase volunteer
opportunities at the polls.
? Continue to expand partnerships with organizations
that work with persons with Limited English Proficiency
(LEP) in order to recruit bilingual poll workers.
? Continue to develop a business-focused poll worker
recruitment program.
? Engage the community in the electoral process and ensure
polling sites are sufficiently staffed with qualified
personnel for the November 2016 Presidential General and
June 2018 Gubernatorial Primary elections by meeting the
planned recruitment goals for poll workers. (SE6)
? Continue to distribute information in support of the
County’s Live Well San Diego strategies using “filler” pages
printed in the Sample Ballot and Voter Information
Pamphlets provided to all registered voters for the
November 2016 Presidential General and June 2018
Gubernatorial Primary elections. (SE6)
? Increase the number of permanent vote-by-mail voters by
5% (or 42,906), for a total of 901,018, for the November
2016 Presidential General Election and by an additional 3%
(or 27,030), for a total of 928,048, for the June 2018
Gubernatorial Primary Election, based on number of
permanent vote-by-mail voters (858,112) from the June 7,
2016 Presidential Primary Election.
? Continue to recruit and replace non-accessible poll
consolidations to comply with federal and State
accessibility requirements. (SE6)
? Increase the overall percent of accessible polls for the
November 2016 Presidential General Election by 3%,
for a total of 70%, based on the anticipated overall
percent of accessible polls for the June 2016
Presidential Primary Election.
? Increase the overall percent of accessible polls for the
June 2018 Gubernatorial Primary Election by 7%, for a
total of 77%, based on the anticipated overall percent
of accessible polls for the November 2016 Presidential
General Election.
? Increase voter awareness of convenient early Mail Ballot
Drop Off Program. (SE6)
? Collect at least 50,000 ballots (an increase of 300%
compared to the November 4, 2014 Gubernatorial
General Election) from early mail ballot drop off sites
for the November 2016 Presidential General and June
2018 Gubernatorial Primary elections.
? Process 100% of valid registrations received on or before
the 15-day close of registration by the 7th day before the
November 2016 Presidential General and June 2018
Gubernatorial Primary elections to ensure eligible
registrants are printed in the official roster of voters and
therefore have the opportunity to vote using a regular
ballot, rather than a provisional ballot.
Align services to available resources to maintain financial
stability
? Maintain a per-mail-ballot labor cost of 40 cents for voteby-
mail ballots returned in the November 2016
Presidential General and June 2018 Gubernatorial Primary
elections. (OE1)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Ensure 100% of poll worker trainers complete online
training assessments with scores of 100% or higher no later
than 26 days prior to the November 2016 Presidential
General and June 2018 Gubernatorial Primary elections,
providing knowledgeable instructors who are available and
prepared to train poll workers. (OE3)
? Continue to offer voters the option to subscribe to an
electronic version of the Sample Ballot and Voter
Informational Pamphlet in lieu of a paper copy. (OE3)
? Continue to offer online campaign finance statements
service. (OE4)
? Increase the overall percent of online filings for the July
2016 and January 2017 semi-annual filings by 11% to a
total of 53%, based on the January 2016 semi-annual
online filing percentage.
? Maintain the overall percent of online filings for the
July 2017 and January 2018 semi-annual filings to 53%,
based on the anticipated January 2017 semi-annual
online filing percentage.
? Tally 50% (775 of 1,550) of precincts for the November
2016 Presidential General Election and 63% (884 of 1,403)
of precincts for the June 2018 Gubernatorial Primary
Election by 11:30 pm on Election Night. (OE4)
? Report 85% of eligible mail ballots (those received by the
ROV by the Sunday before Election Day) in the first Election
Night Results Bulletin released shortly after 8:00 pm for the
November 2016 Presidential General and 95% for the June
2018 Gubernatorial Primary elections. (OE4)
? Report 33% or more of all ballots cast in the first Election
Night Results Bulletin for the November 2016 Presidential
General and June 2018 Gubernatorial Primary elections.
(OE4)
? Tally 90% of all mail ballots received by the ROV by Monday
after Election Day for the November 2016 Presidential
General and 95% for the June 2018 Gubernatorial Primary
elections. (OE4)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Ensure customer satisfaction with core services by
maintaining a 4.7 or better overall customer satisfaction
rating (on a scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “excellent”)
through the June 2018 Gubernatorial Primary Election.
(OE5)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? To encourage overall satisfaction and retention of
volunteers, timely mailing of all poll worker stipends in 15
working days or less from Election Day for all elections in
Fiscal Years 2016–18. (OE6)
? Assign 100% of bilingual poll workers to fill poll worker
positions needed for the November 2016 Presidential
General and June 2018 Gubernatorial Primary elections.
Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Record property ownership in a timely manner, facilitating
access to ownership information for the buying, selling and
financing of property. (SE1)
? Locate, identify, appraise, and complete 98% of mandated
assessments of all property so the public and businesses
are assured a fair and uniform assessment of their property
under the auspices of all applicable State property tax laws,
rules and regulations. (SE2)
? Record births, deaths, marriages and file Fictitious Business
Name statements within in a timely manner to enable the
public and businesses to establish identity in order to
conduct their affairs. (SE2)
? Index 99% of vital records, certificates and licenses within
48 hours of receipt so the public can have the most current
information. (SE2)
? Continue work on the multi-year phased restoration and
preservation project for historical recorded documents.
Phase I will preserve old microfilm and ensure its survival
for future generations. Procurement action for this project
was completed in Fiscal Year 2015–16 with anticipated
project completion in Fiscal Year 2017–18. Phase II will
restore and preserve historical recorded documents and
maps. This project is estimated to be completed in Fiscal
Year 2019–20.Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Collect, distribute and account for all mandated fees and
transfer taxes to ensure County departments, federal and
State agencies, cities and special districts can fulfill their
legal obligations. (OE1)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Examine and process 90% of documents submitted for
eRecording within three hours of receipt to provide
customers a more efficient and secure recording and
document return process. (OE3)
? Pursue e-signature opportunities for Fictitious Business
Name applications and renewals to save our customers
time and increase our efficiency and service to customers.
Incorporate this functionality into Acclaim (integrated
recording and vital records system) development for
implementation in Fiscal Year 2016–17. (OE3)
? Document recording services will be offered to the public
at the Chula Vista branch office in Fiscal Year 2016–17 after
a small remodel is completed. (OE3)
? Build and implement Recorder/County Clerk integrated
Call Center in the Chula Vista branch office. The Call Center
will focus solely on customer calls and improve call
response quality and timeliness. (OE3)
? Review and redesign of Recorder/County Clerk phone
script to decrease the length of time customers are
engaged in the automated phone system and increase
efficiency in responding to customer phone inquiries.
(OE3)
? Redesign and remodel Recorder work space in the County
Administration Center, Kearny Mesa, and San Marcos
offices to accommodate additional production equipment
and relocation of staff to branch offices. (OE3)
? In coordination with the Auditor and Controller, Treasurer-
Tax Collector and the County Technology Office, continue
the design, development, testing, and implementation of
the Integrated Property Tax System (IPTS). This system will
significantly improve property assessment, tax collection
and apportionment activities in the County. (OE3)
? Continue coordination and assistance to San Diego
Geographic Information Source (SanGIS) and other
agencies to develop the consortium of cost sharing users of
oblique imagery. Oblique imagery is aerial photos taken at
a 45-degree angle which allows for accurate measurement
of structures, elevation, and distances. The development
of this consortium of cost sharing users of oblique imagery
increases Assessor imagery area at no additional cost, and
increases efficiency by reducing field trips, increasing
accuracy of assessment information and final assessments
of all taxable property. (OE3)
? Provide the public with a variety of online forms for
submittal and related services. This will provide a more
efficient and effective level of customer service by
leveraging the latest technology in online form processing
and electronic signature technology. Opportunities include
Fictitious Business Names, Assessment Appeals, and
Parent/Child Exclusion. (OE3)
? Provide the public with an online customer service
feedback application (ExpressIt) which will increase the
efficiency of providing such information as well as the
department’s effectiveness and timeliness of responding.
(OE3)
? Reengineer and automate the manual processes in
Assessment Services to provide a faster turnaround time,
improve customer service and eliminate paper
dependency. (OE3)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Provide the public with services that are of value to them
in a competent and professional manner by achieving a
customer service rating of at least 93%.Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? To safeguard public funds and maintain public trust,
efficiently manage the provisions of banking services for
public entities and County departments. Provide accurate
recording of all funds on deposit and facilitate daily
reconciliation of funds. (OE1)
? To continue to fund the delivery of superior services
throughout the San Diego County region, invest public
monies held in the Treasury and maximize cash resources
without sacrificing the principles of safety or liquidity, for
an anticipated weighted average rate of return of 0.65% in
Fiscal Year 2016–17 and 0.75% in Fiscal Year 2017–18.
(OE1)
? Provide a learning platform and forum to address current
government finance issues by facilitating four seminars
including Fraud Prevention, Cash Handling, Debt Financing
and Investment of Public Funds for local agencies. (OE1)
? Maintain a collection rate of 98.5% for secured taxes and
97% for unsecured taxes by preparing and mailing property
tax bills/notices, and processing tax payments in a timely
manner to ensure timely revenue collection on behalf of
San Diego County’s taxpayers. (OE1)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? In coordination with Assessor/Recorder/County Clerk,
Auditor and Controller, and the County Technology Office,
continue the design and development of the IPTS, which
will significantly improve property assessment, tax
collection and apportionment activities in the County.
(OE3)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer service experience
? Achieve a customer satisfaction rating of 4.7 on a 5.0 scale,
based on Customer Satisfaction Survey results. (OE5)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Broaden the Countywide base of employees who are
planning for financial security during retirement. (OE6)
? Achieve enrollment in the Deferred Compensation 457
Plan of 48.0% of eligible County employees through
June 30, 2017 and continue to maintain rate of 48.0%
through June 30, 2018.
? Maintain the average participant contribution in the
Deferred Compensation 457 Plan above $100 per pay
period by June 30, 2017 and a modest improvement of
$110 through June 30, 2018.
? Continue to educate employees on the Deferred
Compensation Plan by presenting two Investment &
Retirement Symposiums each fiscal year.
? Continue to increase employee awareness and
understanding of the Deferred Compensation Plan by
conducting educational workshops and redesigning
promotional materials and presentations to increase
the knowledge base of all employees by June 30, 2017.
? Expand the knowledge and skills in fiscal controls by
newly certifying 120 Cash Handlers in the County and
other government entities by June 30, 2017 and
certifying another 120 new Cash Handlers by June 30,
2018.
The Chief Administrative Office is responsible for a countywide
focus on ethics and integrity, fiscal stability, a positive customer
experience, operational excellence and a commitment to service
improvement in pursuit of the County’s vision—a region that is
Building Better Health, Living Safely and Thriving.
? Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to individuals’ needs
? Provide oversight and guidance to ensure the County
moves the dial to create the opportunity for all residents–
regardless of geographic location, age group, gender, race/
ethnicity, or socio-economic level–to achieve the Live Well
San Diego vision by engaging the community, strengthening
existing services, and serving for results in the Live Well
Communities project.
? Support State legislation and policy changes that would
give low income families greater access to healthy foods;
support federal funding and policy for clean water through
the BEACH ACT as well as federal funding and policy for the
Land and Water Conservation Fund to protect open space
and recreational activities. (HF4)
? Promote a culture of ethical leadership and decision making
across the enterprise
? Model ethical courage by always doing the right thing and
acting in the best interests of all.
? Regularly communicate and discuss the importance of the
County’s Statement of Values to ensure a consistent and
deep understanding of ethics across the enterprise.
? Maintain transparency in fiscal reporting and audits.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
while providing core service needs to our region
? Manage risks with regional acumen, fiscal discipline and in
accordance with federal and State regulations and Board of
Supervisors policies.
? Oversee operations to ensure program needs are met.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Provide strategic planning and appropriate resources for
facility modernization and sustainability to enhance the
workplace and better serve customers.
? Deliver direct communications on, online access to and
resourceful apps for program services.
Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Recognize a department and/or employee annually for
their creativity and demonstrated outcomes towards
ensuring a positive customer experience. (OE5)
? Provide tools across the enterprise to measure customer
satisfaction. (OE5)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Sustain a high level of government excellence through
succession planning, mentoring, training and attracting
forward thinking and competent talent to continue the
County’s journey toward becoming world class. (OE6)
? Champion the Diversity & Inclusion strategic plan and
enterprise initiatives of the Employee Resource Group
Executive Council. (OE6)
? Champion employee wellness activities to ensure team
members thrive.
Expand data-driven crime prevention strategies and utilize
current technologies to reduce crime at the local and regional
level
? Combined with the Superior Court, under the Comprehensive
Collections Program, meet or exceed the collections
performance benchmark (Gross Recovery Rate of 34%)
established by California Judicial Council. Gross Recovery
Rate measures a program’s ability to resolve delinquent
court-ordered debt, including alternative sentence, community
service, suspended services and discharges. This
measure is reported annually through a template as provided
by the Judicial Council.
Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Submit 100% of federal, State and local financial reports
and annual financial statements that comply with
regulations and reporting standards for County
departments, outside government agencies, investors and
taxpayers by their due dates to ensure accountability and
transparency of financial transactions. (OE4)
? Continue to support the financial literacy in the County by
developing A&C curriculum and conducting trainings that
focus on core competencies of employees in accounting
functions. (OE2)
? Meet or exceed an actual recovery rate percentage (total
dollars collected/total available accounts receivable) of
7.25%. This measure represents the effectiveness of collection
activities performed by the Office of Revenue &
Recovery.
? Accurately identify current and future revenue, as well as
cost and cash flow trends, in a timely manner in order to
facilitate the allocation of limited resources to San Diego
County groups and departments.
? Process 100% of County payments within five business
days after receipt of invoice by Accounts Payable to ensure
timely payment of vendors and contractors. The prompt
payment of invoices ensures that the County captures any
discounts that are available for early invoice payment.
? Earn the State Controller’s Award for Achieving Excellence
in Financial Reporting for the Fiscal Year ending June 30,
2015. (OE1)
? Continue to apply for recognition through GFOA Certificate
of Achievement for Excellence in Financial Reporting for
the CAFR and the Award for Outstanding Achievement in
Popular Annual Financial Reporting for the PAFR. (OE1)
? Publish on Department’s website, completed audits
performed by OAAS, including State-mandated and
operational/performance audits, to ensure the integrity of
management control systems, to improve performance
across the enterprise, and to ensure the most efficient use
of resources. (OE4)
? Provide modern infrastructure innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Implement a digital signature solution within the A&C
department that can be leveraged Countywide. Once
implemented, the solution will reduce the staff time
required in the signature approval process, decrease paper
consumption and printing costs, and lessen the impact on
the environment. (OE3)
? In coordination with the Assessor/Recorder/County Clerk,
Treasurer-Tax Collector, Clerk of the Board of Supervisors,
and the County Technology Office continue the design,
development, testing, and implementation of the
Integrated Property Tax System (IPTS). This system will
significantly improve property assessment, tax collection
and apportionment activities in the County. (OE3)
? Continue the administration of the Ethics Hotline in coordination
with the Office of Ethics and Compliance. Monitor
the investigation and resolution of all cases reported
through the Ethics Hotline.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Provide ongoing customer service training to all Auditor
and Controller staff, to enhance customer service skills and
techniques.
Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers Integrate the County Constituent Relationship
Management System (CCRM) system to support the Land
Use and Environment Group’s Business Case Management
System and the County’s document repository and
archiving solution, Documentum. (OE3)
? Continue to enhance functionality in the County’s IT cost
management/chargeback billing application, ITrack, to
support users’ need for a robust, user-friendly application.
(OE3)
? Continue to provide technical support for the
ConnectWellSD project. ConnectWellSD will provide HHSA,
its community partners and other County departments the
capability to access a comprehensive view of a client's
history, thereby creating a coordinated care network
between multiple providers. (OE3)
? Continue to provide Program Management and oversight
over the IPTS project. IPTS will significantly improve
property assessment, tax collection and apportionment
activities in the County. (OE3)
? Continue to effectively manage the performance of the
County’s IT Outsourcing Provider to ensure timeliness and
value of IT services. (OE3)
? Continue to improve upon the information available in
Applications Manager, the County’s system of record for
business applications portfolio, by adding cloud applications
into the repository. This will enable generation of a
comprehensive report showing both portfolio and cloud
applications used in the enterprise. (OE3)
? Provide project management and support to County
Departments for the Microsoft Windows 10 operating
system upgrade effort. This multi-year upgrade will migrate
all enterprisewide desktop and laptop devices to the new
Windows 10 operating system, and coordinate with all
departments to ensure all business applications are
compatible and functioning with the new operating system
by Fiscal Year 2019–20. (OE3)
? Perform formal testing of CTO-managed applications and
platforms to ensure compatibility with Windows 10 and
remediate as needed. (OE3)
? Implement Phase I of Automated Provisioning
technologies. This will reduce the risk of unauthorized user
access, automate account creation/termination and
improve user account management, and ensure that the
County complies with audit requirements. (OE3)
? Select a vendor and negotiate a new agreement for the
continued outsourcing of County’s Information Technology
and Telecommunications services. (OE3)
? Integrate Microsoft Skype for Business with the County's
telephone system, providing capability to place phone calls
from either desk phone or computer. (OE3)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Continue to deliver “Best in Class” IT services to County
end-users, using Gartner Inc.’s Best in Class score for IT
Customer Satisfaction as a benchmark.
Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Resolve 55% of personnel disputes without the need for a
full evidentiary hearing resulting in time and cost savings.
Full evidentiary hearings can result in extensive staff time
and legal and administrative costs.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Distribute at least 95% of Commission decisions within 48
hours of Commission approval in order to provide timely
notification of outcomes to parties and the public. (OE4)
? Ensure direct access to information through proper referral
of inquiries from departments, employees, employee
representatives and organizations and the public, related
to human resources matters. (OE4)
? Ensure all decisions made by the Commission will take into
consideration fairness, due process and are in compliance
with the law. The decisions will be thoroughly reviewed by
Commissioners, staff and counsel.
? Maintain and update desk book manuals on Commission
proceedings and easily searchable electronic database of
Commission case law and precedents, counsel advice, key
issues and other relevant information to increase staff efficiency,
sound decision-making and operational consistency.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Achieve a positive customer satisfaction rating of 95% or
above. Customer satisfaction surveys focus primarily on
responsiveness, courtesy, and knowledge of staff. (OE5)
? Provide customers with hearings that are fair, impartial and
efficient in order to achieve legally sound decisions.
? Provide a neutral environment that facilitates open discussion
of issues for departments, employees and employee
representatives resulting in fair and unbiased outcomes.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Participate in ongoing training in areas of human resources,
technology, workplace safety, finance and pertinent legal
updates to increase staff's knowledge in order to provide
superior customer service. 
Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Increase transparency and open access to Board of
Supervisors official records by installing a new microfilm
machine with digital technology. (OE4)
? Replace current automated agenda management system to
increase reliability and efficiency of the Board of
Supervisors agenda creation process. (OE3)
? Ensure efficiency and transparency of the property tax
assessment appeal process by processing property tax
assessment appeal applications within seven days of
receipt. (OE4)
? Provide open access to County business by making audio
recordings of all Board of Supervisors meetings available
on the Internet within three days of the related meeting.
(OE4)
? Enhance the efficiency and transparency of the property
tax assessment appeal process by participating in the
development of the Integrated Property Tax System. (OE3)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Ensure satisfaction with services provided by achieving a
consistently high average rating of 4.9 out of 5.0 on surveys
of customers. (OE5)
? Provide opportunities to San Diego residents by processing
and mailing 100% of completed U.S. Passport applications
on the same day they are received. (OE5)
? Implement objectives from the Business Process
Reengineering effort of the U.S. Passport acceptance
process to improve services provided to customers.

Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it.
? Support the County’s initiative to strengthen the local food
system and support the availability of healthy foods by providing
prompt and direct legal advice on regulatory questions
related to inspections and licensing of food-related
activities.
? Complete by the agreed upon due dates 95% of all
applicable advisory assignments for County
departments related to the County’s initiative to
strengthen the local food system.Achieve a 90% or more success rate in County Code
Enforcement cases related to the County’s initiative to
strengthen the local food system.
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Use the plan developed to implement Laura’s Law to provide
in-court representation and ongoing legal advisory
opinions to the Health and Human Services Agency (HHSA)
regarding petitions for court-ordered assisted outpatient
mental health treatment.
? Develop related forms for County and Court use.
? Assist in the development of ongoing practices and
procedures in collaboration with the Court, Public
Safety Group, and Patient Rights Advocate to ensure a
successful implementation of this new legal practice
area and to mitigate community threats.
? Expand data-driven crime prevention strategies and utilize
current technologies to reduce crime at the local and
regional level
? Initiate and expand a pilot project with the Justice
Electronic Library System (JELS) document management
system that will enable the Health and Human Services
Agency (HHSA) to upload Juvenile Dependency detention
reports and dual reports making them available
electronically to County Counsel and Probation. This would
eliminate the need for a paper file in court. (SC6)
? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse
? Provide effective legal services to HHSA in matters relating
to children who have been dependents of the Juvenile
Court to ensure the safety of any child who may have been
the victim of abuse. (SC6)
? Prevail in 98% of Juvenile Dependency petitions
contested in Superior Court.
? Prevail in 95% of Juvenile Dependency appeals and
writs filed.
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Ensure coordination of County Counsel responsibilities
with respect to new projects that require County approval
by early involvement of County Counsel staff with other
departmental partners and maintain consistent
communication among County Counsel staff on all aspects
of required review. (SE3)
? Complete 100% of all draft Environmental Impact
Report reviews in 40 days or less.
? Conduct at least ten internal meetings with both
advisory and litigation land use staff to evaluate new
projects and provide a status update of ongoing project
reviews.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Provide quality, accurate, effective and timely legal advice
to all County departments to enable them to fulfill their
mission and objectives in accordance with the law, reduce
the risk of liability and use taxpayer dollars efficiently and
effectively. (OE1)
? Complete 98% of all advisory assignments for the Board
of Supervisors and Chief Administrative Officer by their
due dates.
? Complete 95% of all advisory assignments for County
departments by the agreed upon due dates.
? Provide 40 specialized risk mitigation sessions, such as risk
roundtables, case evaluation committee discussions and
post-litigation debriefings to address risk issues, helping to
promote risk management and decrease future legal
liability. (OE2)
? All County Counsel supervisory staff (38) will take the
online financial literacy training in the County’s Learning
Management System to become more knowledgeable and
proficient in understanding the County’s finances. (OE2)
? Aggressively represent the County in litigation, maintaining
fiscal stability while advancing the overall interests of the
County of San Diego and the public it serves. (OE1)
? Prevailed in 90% of court decisions in all lawsuits filed
against the County.
? Achieve a 90% success rate in lawsuits where the
County is the plaintiff by winning in court or obtaining
favorable financial settlements.
? Handle 95% of the defense of all lawsuits filed in
California against the County, unless a conflict of
interest requires outside counsel to handle a case,
thereby reducing outside counsel costs to the County
and taxpayers.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Complete deployment and implementation of new trial
preparation software that replaces Sanction 2.9, the
current trial preparation software, for compatibility with
the County’s upgrade to Microsoft Windows 10. (OE3)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Develop and implement a five year succession plan to train
and prepare future office leaders. Implement needs-based,
focused training programs, develop legal resource databases for common issues, strengthen team support
structures, and keep current with changing legal
technology. (OE6)
? Send at least one staff member to a Supervisor
Academy, or other training program that enhances
supervisory skills, in Fiscal Year 2016–17.
? Establish at least three in-house trainings for new and
current employees.
Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents.
? Review, prioritize and investigate 100% of citizens’
complaints, issues and other County matters of civil
concern brought before the Grand Jury by assembling a
well-qualified and widely representative civil panel to
ensure that city and county government entities are
operating as efficiently as possible. (SC2)
? Support the District Attorney with hearings on criminal
matters in accordance with Penal Code §904.6.
Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Expand the Farmers Market from nine to eleven locations
at County facilities to support healthy food choices at work
and at home. (HF2)
? Leverage internal communication resources, resource groups
and social media to enhance employee understanding of the
County’s Live Well San Diego vision.
? Increase overall employee participation by 1% in various
wellness activities. (HF5)
? Expand employee meditation sessions from three to five
locations at County facilities. (HF5)
? Expand the employee diabetes management program from
two to three locations at County facilities. (HF5)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Support the Countywide Security Program by providing
training to increase awareness on emergency responses.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Negotiate fiscally prudent successor Memoranda of
Agreement with 12 of 25 bargaining units and 2 of 9
existing employee organizations by June 30, 2017. (OE1)
? Increase financial literacy of all department staff, by
ensuring they complete the online Financial Literary
training course in the Learning Management System. (OE2)
? Work to transition all DHR contracts to the Exigis System
for electronic certification of insurance tracking by June 30,
2017.
? To ensure timely and effective services, reduce the hours of
lost productivity related to workers’ compensation claims
by 2%.
Maintain a 98% accuracy rate in transactions in the human
resources information system, PeopleSoft.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Integrate the human resources information system,
PeopleSoft, into the enterprise’s Oracle Identity
Management solution to increase security and eliminate
staff intervention of password request and system logins
by June 30, 2017. (OE3)
? Enhance the Workers Compensation Claim Management
System by June 30, 2017. (OE3)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? In order to improve services and provide the best customer
service, attain a 97% satisfaction rate on recruitment surveys.
? Provide excellent customer service to County departments
by completing 95% of Classification Activity Requests
within anticipated timelines.
? To provide excellent customer service and serve customer
departments timely, strive to accomplish recruitment timelines
with a 99% success rate.
? Complete Phase III of the Classification Modernization
Project by reviewing 74 classification specifications by June
30, 2017.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Strengthen awareness of diversity, inclusion, and cultural
competence through increased learning opportunities by
June 30, 2017. (OE6)
? To increase Countywide knowledge and understanding of
the function and role of the Risk Assessment Team, conduct
five presentations throughout all five County groups
by June 30, 2017.
? Advertise open recruitments in diverse publications in
order to attract a diverse applicant pool 100% of the time.
? Increase the number of Learning Management System
(LMS) training hours by 5,000 compared to prior year
actuals. (OE6)
? Increase the number of professional training opportunities
available in LMS by adding 20 new trainings in Fiscal Year
2016–17.
Encourage and promote residents to take important and
meaningful steps to protect themselves and their families for
the first 72 hours during a disaster
? Participate in at least two drills each fiscal year to prepare
for and respond to major natural or man-made disasters
impacting the San Diego County region. (SC1)
? Organize one to two meetings per fiscal year of regional
Public Information Officers from various sectors, such as
education, healthcare and government, to review disaster
preparedness and response. Meetings will build critical
relationships needed during regional emergencies and
provide a forum for sharing ideas and resources. (SC1)
? Provide accurate and timely emergency and recovery information
to the public and media, using a wide variety of traditional
and new media tools, such as the County’s
emergency website and app, social media, new releases,
news conferences and video.
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges
? Provide timely and relevant information to the public
about the County’s programs and services while
demonstrating the fact that the County is a responsible
steward of tax dollars through content posted on County
News Center. The department will provide at least one
content item (article, video or graphic) per day for a total of
365 items during Fiscal Year 2016–17 and another 365
items during Fiscal Year 2017–18. (SE6)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Provide information access to all customers ensuring
consistency, transparency and customer confidence. (OE4)
? Support County departments’ goals and objectives by sharing
vital information with the public, stakeholders and
employees by creating print, video, web, mobile and
graphic content shared through public awareness campaigns,
news conferences, public service announcements
and additional formats. This includes the live broadcast of
all Board of Supervisors meetings to ensure the public has
access to its County government.
? Provide easy, on-the-go access to important County information
through social media. Increase number of followers
on Facebook and Twitter by 20% during Fiscal Year 2016–
17 (14,236 above 47,957 actual base), and an additional
20% during Fiscal Year 2017–18.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Foster an environment of excellence, innovation and
exceptional customer service among County employees
who serve the public through the County’s intranet site,
posting at least 200 content items, such as an article or
video, during Fiscal Year 2016–17, and another 200 during
Fiscal Year 2017–18.

 



