Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Open a District Attorney’s Community Storefront office to
provide law enforcement services and education, and to
solicit community input on law enforcement initiatives.
(SC2)
? Develop uniform human trafficking training standards and
provide training to law enforcement officers, judges and
support staff. (SC3)
? Create and provide quick reference cards to law enforcement
on the elements of domestic violence and human
trafficking crimes. (SC3)
? Conduct elder abuse mandatory reporter training for law
enforcement, social service agencies and emergency room
staff on the legal updates, reporting requirements and
reporting methods. (SC3)
? Develop a cyber-threats protocol to assess, identify and
preempt active shooter events in San Diego County. (SC3)
? Establish a partnership with the Chula Vista Police Department
(CVPD) to implement CVPD Smart Policing Initiative,
a program to use electronic monitors on first-time domestic
violence offenders. (SC3)
? Expand data-driven crime prevention strategies and utilize
current technologies to reduce crime at the local and regional
level
? Develop and implement protocols to standardize practices
of the District Attorney’s four regional High Risk Domestic
Violence Teams to support victims of domestic violence.
(SC5)
? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse
? Work in partnership with the Public Defender’s Office to
create a Youth Advisory Board at Serra High School. (SC6)
? Fully implement a balanced-approach model that reduces
crime by holding offenders accountable while providing
them access to rehabilitation
? In partnership with the San Diego Superior Court, increase
referrals to Veterans Courts. (SC8)
? In partnership with the San Diego Superior Court, develop
the framework for a Diversion Court. (SC8)
? Expand the eligibility criteria of Drug Court to include misdemeanants
and other non-violent felony offenders. (SC8)
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Expand the Computer and Technology Crime High-Tech
(CATCH) Response Team to support the prosecution of
cases where there is digital or hardware related evidence.
Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Reduce crime in the Sheriff's jurisdictions within San Diego
County by 5%. (SC3)
? Maintain safety and security of inmates in detention facilities
by providing increased suicide prevention training to
staff.
? Expand data-driven crime prevention strategies and utilize
current technologies to reduce crime at the local and regional
level
? Continue to implement ILP throughout the department as
the primary philosophy used to address crime trends.
? Target prolific offenders by conducting coordinated
enforcement efforts utilizing ILP strategies and information
from the Law Enforcement Coordination Center (LECC) and
funding from the Regional Realignment Response Group
(RG3) and Bureau of State and Community Corrections
(BSCC) Police Grants.
? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse
? Create a Youth Advisory Group which will help develop
common dialogue for exchange of information between
the youth in the areas the Sheriff's Department serves and
members of the Department. (SC6)
? Fully implement a balanced-approach model that reduces
crime by holding offenders accountable while providing them
access to rehabilitation
? Increase the number of community-based providers that
provide evidence-based programs to inmates within the
detention facilities by 10%.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Reduce chargeable traffic accidents by 5%.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior delivery to our customers
? Establish a Body Worn Camera pilot program within the
department to conduct product testing and evaluate
equipment. (OE3)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Continue to improve the ability of deputies to work with
mentally ill subjects by providing eight hours of PERT training
to deputies and sergeants that did not receive training
in Fiscal Year 2014-15.
]San Diego County has fully optimized its health and social
service delivery system to make it an industry leader in efficiency,
integration and innovation
? Ensure the percentage of cases with parentage established
is at 95%, consistent with the statewide goal.
? Maintain the percentage of open cases with an enforceable
order at or above 89% (59,775 of 68,018), consistent with
the statewide goal.
? Maintain the percentage of current support collected to
current support owed at or above 70% ($111 million of
$156 million).
? Increase the percentage of arrears cases with a collection
at or above 70% (35,555 of 50,556).
? Establish at least 300 parenting time orders along with a
child support order to build healthy relationships and
encourage consistent payment of child support.
? Promote family self-sufficiency by partnering with additional
organizations to ensure supportive services are available
to families.
? Partner with at least one other organization to develop a
college savings account program for dependents of child
support customers to help advance academic success and
facilitate self-sufficiency in adulthood. (HF4)
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Collect at least $3.50 for every $1.00 spent on operations.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Develop innovative electronic payment options to make
paying child support easier and provide more convenient
locations throughout the community for customers. (OE3)
? Establish offices at various locations in the community to
better serve customers who reside in those areas. (OE3)
? Develop and distribute information electronically or
through other mediums to educate employers on how
their contributions positively affect families in our region.
(OE4)
? Explore a partnership with an educational institution or
community-based organization to provide customers with
high school equivalency certificates.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted.
? Participate in the development and implementation of a
Diversity and Inclusion Strategic Plan to create an inclusive,
diverse and world-class organization for employees and the
community.
Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges
? Increase community awareness of the CLERB through quarterly
stakeholder outreach. (SE7)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Continue to implement Business Process Reengineering
measures, which define a standard, measurable process
and reduce the amount of effort and lead time required to
complete high-quality investigations. (OE3)
? Maintain public accountability of Sheriff and Probation
peace officers, to the extent allowed by law, by conducting
timely investigation and review of citizens’ complaints of
misconduct. (OE4)
? Issue and publicly distribute monthly workload reports to
the CLERB, Sheriff’s Department and Probation Department.
Complete a comprehensive annual report with a
thorough accounting of new complaints and case closures,
including an analysis of citizen complaint trends and recommendations
for policy change. (OE4)
? Complete 95% of complaint investigations within one year
of receipt, unless delayed due to lengthy investigations that
may be required for complex cases. (OE4)
? Provide monthly “early warning” reports to the Sheriffs
Department and Probation Department regarding the
nature of complaints filed and the identity and assignment
of the employees, when known, to enable corrective
action when necessary. (OE4)
? Maintain a transparent and independent citizen complaint
process, to the extent allowed by law, which provides relevant
feedback and recommendations to the Sheriff and
Chief Probation Officer. (OE4)
? Provide redacted case synopses that include relevant information
for the public, while respecting peace officer confidentiality
rights. (OE4)
? Process new complaints in a timely manner; Maintain a
complaint turnaround of two working days or less, measured
from when the complaint was received to when case
documents were completed and returned to the complainant
for signature.
Encourage and promote residents to take important and
meaningful steps to protect themselves and their families for
the first 72 hours during a disaster
? Encourage 36 San Diego school districts to adopt the San
Diego County “Be Aware, Be Prepared” Disaster Preparedness
curriculum for fourth graders by the beginning of the
2017 school year. (SC1)
? Engage the 300 organizations participating in the Risk Communication
Plan - Partner Relay to promote and encourage
translation and/or dissemination of preparedness information
found in the Family Disaster Plan and Personal Survival
Guide to the Arabic, Chinese, Filipino, Karen, Korean,
Latino, Vietnamese, and Somali language communities.
Additionally for Spanish language participants to share
information about the newly translated Spanish
ReadySanDiego Website and Spanish SD Emergency Mobile
App to their contacts. (SC1)
? Facilitate one functional or tabletop exercise to prepare for
a 2017 regional full-scale exercise. (SC1)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Ensure the consistent and timely dissemination of emergency
alerts by creating 20 pre-scripted disaster alerts for
notifying the public of emergency conditions via AlertSanDiego,
Wireless Emergency Alerts, sdcountyemergency.com or
other emergency alert systems.
? Ensure our influence as a regional leader on issues and decisions
that impact the financial well-being of the county.
? Facilitate the development of a regional financial donations
management plan that details the organizational and
operational framework required to properly receive and
disperse monetary donations to help those most affected
by disaster. (OE1)
? Promote financial literacy of the department on grants,
budget, audits and purchasing and contracting principles
through regular presentations to staff. (OE2)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Increase the number of Accessible AlertSanDiego Spanish
language registrations by 10% (330 to 363). (OE4)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Increase the number of San Diego County disaster service
workers registered with San Diego County’s Advanced
Recovery Initiative (ARI) by 3% (557 to 574). ARI promotes
the training of County disaster service workers to staff local
assistance centers, shelters, and emergency operation
centers or act as 2-1-1 operators during and after large
disasters.Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Gather epidemiology information to address public health
issues and partner with agencies to alert the community on
patterns and trends. These trends will be communicated
through press releases and an annual report published
online. (SC3)
? Contribute to research efforts in Alzheimer’s, Epilepsy,
Autism and Schizophrenic studies by providing tissue to
academic research organizations, with family consent.
(SC3)
? Continue to train medical residents, students and first
responders on forensic investigations by fulfilling 100% of
requests, at least 75, within 4 months of the request.
? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse
? Contribute to research efforts in childhood death by providing
statistics and case examples, and lending expertise
through active participation in groups including the San
Diego County Child Fatality Committee, the Methamphetamine
Strike Force, PDATF, MECAP, NICHD, National
Missing and Unidentified Persons System, and the California
SIDS Advisory Council. (SC7)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Use advanced forensic imaging to assist in the determination
of the cause and manner of death. (OE3)
? Gather imaging case information to locate objects, identify
John or Jane Does and document fractures, deformities
and post-surgical procedures.
? Use bar coding technology to ensure transfer and maintenance
of specimens, evidence, and bodies is accomplished
quickly, efficiently, and accurately.
? Complete 90% of homicide examination reports in 60 days
or less. (OE4)
? Assist in the healing process of those who have lost a loved
one by providing timely and compassionate service and
enable timely sharing of detailed information with customers
(families, law enforcement agencies, hospitals, insurance
companies, media, etc.) regarding the cause and
manner of death. (OE4)
? Notify 90% of next-of-kin for identified Medical Examiner
cases in 12 hours or less. (OE4)
? Enable timely funeral service for families by making 97% of
bodies ready for release in 7 days or less. (OE4)
? Complete 85% of investigative reports in 60 days or less.
? Complete 95% of toxicology reports in 60 days or less.
? Complete 85% of examination reports in 60 days or less.
? Provide 95% of report requests within 7 days or less.
Leverage internal communication resources, resource groups,
and social media to enhance employee understanding of Live
Well San Diego
? Continue supporting the Live Well San Diego campaign
through the efforts of Probation champions, who share
their contributions toward a healthy, safe and thriving
community in the work they perform. (HF5)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Employ operational practices to assist victims.
? Collect at least $2.3 million of restitution from adult probationers
for the benefit of crime victims.
? Collect at least $0.35 million of restitution from juvenile
related cases for the benefit of crime victims.
? Fully implement a balanced-approach model that reduces
crime by holding offenders accountable while providing them
access to rehabilitation
? Employ practices to provide rehabilitative services to
offenders. (SC8)
? Increase the percentage of high-risk juvenile probationers
linked to community-based services associated
with the juvenile’s assessed needs by 5%.
? Increase the percentage of high-risk adult offenders and
Post Release Community Supervision Offenders linked to
appropriate intervention services by 10% to address
factors that lead to criminal behavior.
? Increase the percentage of adult offenders on high-risk
supervision engaged in work readiness and employment
services by 10%.
? Continue to provide substance abuse services for at
least 99% of the youth assessed to have substance
abuse needs.
? Work to rehabilitate offenders by continuing to provide
employment readiness services to at least 99% of youth
in custody assessed as having an employment readiness
need.
? Expand juvenile mental health services to youth in
custody and in the community.
? Standardize the delivery of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
to youth in custody.
Employ operational practices to protect community safety
and reduce crime.
? Ensure 70% of juvenile probationers complete their probation
without a new sustained law violation.
? Ensure 65% of adult probationers complete their probation
without being convicted of a new crime.
? Ensure that 70% of Post Release Community Supervision
Offenders complete their supervision without being convicted
of a new crime.
? Participate in at least 536 multi-agency operations
including gang operations, truancy sweeps, probation
and parole sweeps and sobriety checkpoints.
? Employ practices to hold offenders accountable.
? Increase the number of searches of probationers by 5%
to ensure that probationers are in compliance with their
terms of supervision.
? Ensure the department standard of at least two contacts
per month is met for high-risk offenders.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Implement the use of mobile applications to improve the
efficiency of case management and supervision. (OE3)
? Continue to enhance the case management system to
provide efficiencies for the officers.
Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse
? Improve opportunities for children and families by assisting
juvenile delinquency clients to be successful in their rehabilitation
programs and on probation.
? Use juvenile record sealing statutes to assist juvenile
clients in clearing their records to gain employment or to
participate in training and/or education programs, for
90% of requests.
? Maintain the number of elapsed days between admission
and sentencing in juvenile cases at 28 days or less to
accelerate rehabilitation.
? Fully implement a balanced-approach model that reduces
crime by holding offenders accountable while providing them
access to rehabilitation
? Encourage clients to take advantage of services that will
allow them to thrive by successfully completing probation
and reduce the likelihood of reoffending. (SC8)
? File approximately 50,000 petitions or applications pursuant
to Proposition 47 (2014), Criminal Sentences. Misdemeanor
Penalties. Initiative Statute., for reduction of
felony convictions to misdemeanors, allowing clients
better access to employment, education and housing.
? Attend eight community events to assist community
members with Proposition 47 petitions and expungements.
? Promote collaborative justice by participating in specialty
courts aimed at linking services to clients with specialized
needs. (SC8)
? Participate in Offender Reentry Court, Adult and Juvenile
Drug Court, and Homeless Court to help ensure clients
obtain the services they need to become self-sufficient
and maintain a crime-free lifestyle.
? Maintain 90% of caseload capacity in the Behavioral
Health Court Calendar.
? Maintain 90% caseload capacity in the Veterans Treatment
Review Calendar.
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? File 475 misdemeanor expungement requests to help
clients obtain meaningful employment. (SE2)
? File 475 felony expungement requests to help clients
obtain meaningful employment. (SE2)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Improve the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of services by
storing case-related information electronically. (OE3)
? Receive discovery electronically via eDiscovery on 100%
of incoming adult felony cases.
? Begin testing eDiscovery with the San Diego City Attorney,
with the goal of developing an eDiscovery protocol
no later than June 30, 2017.
? Promote collaborative justice by establishing a professional
rapport and bond of trust with clients, and work with criminal
justice partners to ensure a reasonable and efficient
criminal justice system and obtain the best possible
outcome for the client.
? Resolve 90% of misdemeanor cases prior to trial when
doing so benefits the client more than litigation.
? Resolve 65% of felony cases within 60 days of arraignment
when doing so benefits the client more than litigation.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Ensure a qualified, well-trained and diverse workforce to
effectively represent all cases appointed to the department.
? Achieve 15 hours of annual continuing legal education
for all attorneys.
? Achieve eight hours of annual investigation-related training
for all investigators.
? Develop and maintain partnerships with educational and
community organizations to leverage resources and
address common needs.
? Maintain 100,000 hours provided by volunteers.
? Host two, one-week long trial academies for post-bar
clerks, ensuring their competence in trial work.
? Participate in four community outreach events through
the Public Defender’s Community Outreach Program.
? Train approximately 800 non-staff attorneys concurrently
with staff attorneys to build relationships and
strengthen the criminal justice system.
? Provide 50 streaming video trainings to the department’s
branch offices and other indigent defense agencies.
Every resident has the opportunity to make positive healthy
choices that reduce preventable deaths
? Continue to participate in the Love Your Heart blood pressure
campaign by partnering with fire stations to provide
free blood pressure checks to County employees and residents
in the unincorporated areas of the County.
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Provide outreach, education and enforcement of the
Defensible Space Program to property owners within CSA
135, including the mailing of over 13,000 courtesy notifications
and educational materials. (SC3)
? Coordinate with our regional partner, the California
Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE), to
enhance the Volunteer Reserve Firefighter program.
? Participate in twelve events to recruit Volunteer Reserve
Firefighters with a focus on military veterans.
? Create and implement standardized training for the Volunteer
Reserve Firefighter program.
? Continue coordination with the Sheriff’s Department and
CAL FIRE on regional air response to fire incidents and
ensure the third fire-capable County helicopter is fully integrated
into response plans.
? Participate in the annual countywide wildland fire training
exercise.
? Continue implementation of Step III of the County’s Fire
and Life Safety Reorganization Report, which will reorganize
the Pine Valley and San Diego Rural Fire Protection
Districts into CSA 135.
? Plan and implement paramedic services to upgrade several
fire stations in CSA 135. These fire stations will provide
Advance Life Support (ALS) to upgrade services to the communities.
? Establish service level goals for CSA 135 through the development
and implementation of a Standards of Cover (SOC).
The SOC is the process of Emergency Resources Deployment
Planning to improve services provided in CSA 135.
? Purchase and deploy fire apparatus to neighborhood fire
stations in accordance with the SOC.
? Streamline call processing and dispatch desk procedures to
reduce the average response time to 10 minutes in CSA 135.
? Provide seven Advanced Life Support (ALS) paramedic
engines in CSA 135.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Continue implementation of the ASAP NET and evaluation
of the volunteer fire stations’ communication network.
(OE3)
? Research, implement, and support information technology
tools to reduce firefighting risks and improve firefighting
outcomes. (OE3)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Promote community health through a strong interaction
with neighborhood fire stations.
Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to those individuals who have been affected
by traumatic circumstances
? Collaborate with Administrative Support to create a
trauma informed atmosphere in all facilities. This will be
accomplished by creating a professional setting that
includes a welcoming customer greeting area and a familyfriendly
setting. (HF1)
? Process 96% (38,016 of 39,600) of CalWORKs applications
timely. This is a key metric required by the State and
is a first step in assisting families toward achieving selfsufficiency.
? Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Enroll 95% (285 of 300) of eligible Nurse Family Partnership
and Maternal Child Health clients in CalFresh and Women
Infants and Children Program. (HF2)
? Ensure that 52% (156 of 300) of infants whose mothers
participate in the NFP and MCH programs continue to be
breastfed to 6 months of age. (HF2)
? Process 92% (121,440 of 132,000) of CalFresh applications
timely. CalFresh is a financial nutrition program to
help eligible families and individuals buy food to improve
their nutrition.
? Pursue policy change for healthy, safe, and thriving environments
with a special focus on residents who are in our care
or rely on us for support
? Enroll 100% (91,000) of newly eligible Medi-Cal recipients
as part of the ACA to increase the number of residents with
health insurance and cut the overall costs of health care to
families and individuals. (HF4)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Establish baseline number for chronic homeless, homeless
veterans and veteran families who are assessed using an
assessment tool (VI_SPDT) and/or referred to improve selfsufficiency.
(SC2)
? Increase the diversity of Live Well San Diego partners to
include tribal organizations, faith based entities and
several business sectors, which may include health, technology,
biotechnology, and hospitality. (SC2)
? Develop an evaluation component for Promise Neighborhoods
to outline specific strategic roles for South Region
Child Welfare Services, Public Health Services, Family
Resource Center Eligibility staff and other HHSA Programs.
(SC2)
? Deliver age-appropriate vaccines to 98% (16,238 of 16,500)
of children 0-18 years of age served at regional Public
Health Centers and clinics to protect them from diseases
such as measles and whooping cough. (SC3)
? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime neglect and abuse. (See Child
Welfare Services section for more information on family
strengthening)
? Reunify 47% (152 of 325) of children removed from the
home due to safety concerns with parent(s) within 12
months. (SC6)
? Provide 890 East Region customers and community partners
the education and information necessary for prevention,
early intervention and family strengthening activities. (SC6)
? Develop a plan with Chula Vista Police Department and
Child Welfare Services to implement the Smart Policing Initiative
to reduce the occurrence of domestic violence calls
when children are involved. (SC7)
? Encourage 50% (2,350 of 4,700) of families to participate in
quarterly meetings regarding their children for joint planning
with social workers. Families who participate in jointcase
planning are more likely to follow through with plans
and meet safety goals to achieve positive outcomes for the
children.
? Ensure 87% (1,445 of 1,700) of children in foster care (8 days
or more, but less than 12 months) have fewer than three
placements to minimize the trauma that children experience
and lessen negative impact to their school performance.
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Work with community partners in Central, East, and South
Region to develop effective resources that allow refugees
to acculturate, gain independence and enhance long-term
self-sufficiency.
Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Increase by 5% (5,116 to 5,371) the number of CalFresh
recipients who are seniors living in rural areas by promoting
the use of video interviewing for public assistance programs.
(OE3)
? Increase by 20% the number of status reports and renewals
submitted through Benefits CalWIN, by educating customers
about resources and pathways to services online
without the need to visit or call an office. (OE4)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Create a customer service approach that is trauma
informed and build an environment that is conducive to
reducing trauma for residents seeking services. (OE5)
? Develop a plan to enhance ACCESS Center self-service call
features and a webpage to improve the customer service
experience for San Diego County residents.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Develop a plan to create an HHSA Job Shadow program to
provide 50 qualified employees the opportunity to explore
a specific career interest, develop knowledge and collaborate
to build relationships which provide opportunities for
growth. (OE6)
? Develop a plan to improve the HHSA New Employee Orientation
to ensure a welcoming atmosphere for all new
hires to feel valued, become engaged and integrated to
the shared vision of Live Well San Diego. Providing new
hires the opportunity to feel valued leads to increased
retention and a productive workforce with an increased
appreciation toward their contributions in the lives of our
customers. Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to those individuals who have been affected
by traumatic circumstances
? Collaborate with Administrative Support to create a
trauma informed atmosphere in all facilities. This will be
accomplished by creating a professional setting that
includes a welcoming customer greeting area and a familyfriendly
setting. (HF1)
? Pursue policy change for healthy, safe and thriving environments
with a special focus on residents who are in our care
or rely on us for support
? Ensure 94% (20,680 of 22,000) of annual IHSS reassessments
are recertified timely so clients receive the appropriate
level of care to remain safely in their own home.
? Conduct 97% (6,305 of 6,500) of face-to-face contacts
within 10 days of receiving an APS referral to provide
timely assistance and resources which help adults meet
their own needs.
? Maintain 98% (539 of 550) of participation in the MSSP
case management program by providing resources and/or
assistance which help avoid, delay or remedy inappropriate
placement in nursing facilities.
? Ensure 90% (10,350 of 11,500) of initial eligibility determinations
for IHSS are completed within the 45 day program
mandate.
? Complete 100% (1,050) of assessment notes on conservatorship
investigations within 10 business days of assignment
of referral to minimize risk and loss to the client and
community.
? Ensure 95% (57 of 60) of Acutely Vulnerable Adult (AVA)
APS cases are closed with the client at a stable or higher
rating as measured by the AVA Safety Focused Outcome
Measure.
? Conduct 22,000 interviews to provide veterans and
dependents with benefits counseling and information and
referral services.
? Process 2,750 compensation and pension claims for veterans
and dependents.
? Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Provide the Healthier Living program with nutritional education
and ensure 82% (246 of 300) of graduates adopt one
or more healthy habits during the 6-week workshop. (HF2)
? Prevent the readmission of 325 high risk Medicare patients
by providing comprehensive, person-centered, care transition
services.
? Decrease the number of older adults participating in senior
nutrition program who report experiencing food insecurity
by 2%.
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Ensure 100% PA/PG/PC (2,560) investigations begin within
2 business days of assignment to an investigator to ensure
protection and well-being as mandated by the Omnibus
Conservatorship and Guardianship Reform Act.
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges
? Connect 2,010 older adults with volunteer opportunities,
including the Retired & Senior Volunteer Program (RSVP)
and intergenerational programs, to support thriving, a Live
Well San Diego component which includes volunteerism
and civic engagement.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Assist Administrative Support in the development of an
electronic information exchange system that supports a
person-centered delivery by enabling collaboration
among County programs with shared customers. The Countywide Knowledge Integration Program (KIP) Unit
will design and coordinate a new system to link with multiple
information exchange systems and improve customer
service. (OE3)
? Complete the Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly
(RCFE) pilot and implement the rating system for a
minimum of 30 facilities within the first year.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Collaborate with consumer advocates, residential care
facilities and Better Business Bureau to develop a rating
system for residential care facilities to provide consumers
and family members guidance on how to select the best
facility for their needs. (OE4)
? Ensure action on the Alzheimer's Project implementation
plan and initiate ongoing actions to prevent and address
elder abuse and help community members plan for their
financial health and end-of-life needs. Create a regional
strategy to improve services for those with Alzheimer’s
disease by coordinating community responses to incidents
of wandering, identifying affordable and available care services
for those with the disease, providing support to caregivers
and efforts to find a cure for the disease. (OE4)
? Develop a plan with the Veterans Coalition, other County
departments and the community to engage and connect veterans
to services through use of technology and other efforts.
(OE4)
? Participate in a minimum of 6 Customer Service trainings
for HHSA Departmental Customer Service Ambassadors to
assist with developing skills of over 5,000 County employees
so that they Agency provides customers an exceptional
and effective County experience. (OE5)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled adaptable and diverse
workforce by providing opportunities for our employees to
feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Work with Administrative Support to develop a plan to
create an HHSA Job Shadow program to provide 50 qualified
employees the opportunity to explore a specific career
interest, develop knowledge and collaborate to build relationships
which provide opportunities for growth. (OE6)
? Work with Administrative Support to develop a plan to
improve the HHSA New Employee Orientation to ensure a
welcoming atmosphere for all new hires to feel valued,
become engaged and integrated to the shared vision of
Live Well San Diego. Providing new hires the opportunity to
feel valued leads to increased retention and a productive
workforce with an increased appreciation toward their
contributions in the lives of our customers.

Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to those individuals who have been affected
by traumatic circumstances
? Collaborate with Aging & Independence Services to
provide services to an additional 5% of older adults by
improving access to prevention, early intervention, and
treatment services. (HF1)
? Expand the County’s crisis residential treatment bed capacity
by 16.7% (from 84 to 98) by building a crisis residential
center in the North Inland HHSA Service Region. This is a
multi-year goal and is funded by a California Health Facilities
Financing Authority and the Mental Health Services
Act. (HF1)
? Provide training to 5,000 employees countywide to
enhance community recognition of suicide warning signs
so they can refer those at risk to available resources.
Ensure 42% of alcohol and drug treatment participants
complete services to surpass the statewide average of 37%
and demonstrate the effectiveness of programs within the
County of San Diego.
? Collect baseline data to ensure that 100% of calls to the
Access and Crisis Line are answered in an average of 60
seconds to ensure prompt service.
? Pursue policy change for healthy, safe, and thriving environments
with a special focus on residents who are in our care
or rely on us for support
? Provide 260 KidStart foster care children ages 0-5 with
developmental delays and behavioral health needs, integrated
services in collaboration with Child Welfare Services
and First 5 Commission. (HF4)
? Implement a plan to provide services for people with
severe mental illness who are reluctant to engage in treatment,
in accordance with Assembly Bill 1421, also known as
“Laura’s Law,” in collaboration with County Counsel, Sheriff’s
Department, Courts, Public Defender, Aging & Independence
Services, Public Administrator/Public Guardian/
Public Conservator, and local law enforcement. (HF4)
? Improve the service delivery system through the ongoing
integration of physical and behavioral health services with
SmartCare, a modified service delivery system program
that promotes care coordination between physical and
behavioral health services; and has enormous potential for
enhancing the quality of care provided for clients as well as
increasing efficiencies in the delivery of health care services
overall. (HF4)
? Increase by 5% (from 1,100 to 1,155) the psychiatric consultation
services to pediatric providers who serve children
with Medi-Cal to ensure that behavioral health and physical
health needs are met.
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Expand the Psychiatric Emergency Response Team (PERT),
by 5 (from 23 teams to 28) to provide education, training
and clinical support to the Sheriff’s Department, local law
enforcement personnel and the community for calls involving
persons having a mental health crisis. The Public Safety
Group will also be adding 5 PERT teams. (SC2)
? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse
? Support educational growth and overall well-being of
adolescents who complete alcohol and drug treatment by
requiring educational assessments in all client plans
resulting in a minimum of 95% either completing high
school or the equivalent, or being enrolled in an educational
setting. (SC8)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Achieve a 90% or higher client satisfaction among clients in
rural communities who are served through an innovative
care model which integrates primary care and behavioral
health services.
? Admit 90% (1,296 of 1,440) of adolescents entering nonresidential
alcohol and drug treatment programs within 14
days to ensure timely access to care.
? Maintain 17% or lower readmission rate at the San Diego
County Psychiatric Hospital demonstrating accountability
and commitment to outstanding patient care.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Assist Administrative Support in the development of an
electronic information exchange system that supports a
person-centered delivery by enabling collaboration among
County programs with shared customers. The Countywide
Knowledge Integration Program (KIP) Unit will design and
coordinate a new system to link with multiple information
exchange systems and improve customer service. (OE3)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Participate in a minimum of 6 Customer Service trainings
for HHSA Departmental Customer Service Ambassadors to
assist with developing skills of over 5,000 County employees
so that he Agency provides customers an exceptional
and effective County experience. (OE5)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Lead efforts to increase understanding among HHSA staff
of how trauma affects individuals, families, groups, and
communities by implementing a trauma informed model
that recognizes how trauma impacts the overall wellness of
clients and staff.
Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to those individuals who have been affected
by traumatic circumstances
? Ensure 80% (484 of 605) of children, ages 0-17, with a new
CWS case are screened for mental health needs. These
efforts will ensure that all children have access to trauma
informed mental health services. (HF1)
? Increase 10% (from 550 to 605), the recruitment and licensure
of foster families willing to parent older children or
teens particularly those children stepping down from
group home care.
? Provide 78% (209 of 268) of youth enrolled in intensive
home-based services (i.e. Wraparound) with resources to
help the youth remain or be placed in a home-like setting,
further improve their connection to home and community
and reduce the use of costly group home placements.
? Increase family engagement to 30% (150 of 500) of referrals
and cases. Family engagement efforts are shown to
increase accurate assessment and decision making by 70%
which can ultimately prevent the removal of children and/
or facilitate more timely reunification.
? Support stability by placing 55% (743 of 1,350) of foster
care children with a relative or close non-family member,
minimizing trauma to children by maintaining their connections
to familiar environments.
? Support stability by maintaining the number of children,
87% (1,479 of 1,700), who have been in foster care for less
than 12 months and have fewer than three placements.
Fewer placements minimize the trauma that children experience
and may help lessen negative impact to their school
performance.
? Enhance the Cultural Broker Program to provide a bridge
for the African American community and families in child
welfare to develop concrete supports and social connections
to strengthen families.
? Pursue policy changes for healthy, safe and thriving environments
with a special focus on residents who are in our care or
rely on us for support
? Increase by 5% (from 325 to 341), the number of adoption
finalizations to achieve permanence for children.
Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse.
? Develop in collaboration with Probation, Behavioral
Health, Public Health, and Juvenile Court an interagency
protocol to serve commercially sexually exploited children.
In addition, develop a training curriculum that will educate
foster youth on how to recognize and avoid commercial
sexual exploitation. (SC6)
? Determine baseline data for eligible 17-year-old foster
youth placed in San Diego County who participate in an
Independence Mapping (IM). This process engages youth
and their support networks in identifying strengths, needs
or barriers in relation to education, employment, healthy
relationships, and stable housing while identifying next
steps to assist the youth in their transition to adulthood.
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges.
? Address disproportionality and disparate outcomes for
families by engaging Child Abuse Coordinating Council
stakeholders to review current research, promising practices
and to develop an action plan.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers.
? Assist Administrative Support with the development of an
electronic information exchange system that supports a
person-centered delivery by enabling collaboration among
County programs with shared customers. The Countywide
Knowledge Integration Program (KIP) Unit will design and
coordinate a new system to link with multiple information
exchange systems and improve customer service. (OE3)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Participate in a minimum of 6 Customer Service trainings
for HHSA Departmental Customer Service Ambassadors to
assist with developing skills of over 5,000 County employees
so that they Agency provides customers an exceptional
and effective County experience. (OE5)
? Develop and implement a customer satisfaction survey for
foster parents to gather baseline information to further
strengthen the partnership between foster parents and
CWS staff.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled adaptable and diverse
workforce by providing opportunities for our employees to
feel valued, engaged and trusted.
? Work with Administrative Support to develop a plan to
create an HHSA Job Shadow program to provide 50 qualified
employees the opportunity to explore a specific
career interest, develop knowledge and collaborate to
build relationships which provide opportunities for
growth. (OE6)
? Work with Administrative Support to develop a plan to
improve the HHSA New Employee Orientation to ensure a
welcoming atmosphere for all new hires to feel valued,
become engaged and integrated to the shared vision of
Live Well San Diego. Providing new hires the opportunity
to feel valued leads to increased retention and a productive
workforce with an increased appreciation toward their
contributions in the lives of our customers.
Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to those individuals who have been affected
by traumatic circumstances
? Ensure 90% (2,700 of 3,000) of children in out-of-home
placement receive preventive health examinations to identify
and correct undetected health issues. (HF1)
? Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Adopt a comprehensive County of San Diego Nutrition and
Food Systems Standard to improve the nutritional value of
foods offered through County congregate meal programs
and food services, procurements, meetings and events.
This comprehensive standard will build upon existing
federal and State requirements and will be adopted by the
end of Fiscal Year 2017 after conducting outreach and
designing the standard with input from consumers, providers
and other stakeholders. (HF2)
? Encourage and promote residents to take important and
meaningful steps to protect themselves and their families for
the first 72 hours during a disaster
? Ensure preparedness for disaster or public health threat, in
collaboration with the Office of Emergency Services, by
activating the public health emergency response system
five times annually. (SC1)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Monitor area medical response times to ensure that 90%
of calls are within established response time standards.
(SC2)
? Ensure 100% (1,000) of individuals receiving a newly confirmed
HIV diagnosis are linked to primary care with a verified
medical visit within 90 days of results disclosure, to
increase access to health care and control the spread of HIV.
? Ensure 100% (210) of tuberculosis (TB) cases are reported
within one working day from start of treatment to prevent
transmission of TB.
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Increase number of Live Well @ Work locations by 25 to
ensure local employers adopt policies and practices that
increase opportunities for physical activity, access to healthy
foods, and other changes to create a healthier workplace.
(SE1)
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Gain recognition as a nationally accredited public health
agency through the Public Health Accreditation Board
(PHAB), demonstrating achievement of nationally recognized,
practice-focused and evidenced-based standards.
(OE1)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Assist Administrative Support with the development of an
electronic information exchange system that supports a
person-centered delivery by enabling collaboration
among County programs with shared customers. The
Countywide Knowledge Integration Program (KIP) Unit
will design and coordinate a new system to link with multiple
information exchange systems and improve customer
service. (OE3)
? Initiate 100% (270) of communicable disease investigations
within 24 hours of report to reduce disease transmission.
Examples of reportable communicable diseases include
hepatitis A, meningococcal disease, and E. coli.
? Expedite and improve the accuracy of 68% (28,560 of
42,000) of referrals for California Children’s Services
through eQuest, a web referral system for children with
certain physical limitations and chronic health conditions
and diseases.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged, and trusted
? Conduct and implement a minimum of six quality improvement
projects to increase efficiency and improve effectiveness
of operations. (OE5)
? Work with Administrative Support to develop a plan to
create an HHSA Job Shadow program to provide 50 qualified
employees the opportunity to explore a specific career
interest, develop knowledge and collaborate to build relationships
which provide opportunities for growth. (OE6)
? Work with Administrative Support to develop a plan to
improve the HHSA New Employee Orientation to ensure a
welcoming atmosphere for all new hires to feel valued,
become engaged and integrated to the shared vision of
Live Well San Diego. Providing new hires the opportunity
to feel valued leads to increased retention and a productive
workforce with an increased appreciation toward their
contributions in the lives of our customers.
Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to those individuals who have been affected
by traumatic circumstances
? Work with HHSA departments to create a trauma informed
atmosphere in all facilities. This will be accomplished by
creating a professional setting that includes a welcoming
customer greeting area and a family-friendly setting. (HF1)
? Assist 66% (8,310 of 12,581) of students entering kindergarten
to thrive by increasing the number of children identified
with a developmental, social emotional or behavioral
need and provide the resources necessary to reduce the
occurrence of undetected and/or untreated conditions in
children entering school. (HF1)
? Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Educate 94% (7,215 of 7,676) of parents receiving First 5
Commission services to provide them the knowledge and
capacity to advocate for their child's health needs and
encourage the healthy development of children ages 0
through 5. (HF2)
? Pursue policy change for healthy, safe and thriving environments
with a special focus on residents who are in our care
or rely on us for support
? Support creation of 50 new partnerships to increase efforts
that positively impact the health and well-being of residents
through Live Well San Diego. (HF3)
? Leverage internal communication resources, resource
groups, and social media to enhance employee understanding
of Live Well San Diego
? Increase County employees’ understanding of Live Well
San Diego through an internal communication campaign.
The increase will be measured through a survey conducted
in Fiscal Year 2015–16 and compared with survey conducted
in Fiscal Year 2012–13. Increasing awareness of Live
Well San Diego allows employees to cultivate stakeholder
relationships and gain public trust as they are all working
together towards one vision. (HF5)
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? In partnership with the United Way of San Diego County and
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), support and promote the
availability of free income tax services to increase applications
for the Earned Income Tax and other credits. (SE2)
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Develop a countywide marketing campaign to raise awareness
about Live Well San Diego among San Diego County
residents and encourage positive choices. This campaign
will promote healthy, safe and thriving communities,
including a sustainable food system that provides fresh and
nutritious food for residents. (SE3)
? Foster an environment where residents engage in recreational
interests by enjoying parks, open spaces and outdoor
experiences
? Host and promote the 2016 Live Well San Diego 5K Walk/
Run and Health Fair to provide a healthy and informative
outdoor experience to reach 3,000 county residents. The
Live Well San Diego 5K event encourages residents to exercise
with family and friends at a local park while supporting
thousands of children in foster care and receiving health
information. (SE4)
? Support the County of San Diego, Parks and Recreation,
Summer Movies In The Park efforts through Coast2Coast
funding and the accompanying display of videos to promote
a healthy, safe and thriving region. The Summer Movies In
The Park series is free to residents, offers fun activities for
children and encourages families to visit local parks, countywide,
for an estimated total of 40,000 residents. (SE4)
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges
? Train 15 Resident Leadership Academy (RLA) facilitators,
increasing the regional capacity to deliver the RLA curriculum
which engages local leaders in the creation of healthy,
safe and thriving San Diego neighborhoods. (SE7)
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Conduct 26 comprehensive financial reviews of contractors
to ensure compliance with standards and financial controls
are in place. This activity will help assure that the County
maintains fiscal stability. (OE1)
? Conduct 14 Quality Assurance reviews to ensure that contracting
policies and procedures are in accordance with
funding sources.
Train 100 HHSA employees on contract administration
topics to develop, strengthen, and maintain the procurement
knowledge and effectively improve contractor performance.
(OE2)
? Coordinate 8 financial trainings comprised of budgetary
topics impacting program operations such as funding
streams and fiscal impacts to service delivery. (OE2)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Build an electronic information exchange system that supports
a person-centered delivery by enabling collaboration
among County programs with shared customers. The
Countywide Knowledge Integration Program (KIP) Unit
will design and coordinate a new system to link with multiple
information exchange systems and improve customer
service. (OE3)
? Increase the number of unique visitors to the Live Well San
Diego website (LiveWellSD.org) by 50% (from 16,144 to
24,216) by providing access to timely, relevant news and
materials. (OE4)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Coordinate 6 Customer Service trainings for HHSA Departmental
Customer Service Ambassadors to assist with developing
skills of over 5,000 County employees so that the
Agency provides customers an exceptional and effective
County experience. (OE5)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Develop a plan to create an HHSA Job Shadow program to
provide 50 qualified employees the opportunity to explore
a specific career interest, develop knowledge and collaborate
to build relationships which provide opportunities for
growth. (OE6)
? Develop a plan to improve the HHSA New Employee Orientation
to ensure a welcoming atmosphere for all new
hires to feel valued, become engaged and integrated to
the shared vision of Live Well San Diego. Providing new
hires the opportunity to feel valued leads to increased
retention and a productive workforce with an increased
appreciation toward their contributions in the lives of our
customers. 
Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Through the interdepartmental Live Well San Diego Food
System Working Group promote food waste reduction and
encourage food donations at food facilities, processors,
growers, and distributers. Facilitate relationship building
between food industry members, growers and food banks
to remove barriers to food donation. (HF3)
? Ensure certified organic produce is safe and healthy by
increasing produce sampling for illegal pesticide residue by
50%, from 30 to 45, at Certified Farmers’ Markets and
other outlets and locations.
? Leverage resources within the Pesticide Regulation and the
Agricultural Standards programs to ensure healthy food by
coordinating pesticide inspections at Certified Producers’
farms and verifying safe use of pesticides in local food production.
? Conduct 20 pesticide inspections at Certified Producers’
farms.
Pursue policy change for healthy, safe and thriving environments
with a special focus on residents who are in our care
or rely on us for support
? Through the interdepartmental Live Well San Diego Food
System Working Group develop a comprehensive County
of San Diego Food and Nutrition Standards that will
address custodial populations, County-hosted meetings,
events and cafeterias. (HF4)
? Plan, build, and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Collaborate with federal, State, and local law enforcement
agencies in efforts to mitigate, prevent, and combat negative
economic and personal impacts that copper and metal
theft have on our community. (SC3)
? AWM will participate in 100% of monthly meetings in
Fiscal Year 2015-16 of the San Diego Regional Metal
Theft Working group to support the effort and disseminate
current information to Weights and Measures
inspectors.
? To deter metal theft, Weights and Measures program
will conduct 100% of the inspections assigned in Fiscal
Year 2015–16 by the California Department of Food and
Agriculture Division of Measurement Standards (DMS) of
all weighmaster recyclers and junk dealers and report
non-compliances back to DMS for follow-up.
? Promote the safe and legal use of pesticides and ensure
timely resolution of non-compliances related to pesticide
treatments by completing pesticide-related complaint
investigations within an average of 75 days.
? Protect county residents, pesticide workers, and the environment
by monitoring structural fumigations in San Diego
County.
? Conduct 40 undercover surveillance inspections.
? Conduct employee safety and records review audits of
each company headquartered in the county.
? Conduct 380 unannounced inspections.
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Simplify and clarify the process for establishing a new Certified
Farmers’ Market (CFM) by instituting an on-line,
interdepartmental CFM Roadmap, a one-stop information
guide to navigate the requirements of the six departments/
agencies involved with setting up a CFM. (SE1)
? Support a fair marketplace and consumer confidence in
the accuracy of product weight, measure and price.
? Increase undercover test sales of recyclable beverage containers
from 37% (53) to 50% (72) of all recyclers to ensure
consumer confidence and equity in the marketplace.
? Conduct undercover test purchases of gasoline at 71 of
712 gas stations to ensure consumers are getting what
they pay for.
? Ensure consumer confidence by completing 100% of
approximately 30,000 annual inspections for fuel
meters, taxi meters, water dispensers, computing scales
and counter scales.
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Promote the diversion of recyclable materials from landfills
through recycling events in conjunction with the Departments
of Public Works and Environmental Health and
industry by implementing two collection events for recycling
of used pesticide containers. (SE3)
? Establish a pilot program to provide outreach and training
to promote the licensing of maintenance gardener pest
control businesses.
? Prevent the introduction of costly invasive pests.
? Reduce the possibility of an invasive pest quarantine to
avoid stakeholder cost associated with mitigating and
complying with regulatory requirements by maintaining
the mandated 9,750 insect detection traps.
? Increase inspections of root sampling by 10% (339 to
380).
? Increase permission rate to open U.S. first class mail
packages identified by agricultural product detector
dogs to intercept invasive agricultural pests from 10%
(60) to 30% (120) packages.
? Partner with the California Department of Food and
Agriculture, SANDAG, the San Diego County Weed Management
Area, Partners for Fish and Wildlife, the San
Diego Management and Monitoring Program, the California
Invasive Plant Council, and the California Conservation
Corps in the preservation, maintenance and
management of preserved land by controlling and eradicating
invasive weeds.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? At least 10% of employees participate in a financial literacy
training in order to promote understanding and individual
contribution to the County’s fiscal stability. (OE2)
? Increase efficiency and reduce operational costs associated
with compliance actions by developing and implementing
an automated Business Case Management System Letter of
Warning report for pesticide violations.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovation technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers.
? Ensure 100% of all Weights and Measures auto-generated
Notices of Proposed Actions (NOPA) are mailed to customers
within 45 days from the time of inspection.
Expand Accela Citizen Access to enable online payment of
program fees. (OE3)
? Leverage Business Case Management System technology
to automate tracking of revenue sources for the Integrated
Pest Control program optimizing service delivery. (OE3)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Increase qualified candidate applications by 50% by
holding one job fair and working with local community colleges
to promote entry-level positions as a pathway to long
and rewarding careers working in Agriculture, Weights and
Measures.
Pursue policy change for healthy, safe and thriving environments
with a special focus on residents who are in our care or
rely on us for support
? Increase public health protection by implementing new
statewide guidelines and related tools for assessing and
mitigating the health risks associated with toxic air contaminants,
thereby ensuring that permitting decisions are
based on new science about the increased childhood sensitivity
to air toxics. (HF4)
? Plan, build, and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Investigate 100% of the air pollution complaints received
within two business days or less to minimize the impact of
air pollutants on county residents and visitors. (SC3)
? Maintain the capability to deploy an emergency network of
two fine particulate matter (PM2.5) monitors within 48
hours of any wildfire and link the instruments via satellite
for real-time data delivery to the public. (SC3)
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Maintain a robust business assistance program by continuing
to provide training sessions, online videos, courtesy
inspections, informational materials, and other activities to
aid the business community in achieving compliance with
air pollution rules and regulations.
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Conduct a minimum of two informational events in collaboration
with other County departments and public agencies
to enhance regional awareness and understanding of
air quality rules and regulations.
Conduct a minimum of one informational event in collaboration
with other County departments to create awareness
of grant funding opportunities for delivery of County services
in a manner that reduces air pollutant emissions from
motor vehicles and other mobile sources. (SE3)
? Develop a regional air quality plan in Fiscal Year 2016–17 to
ensure measures are in place to expeditiously attain the
2008 national standard (limit) for ground-level ozone
countywide.
? Collect valid ozone measurement data on at least 90% of
days in the year, surpassing the federal requirement of 75%
and ensuring that plans to attain clean air are based on an
accurate assessment of existing conditions.
? Conduct a minimum of 7,400 inspections of equipment
and processes at regulated facilities to verify compliance
with air quality rules and regulations and minimize excess
emissions of air pollutants.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? At least 10% of employees participate in a financial literacy
training in order to promote understanding and individual
contribution to the County’s fiscal stability. (OE2)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Create two new online videos instructing customers of procedures
for completing and submitting online applications
for air quality permits or project grants and/or procedures
to comply with air quality rules and regulations. (OE3)
? Create a web-based automated system for access by staff
and external customers that calculates and displays labor
costs and revenue account balances for permit applications
in real-time. (OE4)
? Expedite permittees’ access to information by increasing
the types of permit related documents available in electronic
form for secure online viewing and downloading,
such as emissions measurement reports, historical permits,
and vital permit-related communications. (OE4)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Enhance the existing Blue Sky Leadership Award program
by developing and implementing a process to recognize
regulated facilities with a written acclamation upon
passing routine inspections.
? Provide timely services by taking action on 100% of construction
permits for new or modified equipment within
180 days of receipt of a completed application.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Enhance workforce development and strengthen leadership
skills and succession planning by developing and
implementing a pilot program for job shadowing and crosstraining.
Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Coordinate with the Health and Human Services Agency
(HHSA) to assist local retailers with their plan check conversions
to increase the number of stores offering fresh fruits
and vegetables to underserved communities and thereby
reducing food deserts. (HF3)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Evaluate pool operators to ensure compliance with new
state pool safety regulations which are intended to make
public pools safer. (SC2)
? Complete food facility plan check and facility inspections to
ensure compliance with regulations to promote safe communities
and improve the quality of life for all consumers.
(SC3)
? Pursue formal enforcement of businesses with Class I violations
in order to prevent future hazardous waste spills and
exposures. Class I violations are those violations that are
willful, intentional, negligent, knowing or should have
known, include false documents, violations that pose a significant
threat of harm to the environment or human life;
chronic violations may also be considered Class I. (SC3)
? Require drought management plans for each of the 162
DEH-regulated small public water systems by June 30,
2017, to ensure all systems are able to provide clean, safe
and reliable water supplies. (SC3)
? Provide additional sharps collection kiosks to unincorporated
areas of the county so residents can properly dispose
of their sharps waste. (SC3)
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Streamline the permitting process for local fisherman by
providing guidelines and reducing regulations which will
boost the local seafood industry and provide safe and fresh
seafood to the residents creating a sustainable and thriving
environment. (SE1)
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Monitor Underground Storage Tanks holding hazardous
materials and hazardous wastes through annual inspections
to reduce pollution to groundwater and natural
resources.
? Promote wastewater treatment alternatives that will
enhance land development opportunities while preserving
resources and protecting public health.
? Participate in the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA) Environmental Review Process to reduce future
mosquito breeding sources.
? Foster an environment where residents engage in recreational
interests by enjoying parks, open spaces and outdoor
experiences
? Provide recreational water quality training classes each
year to surfing or other enthusiast or environmental
groups including children attending surf camps or other
summer camps (e.g., junior lifeguard programs). The trainings
will enable these group members to make informed
decisions about where and when it is safe to enter the
water and how to find current information regarding local
beach water quality. (
Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? At least 10% of employees participate in a financial literacy
training in order to promote understanding and individual
contribution to the County’s fiscal stability. (OE2)
? Develop and pursue regional partnerships to enhance
home-generated sharps collection infrastructure to ensure
superior service to San Diego County residents.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Utilize data to ensure a comprehensive aerial green swimming
pool identification program to reduce urban mosquito
breeding sources which leads to superior customer
service. (OE3)
? Utilize existing tools and foster the development of new
technologies to track violations and ensure businesses
return to compliance for hazardous materials and hazardous
waste violations in a timely manner. (OE3)
? Provide the public with instant access to site clean-up and
monitoring well permit case files online, saving time and
reducing costs to both the public and staff providing the
information. (OE4)
? Hazardous Materials Division to exceed State mandated
Unified Program inspection frequencies by 5%.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Continue to implement the County’s Customer, Service
Program initiative in the department and work with all DEH
employees to use a positive approach to provide customers
with a positive experience.
Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Conduct nutrition education for 500 low-income families
with children to reduce the risk of childhood obesity and
chronic diseases such as diabetes, heart disease and high
blood pressure through lifestyle change related to diet and
physical activity residents with local food sources, nutrition
education, and nutrition assistance. (HF2)
? Conduct nutrition education for 2,000 children and youth
from low income and limited resource families to promote
nutrition and physical activity for a healthy lifestyle that
can reduce the risk of childhood obesity and chronic diseases
such as diabetes and heart disease. (HF2)
? Disseminate science-based food safety information to consumers
on issues including home food preservation. (HF2)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Recruit and train 350 adult and teen 4-H volunteers to
deliver positive youth development experiences to youth
ages 5-19 years which will enable youth to reach their full
potential as competent, confident leaders of character
who contribute and are connected to their communities.
(SC2)
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Continue work on a needs assessment to identify and
develop resources for sustainable urban farming to assist
with promoting business confidence. (SE1)
? Provide business and risk management education to agricultural
producers in areas such as financial management,
food safety, and business management through a
minimum of two outreach activities to the agricultural
community. (SE1)
? Conduct research projects on high-density avocado plantings
to maintain the viability and profitability of avocado
production in San Diego County. (SE1)
? Assist families in achieving and maintaining financial selfsufficiency
through household savings and debt reduction
through a minimum of two outreach activities to San Diego
County residents, various agencies, and other cooperators.
(SE1)
? Expand market opportunities for agricultural producers in
San Diego County through agricultural tourism, direct marketing,
and value added activities to assist with increasing
business confidence by conducting four outreach activities
to agricultural producers.
? Support the development and updating of agricultural
related policies, legislation and regulations technical
research and analysis, providing subject matter expertise
and/or participating in briefings and public hearings.
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Identify threats to water supply systems from pollution,
invasive species, and climate change to develop management
practices that aid growers in meeting the regulatory
requirements of federal, State, and local laws and that also
consider the local climate, land use issues and other
resource constraints.
? Provide residents and the agricultural community concrete
ways or methods to reduce water usage and/or Total
Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) impacts through a minimum
of four outreach activities.
? Identify threats to aquatic and riparian ecosystems from
pollution, invasive species, and climate change and provide
a minimum of three outreach activities to residents and
other collaborators providing concrete ways to reduce
these threats to riparian ecosystems.
? Identify problems and potential solutions for endemic and
invasive pests such as insects, diseases, weeds, etc. impacting
San Diego agriculture, nursery, ornamental horticultural
and landscapes though a minimum of four outreach
activities to nursery and ornamental horticulture growers,
residents and agricultural community members.
? Maintain, support and manage the volunteer Master Gardener
program to provide research-based information in
the areas of home gardening, community gardening, landscaping,
water conservation and pest management to San
Diego County residents through a minimum of 400 office
consultations, 10 educational exhibits and 4,000 hours of
volunteer service.
? Encourage adoption of local research-derived invasive
plant management methods to enhance restoration of
natural habitats. Collaborate with Department of Parks and
Recreation to encourage management or eradication of
invasive plants through outreach activities and utilize largescale
field demonstrations.
? Educate natural land owners, managers and staff on appropriate
invasive plant control methods through a minimum
of five outreach activities including presentations.
Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to those individuals who have been affected
by traumatic circumstances
? Partner with a military organization to create programs
that provide a therapeutic component through outdoor
recreational or work experiences for those with traumatic
exposures. (HF1)
? Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Support the availability of healthy food in communities
through agricultural leases, community gardens, orchard
donations, and education programs. (HF2)
? Improve healthy eating education by creating and marketing
brochures for the “Different Food For Different
Activities” Campaign to promote proper food for preand
post- recreational activities.
Partner with HHSA to acquire produce from local food
sources to serve at afterschool programs and community
centers that provide snacks.
? Provide residents with opportunities to access healthy
local foods by establishing one Farmers Market in a
County park.
? Pursue policy change for healthy, safe and thriving environments
with a special focus on residents who are in our care
or rely on us for support
? Align the Parkland Dedication Ordinance (PLDO) with Live
Well San Diego through update of the Ordinance to ensure
that the active recreational needs of residents in new
planned communities are met. (HF4)
? Leverage internal communication resources, resource
groups, and social media to enhance employee understanding
of Live Well San Diego
? Increase employee education and activity through the
support of Live Well San Diego. (HF5)
? Incentivize employee participation in Live Well San Diego
by hosting at least four fitness/wellness based recreational
events per year through a partnership with the
Department of Human Resource’s Wellness Program and
County Employee Resource Groups.
? Promote County parks on the County intranet site,
InSite, by highlighting park features that appeal to specific
age groups and activity levels of employees and
their families.
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Improve quality of life for all residents through the planning,
constructing, and maintenance of safe, healthy, and
inclusionary opportunities throughout the park system.
(SC2)
? Increase park accessibility and safety for users of all abilities
by creating an ADA Transition Action Plan that identifies
and prioritizes improvements to existing facilities.
? Reduce the number of day’s grass fields are closed for
maintenance by converting one athletic field to synthetic
turf which will allow 60 additional days of field use
leading to an increase in overall health of field users
based on research showing that life expectancy is
increased by two hours for every one hour of exercise.
? Continue to develop a comprehensive network of safe
and accessible non-motorized transportation throughout
the county by connecting new and existing trails
with adjacent trail networks, regional trails, bikeways,
and pathways in three areas.
? Increase safety for staff and visitors by ensuring all major
improvement projects incorporate Crime Prevention
Through Environmental Design standards for safe access,
improved visibility, lighting, and building locations.
? Increase active uses of existing parks through the completion
and implementation of five Active Living Assessments.
? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse
? Foster positive development of youth through the creation
of five additional recreation programs and services that
increase physical, intellectual, social and/or emotional abilities.
(SC6)
? Develop a sustainable native plant nursery in partnership
with the Sheriff’s Community Involved Vocational Inmate
Crew Services program to provide opportunities for
inmates to gain marketable landscaping skills to reduce
recidivism and to support DPR landscape and native plant
restoration projects. (SC7)
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Promote an environment where communities can prosper
and residents can enjoy parks, open spaces, clean air and
water and outdoor experiences.
? Ensure early detection and treatment of Gold Spotted
Oak Borer infestations to mitigate negative impacts to
native oaks by developing and implementing an integrated
pest management plan through collaboration
with regional and state partners at seven park locations.
? Conserve resources and reduce the carbon footprint of
park facilities by implementing the next phase of DPRs
Water Conservation and Energy Efficiency Plan through
construction of porous paving parking lots, synthetic turf
conversions, electrical upgrades, and the installation of
photovoltaic systems.
? Continue regional leadership in land management, responsible
stewardship, preservation education and biological
monitoring of open space preserves while meeting recreational
needs of the present without compromising the
needs of future generations.
? Demonstrate our open space preserves are thriving by
continuing the implementation and initiate reporting
out results of the Comprehensive Monitoring Plan which
monitors changes to habitat and species over time.
? Promote responsible stewardship and land management
through three presentations to regional partners and
stakeholder groups reporting both annual trends and
challenges in preservation and restoration efforts.
Foster an environment where residents engage in recreational
interests by enjoying parks, open spaces and outdoor
experiences
? Identify recreational opportunities and amenity needs for
each Local Park Planning Area by creating a Park Master
Plan and Needs Assessment Survey. (SE4)
? Expand and encourage the use of DPR programs in elementary
schools to provide youth with a sense of stewardship
by aligning DPR environmental education curriculum with
California State educational standards. (SE5)
? Sustain the natural environment by providing high quality
parks, open space, trails, programs, and recreational
opportunities for all residents as well as educate the public
how to preserve these resources. (SE6)
? Combine physical activity and environmental education
for youth by constructing the first nature based play
pockets (play elements reflecting local natural and cultural
resources) within the County park system.
? Foster nature engagement, environmental education,
and physical fitness in youth by expanding the Track
Trails Program to two additional park facilities and maintain
the national lead for number of participants.
? Increase participation in nature engagement programs
by 10% through targeted outreach to underserved
youth.
? Provide access to two open space trail systems that are
currently closed to the public.
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges
? Engage 200 youth and family volunteers to instill a sense of
civic responsibility and pride through participation in 12
park volunteer activities that encourage ongoing use of the
park system. (SE7)
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Diversify funding sources and expand the range of services
by continuing to implement the DPR Business Plan. (OE1)
? Generate revenue by implementing a merchandizing
effort that targets local consumers and visitors using the
new DPR branding campaign.
? Redesign DPR website to promote activities that generate
revenue such as: corporate events, weddings, special
events, reservation information and booking, merchandise,
and opportunities for Naming Rights.
? Increase the services we provide to park visitors by leveraging
strategic partnerships with five local organizations
and businesses.
? At least 10% of employees participate in a financial literacy
training in order to promote understanding and individual
contribution to the County’s fiscal stability. (OE2)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Use new technology to improve customer service and gain
employee efficiencies. (OE3)
? Increase staff efficiency and enhance customer service
satisfaction by expanding the use of electronic tablets
for park user registration and fee collection at three
additional park facilities.
? Enhance our customers’ engagement through the development
of a custom interactive computer program that
provides users with trail maps showing trail elevation
gain, length of trails and uses allowed.
? Demonstrate the highest level of excellence by seeking
national recognition in the parks and recreation field.
? Provide assurance to our customers that our agency
meets national standards for best practices while providing
high quality services and experiences by obtaining
recertification from the Commission for Accreditation of
Park and Recreation Agencies.
? Protect the value of existing park infrastructure through an
annual $3.0 million maintenance program to ensure high
quality park amenities are available to future generations.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer service experience
? Continue our commitment to providing our customers with
valuable experiences through the development of new
tools and new approaches to customer service. (OE5)
? Strengthen and expand customer service assessments
and engagement strategies to gain a better understanding
of existing customer needs, while increasing customer
loyalty by implementing a customer satisfaction
survey for all campground visitors.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Build leaders and improve pathways for promotion by creating
and implementing an internal departmental PEER
(Promoting Employees and Enriching Relationships) mentoring
program consisting of succession planning, crossfunctional
threading, and job-shadowing.
Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Streamline regulations and provide more opportunities for
agricultural ventures to further support small-scale operations
and promote agricultural tourism. (HF2)
? Conduct community outreach and draft ordinance
amendments for the Agricultural Promotion Program.
? Draft Agricultural Promotion Program environmental
impact report to be prepared for circulation by spring
2016.
? Pursue policy change for healthy, safe and thriving environments
with a special focus on residents who are in our care
or rely on us for support
? Continue to improve knowledge, processes, and functional
threading to plan, design, and maintain livable, sustainable,
and healthy communities within the unincorporated
areas of San Diego County.
? Lead efforts to work with stakeholders and neighboring
jurisdictions to implement the Board adopted Thriving
Plan.
Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Ensure high quality safe communities are achieved through
the discretionary permit review process that balances community,
economic, and environmental interests.
? Reduce risks to lives by ensuring buildings and improvements
are designed and constructed in accordance with
building safety codes.
? Review 12,000 proposed building plans in Fiscal Year
2015–16 to ensure structures are properly and safely
designed.
? Help 40,000 customers navigate the building permit and
inspection process by explaining code requirements and
exploring options to achieve compliance in Fiscal Year
2015–16.
? Conduct 30,000 building inspections during construction
to ensure structures are built in accordance with
approved building plans in Fiscal Year 2015–16.
? Promote safe communities through the plan check and
inspection of 600 new homes in Fiscal Year 2015–16.
? Improve public health and safety by resolving 40% of
debris and waste complaints within 6 months of initial
notice to the property owner. (SC3)
? Provide and promote services than increase consumer and
business confidence
? Ensure ongoing customer and stakeholder engagement
through proactive outreach, regular stakeholder and industry
group meetings, and continuous communication
through a variety of formats in order to anticipate customer
expectations and demands. (SE2)
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention, and strategic planning
? Improve the efficiency of land use programs that guide the
physical development of the County’s land through a
balance of growth and conservation while collaborating
with communities.
? Present Phase One of CREP to the Board of Supervisors
in fall 2015 and obtain Board direction on potential
Phase Two implementation options for future programs
to increase renewable energy usage, reduce consumer
costs and consider community impacts.
? Complete draft of the North County MSCP text and environmental
document in spring 2016 with a goal of completing
the program for Board consideration in 2017.
? Improve consistency and ease of interpretation of County
Planning policy documents through periodic updates to the
San Diego County General Plan.
? Complete biennial General Plan Clean Up by winter of
Fiscal Year 2015–16.
? Draft and prepare for circulation the environmental
impact report for 43 parcels included in the General Plan
Property Specific Requests by Fiscal Year 2016–17.
? Present recommended land use designations that incorporate
the now expired Forest Conservation Initiative
lands into the General Plan by winter of Fiscal Year
2015–16.
? Protect the environment and preserve community character
through the efficient application of planning, engineering,
and environmental regulations in the management of land
development permit applications for discretionary projects.
? Continue implementation of the PACE program, which
supports the local agriculture industry and the preservation
of community character, with a goal of 230 additional
acres.
? Promote green building, including sustainable building
practices, renewable energy and energy efficiency through
streamlined permit processing.
? Promote renewable energy generation in the unincorporated
county through the plan check and inspection of
solar system capacity of 25,000 kilowatts in Fiscal Year
2015–16.
? Launch at least one major community outreach event to
promote local energy efficiency and conservation programs.
? Initiate updated CAP including stakeholder process for
Board consideration in 2017.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? At least 10% of employees participate in a financial literacy
training in order to promote understanding and individual
contribution to the County’s fiscal stability. (OE2)
? Provide adequate resources to customers through fiscal
discipline and dedication to operational excellence.
? Develop work plans for each PDS division.
? Manage workload and staffing levels by balancing land
development market fluctuations with fiscal and customer
service stability.
? Create better tools for tracking regional economic trends to
align resources to meet market demands. Provide modern
infrastructure, innovative technology and appropriate
resources to ensure superior service delivery to our customers
? Use new technology to improve customer service and gain
efficiencies. (OE3)
? Expand online services to reduce transaction times and
the need for customers to visit a County office.
? Develop online tools that allow customers to complete
applications online, reducing the time they spend at the
County office by Fiscal Year 2016–17.
? Continue development of a 3-1-1 style mobile application
for the public to file certain complaints for Code
Compliance cases.
Continue development of the performance management
program, and when applicable provide information access
to all customers ensuring consistency, transparency, and
customer confidence. (OE4)
? Create automated reports for monitoring and tracking
performance.
? Expand the discipline of publishing results on the public
facing website by adding results for the Land Development
and Project Planning divisions in Fiscal Year 2015–16.
? Deploy new fiscal management tools in Accela Automation
to effectively and efficiently monitor discretionary
project applications from submittal to final decision.
? Through the application of proactive case and project
management principles and techniques, achieve the PDS
target time standards for processing land development
projects.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Continue department-wide focus on improving customer
service. (OE5)
? Participate in the countywide Customer Service Ambassador
program.
? Participate in the Team LUEG customer & stakeholder
outreach efforts.
? Hold two customer perspective panels.
? Increase the number of cases closed through voluntary
compliance by 10% in Fiscal Year 2015–16, thus increasing
customer satisfaction and reducing customer cost.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Implement the PDS Workforce Development Program,
including participating in LUEG-wide Workforce Development
programs, to cultivate, retain, and attract a workforce
that has the skills, talent, and commitment to
achieve organizational excellence. (OE6)
? Deploy a follow-up Case & Project Management training
tailored to the specific processes and functions within
PDS in Fiscal Year 2015–16.
? Create and deploy three-tiered PDS Professional Development
seminar series in Fiscal Year 2015–16.
The County makes health, safety and thriving a focus of all
policies and programs through internal and external collaboration
? To guide the development and maintenance of active
transportation infrastructure and make it easier for people
to engage in physical activities, the Departments of Parks
and Recreation, Planning & Development Services and
DPW applied for and received a grant to develop a Countywide
Active Transportation Plan (Plan). This Plan will be
completed in Fiscal Year 2015-17 and will integrate and
update existing plans, programs and documents into one
comprehensive package for future implementation of
Active Transportation projects. (HF4)
? Part of the grant will be used by DPW to conduct a gap
analysis for sidewalks and pathways in all 26 Community
Planning areas and to develop a health-focused list of
projects for future installation.
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Stabilize roadway infrastructure through implementation
of a multi-year pavement resurfacing program, which identifies
nearly $24 million to be spent on road maintenance
(e.g., resurfacing, repaving, culverts and guard rail repairs,
etc.) for the next two years to slow the degradation of our
roads. (SC2)
? Increase opportunities for bicycles and pedestrian safe use
by incorporating appropriate bike and pedestrian facilities
in 100% of road capacity improvements (projects that
widen road or add lanes or features to handle increased
traffic volume). (SC2)
? Provide coordinated response to emergency situations,
severe weather events, and natural disasters to ensure
public safety, timely recovery, and ability for the public to
use the County’s transportation network. Use County Continuity
of Operations Plan (COOP), Department Emergency
Response Plan, and involvement at the Emergency Operations
Center (EOC) to ensure all DPW units provide a coordinated
response during an event. (SC3)
? Road maintenance crews will work with County Sheriff
staff to keep roadways open and safe within 24 hours of
a declared emergency 100% of the time, by implementing
immediate response to inclement weather, roadway
hazards, and natural disasters.
? Airport staff will maintain airports infrastructure to maximize
availability for emergency first responders (Aerial
Support to Regional Enforcement Agency ASTREA; Air
Ambulance; CalFire; etc.) during a broad range of regional emergencies and natural disasters. At the five
largest County airport facilities, the objective is to maintain
a combined runway availability rate at or above 95%
(using FAA Notice to Airmen (NOTAM) data).
? Transportation staff will replace 100% of 250 Watt High
Pressure Sodium streetlights with energy-efficient LED
streetlights using remote access technology and will proactively
troubleshoot and repair inoperable lights within one
working day, resulting in improved customer service and
safer streets for residents. (SC3)
? Ensure that County bridges are safe for public use. (SC3)
? Ensure 100% of County bridges that are structurally
unsound (Safety Rating at or below 50) are programmed
for replacement.
? To help communities prepare for and respond to flood
events, Flood Control staff will inspect 75% of flood control
facilities and maintain 100% of County flood control facilities
after inspection to make sure they are operating at full
capacity. (SC3)
? Inspect 75% of flood control facilities of more than 50
miles of drainage pipe; more than four miles of open
channels, and more than 2,000 storm drain inlets by June
2016. After inspection staff will maintain the sites to
ensure 100% of the facilities are operating at full capacity.
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention, and strategic planning
? Engage businesses, residents and County staff to promote
clean water so that by the end of 2017, water quality will
be improved by achieving a 10% reduction in urban runoff
(pollution) into County storm drains that continually flow
during dry weather (meaning they are not caused by rain,
but human interaction, e.g., car washing, lawn watering,
etc.). (SE3)
? Protect a sustainable watershed by improving the health of
local waters and minimizing downstream pollutants.
? To keep debris from entering county waterways and
prevent flooding, Transportation road crews will remove
25,000 cubic yards of debris from culverts, drainage
channels and roads through a systematic cleaning
program by June 30, 2016.
? To improve knowledge about ways to prevent water pollution,
ensure a 70% average score on post-tests administered
to high school students following watershed
education presentations.
? Provide Qualified Stormwater Pollution Prevention
Program (SWPPP) Practitioner (QSP) or Qualified SWPPP
Developer (QSD) training to 100% construction inspection
staff by June 2016 to equip staff with the necessary
knowledge to assure compliance with stormwater
permit requirements on private construction projects.
? Achieve 100% of permit compliance requirements at all
DPW construction in progress (CIP) sites to eliminate violations
of stormwater regulations and thereby protect
the county's waterways.
? Operate the sanitary sewer system in compliance with regulations
with zero reportable Sanitary Sewer Overflows
(SSO) over 1,000 gallons or that reach surface waters.
? Provide Recycling Market Development Zone assistance to
10 businesses. Work collaboratively with applicable jurisdictions
to provide assistance in siting and permitting of
recycling sites.
? Reduce water usage by switching to low flow toilets, urinals,
sinks and shower heads in our road stations; remove
lawn and replace it with drought tolerant plants at the
County’s eight airports. As a water supplier in Campo Hills
and Rancho Del Campo, we will limit our customers’ water
usage for irrigation to no more than two times per week.
These efforts address water conservation efforts and the
drought.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Work with regional regulators to assure appropriate stewardship
of inactive landfills, while reducing costs for providing
services by reducing permit costs by up to $650,000.
This will require approval from the Regional Water Quality
Control Board on reduced site risks. (OE1)
? At least 10% of employees participate in a financial literary
training in order to promote understanding and individual
contribution to the County’s fiscal stability. (OE2)
? Implement identified process changes to realize a 10% cost
reduction in delivery costs for street repavement projects
to complete the second year of a cost reduction goal begun
in Fiscal Year 2014-15. DPW can only control the costs of
delivery; not the cost of materials. Revised processes have
been implemented and actual savings will be reported out
at the end of Fiscal Year 2015-16.
? Actively resolve Capital Improvement Projects (CIP) construction
contract disputes and claims in a timely manner
and at the lowest organizational level.
? Ensure there are zero contract disputes on DPW CIP construction
contracts needing to be resolved using arbitration,
thereby saving time and County resources.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
customers
? Use improved technology to better manage road assets
and provide enhanced customer service. (OE3)
? Implement Land Use and Environment Group Enterprise
Asset Management System (LEAMS), an integrated asset
management system with Geographic Information System
maps for citizen access, resulting in transparency and 24-
hour online access for customers to unincorporated road
asset data.
Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Engage employees to take personal ownership of the
County’s Customer Service Program to ensure all DPW
employees understand it is their role to provide the best
customer service possible and that they have the skills to
provide that service. (OE5)
? To provide the best possible customer service, DPW will
focus on (1) Modeling behavior from top down; (2) Training
staff on excellence in customer service; (3) Developing
a template for responding to customers with
empathy, even when the answer is no; (4) acknowledging
excellence.
Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to those individuals who have been affected
by traumatic circumstances
? Work with the Pets for Patriots organization to place pets in
forever homes with veterans who participate in this program.
The goal is to place ten animals through the Pets for
Patriots’ program.
Leverage internal communication resources, resource
groups, and social media to enhance employee understanding
of Live Well San Diego
? Increase County employees’ understanding of all components
of Live Well San Diego through an internal communication
campaign. The increase will be measured through a
survey conducted in Fiscal Year 2015–16 and compared
with survey conducted in Fiscal Year 2012–13. (HF5)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Achieve goal of 0% euthanasia of any healthy, friendly
animal by reuniting lost pets with their owner or through
adoption to a new family.
? Promote community safety and injury prevention by conducting
50 dog bite prevention presentations per year to
area schools and other organizations that encounter dogs
during normal operations. (SC3)
? Respond to 94.4% of patrol calls on time according to DAS
protocols for responding to various levels of priority calls.
? Conduct eight classes per year for the Responsible Pet
Ownership program to teach responsible pet ownership to
animal law violators and to reduce the burden on the court
system.
? Enhance children’s awareness of animal welfare issues and
promote the humane treatment of animals through participation
in a joint facility tour and education program with
the San Diego Humane Society, and by co-hosting 14 classroom
or youth group visits per year to the Campus for
Animal Care or other County animal shelters. These educational
endeavors will help ensure that both animals and
people are protected from neglect and abuse, promoting
safe communities.
? Conduct eight presentations per year to community or
industry groups describing DAS services, disaster preparedness,
animal health and welfare issues, cruelty investigations
and/or new animal-related legislation.
? Submit four articles per year to trade journals or community
publications to highlight DAS services, animal health
and welfare issues, and dog bite prevention and/or adoption
opportunities.
? Provide 10 dog bite prevention presentations per year to
County departments and local area companies to promote
the safety of employees who may encounter dogs in the
scope of their duties (e.g., SDG&E and the U.S. Postal Service).
(SC3)
? DAS strives to continuously improve the plight and welfare
of the animals in its care through best practices, innovation
and creative strategies. To fulfill its mission and provide
maximum service and value to the community, DAS will
focus on the following key objectives:
? Ensure that 71.4% of an estimated 25,000 sheltered
dogs and cats are reunited with their owner or adopted
into a new home.
? Ensure that no more than 12.9% of treatable animals
that come into our shelter are euthanized by providing
medical care when resources allow and placing animals
with rescue partners or adopters.
? Encourage and promote residents to take important and
meaningful steps to protect themselves and their families for
the first 72 hours during a disaster
? Inform and educate county residents on emergency preparedness
for their pets and themselves to help ensure
they are protected in case of an emergency. (SC1)
? Participate in four Community Emergency Response
Team (CERT) meetings per year.
? Conduct 10 presentations to community groups per year.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability.
? Ensure all finance staff in CSG departments participate in
financial literacy training during Fiscal Year 2015–16. (OE2)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Ensure customers are provided with superior services by
being responsive to customers’ needs, professional, courteous,
attentive and knowledgeable; achieve a customer
satisfaction rating of 4.72 or higher (on a scale of 1 to 5,
with 5 being “excellent”). (OE5)
? Train 100% of staff regarding resources available to
members of the public for animals with treatable medical
and behavioral issues, including those organizations which
provide financial assistance to people facing a hardship in
caring for their animal(s).
? Ensure that staff contact rescue groups on 100% of animals
with a treatable medical or behavioral issue prior to euthanasia.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Continue to seek qualified diverse applicants by attending
four job fairs this year and advertising positions in periodicals
targeted to minority populations in order to fill positions
as needed.
Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Maintain partnership with Health and Human Services
agency to promote a healthy lifestyle for children in at-risk
neighborhoods. (HF2)
? Continue to offer the Rockin’ Recess program in conjunction
with the Summer Lunch Program by hosting 50 sessions
during the summer months.
? Support the County of San Diego’s Live Well San Diego
Building Better Health Initiative by offering more than 300
healthy lifestyle programs for all ages every month.
? Leverage internal communication resources, resource
groups, and social media to enhance employee understanding
of Live Well San Diego
? Increase County employees’ understanding of all components
of Live Well San Diego through an internal communication
campaign. The increase will be measured through a
survey conducted in Fiscal Year 2015–16 and compared
with survey conducted in Fiscal Year 2012–13. (HF5)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Provide students and families a safe place for the pursuit of
education and constructive civic engagement in support of
the County’s Live Well San Diego Living Safely initiative by
offering an average of 300 after-school programs each
month.
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges
? Ensure that collections and library materials are current
and relevant to meeting the needs and interests of a
dynamic community by obtaining the planned annual
average circulation of 7.0 per item.
? Provide relevant adult programs that promote lifelong
learning and civic engagement by serving more than
100,000 participants.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability.
? Ensure all finance staff in CSG departments participate in
financial literacy training during Fiscal Year 2015–16. (OE2)
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Meet the informational, recreational and cultural needs of
the community and actively promote reading and lifelong
learning by ensuring the public has access to library
resources and services and that the SDCL has the capacity
to meet these goals.
? Maintain the planned schedule of library operations.
? Provide virtual library services that are available and relevant
such as e-books, audio downloads, video downloads
and access to premium databases.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Install a 24/7 Library-to-Go kiosk at another County location
to be determined to provide library services to remote
areas currently without library services; examine the viability
and feasibility of rolling out these devices to other
potential locations.
Update the Library’s website to maximize customer usability
and access to the library collection and visiting authors. (OE4)
? Implement a software upgrade in preparation for a new
Integrated Library System (Library’s database) which will
provide faster and more reliable library services to customers.
(OE3)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Ensure customers are provided with superior services by
being responsive to customers’ needs, professional, courteous,
attentive and knowledgeable by achieving an
average customer satisfaction rating of 4.60 or higher (on a
scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “excellent”).
? Ensure customers are provided with quality programs that
are current, relevant, and engaging by achieving an
average customer satisfaction rating of 4.75 or higher (on a
scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “excellent”) for SDCL programs.
Leverage internal communication resources, resource
groups, and social media to enhance employee understanding
of Live Well San Diego
? Increase County employees’ understanding of all components
of Live Well San Diego through an internal communication
campaign. The increase will be measured through a
survey conducted in Fiscal Year 2015–16 and compared
with survey conducted in Fiscal Year 2012–13. (HF5)
? Plan, build, and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Support client departments in their public safety efforts.
? Maintain availability of County-supported fire apparatus
at 85% (84 of 99).
? Ensure maximum availability of law enforcement patrol
vehicles at 95% (527 of 555).
? Develop project criteria and delivery strategy for the
migration to new technology for the County-wide
Regional Communications System.
? Provide time-critical (24/7) maintenance response to emergency
requests involving life and safety issues or those
posing an imminent risk to County assets and infrastructure,
by responding to and initiating corrective action for
100% (1,000) of all emergency requests within 4 hours of
notification.
Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Improve County operations through sustainability efforts
such as energy conservation, alternative energy generation
systems, green building design and recycling.
? Reduce annual building energy use intensity by 6%, comparing
Fiscal Year 2015–16 to a Fiscal Year 2011–12 baseline.
? Prepare greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories of County
operations for calendar years 2015 and 2016. Achieved a
1% reduction in total greenhouse gas emissions each
year compared to the prior calendar year.
? Plan for installation of drought tolerant landscaping,
high-efficiency irrigation systems and high-efficiency
plumbing fixtures in County facilities where feasible.
? Incorporate the strategies of the Green Fleet Action plan
into the annual vehicle replacement planning process to
reduce the County's vehicle-related greenhouse gas
emissions.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability.
? Ensure all finance staff in CSG departments participate in
financial literacy training during Fiscal Year 2015–16. (OE2)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Complete 96% (2,208 of 2,300) of targeted preventive
maintenance activities to maximize the operational efficiency
of County assets/infrastructure, as well as maintain
or prolong the design life of these systems. (OE3)
? Advertise and award construction contract for the new
Pine Valley Fire Station by spring 2016 for completion by
summer 2017.
? By fall 2015, prepare leased space for relocation of initial
departments to allow remodel of the Hall of Justice and to
accommodate bridge connection to the new Courthouse.
Prepare plans for the relocation of other displaced departments
in the current downtown Courthouse by Winter
2016.
? Complete design-build construction of the new Alpine
Library as the first Zero Net Energy County building in
spring 2016.
? Complete the design-build construction of the new Imperial
Beach Library in summer 2016.
? Advertise and award the design-build contract for construction
of the new Borrego Springs Library for completion
in summer/fall 2017.
? Complete Phase 2 construction of the new Las Colinas
Detention and Reentry Facility in January 2016.
? Complete construction of the Cedar and Kettner Development
Parking Structure in October 2015.
? Award the design-build contract for construction of the
new HHSA Crisis Residential Facility in Escondido for completion
in early 2017.
? Complete construction-management-at-risk construction
of improvements in the East County Regional Center for
the District Attorney in fall 2016.
? Begin construction of the new COC Crime Lab and Evidence
Warehouse in summer 2016 for completion in summer
2018.
? Prepare programming and procurement to replace the
Oceanside Family Resource Center, Public Health Center
and associated operations into a consolidated facility on
the current Mission and Barnes property.
? Continue assessment of aging Health and Human Services
buildings.
? Determine options for replacement/renewal and consolidation
of Family Resource Centers.
? Develop Major Maintenance Improvement Plan and
Capital Improvement Needs Assessment recommendations
for specific projects.
? Initiate strategic facility planning efforts with departments
in aging buildings in a strategic view of their programs and
facilities. Using the internally developed Facility Effectiveness
Assessment Tool—an analysis extending facility condition
assessments to incorporate location, costs and
department program delivery—work with departments to
integrate program needs into the analysis and prioritization
of facility requirements.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Complete 96% (7,603 of 7,920) of vehicle and mobile
equipment preventive maintenance actions to maximize
the operational effectiveness of County vehicles.
? Maximize postage discounts by bar coding a minimum of
95% (475,000 of 500,000) of all standard business letters.
? Monitor leases on County-owned property ensuring rents
are paid within 30 days of due date for 97% (231 of 238) of
the leases.
The County makes health, safety and thriving a focus of all
policies and programs through internal and external collaboration
? Provide first-time homebuyer loans to 30 households
through the regional HOME Consortium Homebuyer
Downpayment and Closing Cost Assistance (DCCA) Program,
which offers low-interest deferred payment loans for
qualified low-income, first-time homebuyers.
? Design and implement, in cooperation with community
stakeholders, a Coordinated Assessment and Housing
Placement (CAHP) system capable of matching the homeless
with appropriate permanent housing in the San Diego
Region.
? Provide 18 competitive academic scholarships annually to
heads of household and/or their children who have established
five-year family self-sufficiency goals in academic or
vocational self-sufficiency or who reside in Public Housing.
? Promote the implementation of a service delivery system
that is sensitive to those individuals who have been affected
by traumatic circumstances
? Provide trauma-informed training to 100% of HCD staff and
develop a department trauma-informed fact sheet for HCD
staff. (HF1)
? In collaboration with HHSA, the Department of Parks and
Recreation, and County Libraries, develop a training
program to provide frontline staff at park and library facilities
with tools and techniques to improve engagement and
interactions with homeless populations to connect them
with community resources. (HF1)
? Increase funding by up to 47% (from $68,000 to $100,000)
for the County’s Hotel/Motel Voucher Program, administered
by HHSA, which provides hotel vouchers for homeless
families, the elderly, persons with disabilities and
pregnant women at risk of homelessness who may not be
appropriate for placement in a traditional emergency
shelter setting.
? Pursue policy change for healthy, safe and thriving environments
with a special focus on residents who are in our care
or rely on us for support
? Update policies to allow consideration for future needs to
create more accessible housing for seniors and people with
disabilities to live independently. (HF4)
? Leverage internal communication resources, resource
groups, and social media to enhance employee understanding
of Live Well San Diego
? Increase County employees’ understanding of all components
of Live Well San Diego through an internal communication
campaign. The increase will be measured through a
survey conducted in Fiscal Year 2015–16 and compared
with survey conducted in Fiscal Year 2012–13. (HF5)
? Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Conduct four community outreach meetings throughout
the county regarding affordable housing and community
revitalization funding opportunities available annually
through four federal entitlement programs: Community
Development Block Grant, HOME Investment Partnership
Program, Emergency Solutions Grant and Housing Opportunities
for Persons with AIDS. (SC2)
? Fund up to 30 public community projects for parks, street/
sidewalk improvements, Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) improvements, firefighting equipment, public services,
community, youth and family centers, health clinics,
and affordable housing activities in the unincorporated.
(SC2)
? Promote crime-free communities by collaborating with
local police departments and renewing annual Crime-Free
Multifamily Housing Program certificates at the five
Housing Authority-owned residential properties. (SC3)
? Provide HOME Tenant-based Rental Assistance programs
for up to 65 youth aging-out of the foster care system and
44 families with children that are participants of the
County’s substance abuse recovery and family reunification
programs. (SC7)
? Provide Home Repair Assistance to 30 low-income homeowners
and mobile home owners residing in the Urban
County for critical health and safety improvements, accessibility
improvements, and/or other necessary rehabilitation.
The Urban County includes unincorporated
communities of the county and the cities of Coronado, Del
Mar, Imperial Beach, Lemon Grove, Poway and Solana
Beach.
? Conduct 100% of required inspections (approximately
7,000) of units assisted through the Rental Assistance Division
and ensure that these units are decent, safe and sanitary
by meeting Housing Quality Standards required by
HUD.
Provide safe and decent housing opportunities to special
needs populations to improve the quality of life and
promote self-sufficiency.
? Actively participate in the 25 Cities North County initiative
targeting chronic homeless and Veterans by providing
staff support and resources to the Leadership and
Design Teams and the Housing Sub-committee.
? Provide safe and decent housing opportunities for up to
20 low-income families participating in the Redevelopment
Local Rental Subsidy Program and ensure that
assisted units meet Housing Quality Standards through
annual recertification inspections. Funding for this
program is expected to be expended by June 30, 2017.
? Promote self-sufficiency by providing permanent
housing for up to 200 eligible homeless applicants
referred by the Continuum of Care who either meet the
definition of chronically homeless or are exiting federally-
assisted housing programs with no other permanent
housing placement options.
? Provide rental assistance to permanently house up to
449 homeless veterans through the VASH program. Utilization
of these vouchers is dependent upon HCD receiving
referrals from the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs.
? Increase the number of participants receiving VASH
security and utility deposit assistance funded through
the Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG) funds to 15 total
participants, to allow recipients and their families access
to permanent housing.
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Proactively support fair housing and fight discriminatory
housing practices.
? Complete 40 random site tests on multifamily rental
properties in the unincorporated county to ensure compliance
with fair housing laws.
? Publish quarterly educational articles on the topic of fair
housing on the HCD website and through social media.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Assist families to secure safe, decent and affordable
housing through rental assistance subsidies by using 100%
of the anticipated annual funding allocation of $102.7
million or issuing 100% of the maximum authorized vouchers
anticipated to total 11,439 to provide a nurturing and
healthy environment while improving opportunities for
children and adults. (OE1)
? Participate in three State and/or local housing industry
organizations and/or provide three presentations to relevant
groups/events. (OE1)
? Conduct one program integrity conference in collaboration
with County departments and regional partners to identify
program compliance best practices. (OE1)
? Ensure all finance staff in CSG departments participate in
financial literacy training during Fiscal Year 2015–16. (OE2)
? Implement one new program design change in support of
the Department’s Audacious Goal to build a more efficient
HCD that is nimble and sustainable.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Provide enhanced customer service by completing a customer-
friendly redesign of the HCD website. (OE3)
? Renovate the HCD Administrative Office by incorporating
energy efficient fixtures and customer-focused design elements
to be completed by June 30, 2017.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Ensure customers are provided with superior services and
a positive experience through staff who employ helpfulness,
expertise, attentiveness, respect and timeliness. A
key indicator of how well service is provided will be
achievement of a customer service satisfaction rating or
4.7 or better (on a scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “excellent”).
(OE5)
? Promote the benefits of landlords participating in the
Housing Choice Voucher Program.
? Create a Landlord Liaison position to work closely with
participating landlords.
? Collaborate with regional partners to outreach to landlords.
? Create an informational brochure for prospective landlords
to detail the benefits and responsibilities of participation
in the Housing Choice Voucher Program.
? Provide at least one rental assistance presentation to
stakeholder groups.
? Hold four Housing Choice Voucher landlord seminars to
continue to educate landlords on program requirements.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Support, encourage, and provide opportunities to foster
employee well-being, inclusion, and development by:
hosting lunch and learn presentations, exercise classes,
and/or wellness events; encouraging staff to participate in
Employee Resource Groups (ERG) and inviting ERGs to
present at Department meetings; performing outreach to
diverse populations in recruitment and education efforts;
engaging staff in the renovation design of the HCD Administrative
Office; and scheduling mandatory and optional
professional and safety training as well as soft skills
enhancements.
Leverage internal communication resources, resource
groups, and social media to enhance employee understanding
of Live Well San Diego
? Increase County employees’ understanding of all components
of Live Well San Diego through an internal communication
campaign. The increase will be measured through a
survey conducted in Fiscal Year 2015–16 and compared
with survey conducted in Fiscal Year 2012–13. (HF5)
? Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Present at least four vendor/supplier outreach sessions in
cooperation with local business associations and/or other
public agencies. (SE1)
? Develop a strategy for earliest implementation of online
bidding (Request For Bids - RFB). (SE2)
? San Diego is the best managed county in the nation
? Initiate enhancements to increase competitiveness for a
new top tier national industry excellence award for DPC’s
leadership and implementation of world-class procurement.
(OE1)
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Ensure all finance staff in CSG departments participate in
financial literacy training during Fiscal Year 2015–16. (OE2)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Continue researching feasibility of a Contracts Award &
Management System (CAMS). (OE3)
? Solicit input and feedback from customer departments
and other stakeholders.
? Continue market research of potential commercial offthe-
shelf solutions.
? Ensure all departments have staff trained and the tools
necessary to stay up-to-date and current on all Countywide
Records Management policies and best practices. (OE4)
? Provide an individualized on-site annual training for each
supported County department.
? Ensure all County departments’ records retention schedules
are current.
Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Provide information access to all customers ensuring consistency,
transparency and customer confidence.
Expeditiously wind down the affairs of the former County
Redevelopment Agency, maintaining compliance with all
laws and with the approval of the County Oversight Board.
Leverage internal communication resources, resource
groups, and social media to enhance employee understanding
of Live Well San Diego
? Increase County employees’ understanding of all components
of Live Well San Diego through an internal communication
campaign. The increase will be measured through a
survey conducted in Fiscal Year 2015–16 and compared
with survey conducted in Fiscal Year 2012–13. (HF5)
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning
? Continue to distribute information on how to reduce environmental
risks using “filler” pages printed in the Sample
Ballot and Voter Information Pamphlets provided to all registered
voters for the June 2016 Presidential Primary and
November 2016 Presidential General elections. (SE3)
? Conserve resources by printing the Sample Ballot and
Voter Information Pamphlets on paper containing as much
as 25% post-consumer recycled paper for all elections conducted
in Fiscal Year 2015–17, refer military and overseas
voters to an online version of their Sample Ballot and Voter
Information Pamphlets, and promote the sign up of e-
Sample Ballot and Voter Information Pamphlets. (SE3)
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges
? Mitigate challenges to the voter registration process. (SE7)
? Work with volunteers and community-based organizations
to identify needs and increase voter registration.
? Identify and develop strategies to address potential challenges,
including application submittal accuracy, community
knowledge and awareness, voter movement/
relocation, cultural expectations, and the growing senior
population.
? Increase the number of poll workers. (SE7)
? Develop an outreach strategy to increase volunteer
opportunities at the polls.
? Expand partnerships with organizations that work with
persons with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) in order to
recruit bilingual poll workers.
? Develop a business-focused poll worker recruitment program.
? Engage the community in the electoral process and ensure
polling sites are sufficiently staffed with qualified personnel
for the June 2016 Presidential Primary and November 2016
Presidential General elections by meeting the planned
recruitment goals for poll workers.
Continue to distribute information in support of the
County’s Live Well San Diego strategies using “filler” pages
printed in the Sample Ballot and Voter Information Pamphlets
provided to all registered voters for the June 2016
Presidential Primary and November 2016 Presidential
General elections. (SE7)
? Increase the number of permanent vote-by-mail voters by
3% (or 24,378), for a total of 836,991, for the June 2016
Presidential Primary Election and by an additional 5% (or
41,850), for a total of 878,841, for the November 2016
Presidential General Election, based on number of permanent
vote-by-mail voters (812,613) from the November 4,
2014 Gubernatorial General Election. (SE7)
? Continue to recruit and replace non-accessible poll sites to
comply with federal and State accessibility requirements
(SE7):
? Increase the number of accessible poll sites for the June
2016 Presidential Primary Election by 7% (or 53), for a
total of 813, based on the number of sites for the
November 4, 2014 Gubernatorial General Election of
760.
? Increase the number of accessible poll sites for the
November 2016 Presidential General Election by 4% (or
33), for a total of 846, based on the anticipated number
of sites for the June 2016 Presidential Primary Election
of 813.
? Process 100% of valid registrations received on or before
the 15-day close of registration by the 7th day before the
June 2016 Presidential Primary and November 2016 Presidential
General elections to ensure eligible registrants are
printed in the official roster of voters and therefore have
the opportunity to vote using a regular ballot, rather than a
provisional ballot. (SE7)
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Ensure all finance staff in CSG departments participate in
financial literacy training during Fiscal Year 2015–16. (OE2)
? Maintain a per-mail-ballot labor cost of 40 cents for voteby-
mail ballots returned in the June 2016 Presidential
Primary and November 2016 Presidential General elections.
(OE1)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Ensure 100% of poll worker trainers complete online training
assessments with scores of 90% or higher no later than
26 days prior to the June 2016 Presidential Primary and
November 2016 Presidential General elections, providing
knowledgeable instructors who are available and prepared
to train poll workers. (OE3)
? Offer voters the option to opt out of receiving a paper
copy, thus viewing the Sample Ballot and Voter Informational
Pamphlet electronically. (OE3)
? Offer new online campaign finance statements service.
(OE4)
? Tally 54% (786 of 1,436) of precincts for the June 2016
Presidential Primary and 50% (764 of 1,527) of precincts
for the November 2016 Presidential General elections by
11:30 pm on Election Night. (OE4)
? Report 95% of eligible mail ballots (those received by the
ROV by the Sunday before Election Day) in the first Election
Night Results Bulletin released shortly after 8:00 pm for the
June 2016 Presidential Primary and 85% for the November
2016 Presidential General elections. (OE4)
? Report 33% or more of all ballots cast in the first Election
Night Results Bulletin for the June 2016 Presidential
Primary and November 2016 Presidential General elections.
(OE4)
? Tally 95% of all mail ballots received by the ROV by Monday
after Election Day for the June 2016 Presidential Primary
and 90% for the November 2016 Presidential General elections.
(OE4)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Ensure customer satisfaction with core services by maintaining
a 4.7 or better overall customer satisfaction rating
(on a scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “excellent”) through the
November 2016 Presidential General Election. (OE5)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? To encourage overall satisfaction and retention of volunteers,
timely mailing of all poll worker stipends in 15
working days or less from Election Day for all elections in
Fiscal Years 2015–17. (OE6)
? Assign 100% of bilingual poll workers to fill poll worker
positions needed for the June 2016 Presidential Primary
and November 2016 Presidential General elections.
Provide and promote services that increase consumer and
business confidence
? Record property ownership in a timely manner, facilitating
access to ownership information for the buying, selling and
financing of property. (SE1)
? Locate, identify and appraise all property so the public and
businesses are assured a fair and uniform assessment of
their property under the auspices of all applicable State
property tax laws, rules and regulations. (SE2)
? Record births, deaths, marriages and Fictitious Business
Name statements in a timely manner to enable the public
and businesses to establish identity in order to conduct
their affairs. (SE2)
? Begin multi-year phased restoration and preservation
project for historical recorded documents. Phase I will preserve
the old microfilm and ensure its survival for future
generations. This project will begin in Fiscal Year 2015–16
with anticipated completion in Fiscal Year 2017–18. Phase
II will restore and preserve historical recorded documents
and maps. This project is a three to five year effort and is
estimated to be complete in Fiscal Year 2019–20.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Collect, distribute and account for all mandated fees and
transfer taxes to ensure County departments, federal and
State agencies, cities and special districts can fulfill their
legal obligations. (OE1)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? In coordination with the Auditor & Controller, Treasurer-
Tax Collector and the County Technology Office, continue
the design and development of the Integrated Property Tax
System (IPTS), which will significantly improve property
assessment, tax collection and apportionment activities in
the County. (OE3)
? Provide the public with a variety of online forms for submittal
and related services. This will provide a more efficient
and effective level of customer service by leveraging
the latest technology in online form processing and electronic
signature technology.
Extend document recording services at the Chula Vista
branch office to the public. (OE3)
? In coordination with the Clerk of Appeals Board, create
“intent to attend hearing” feedback option for appeal
applicants to increase efficiency and reduce labor costs.
Project to be completed in Fiscal Year 2016–17. (OE3)
? In coordination with Planning & Development Services,
vendor and other agencies, develop a consortium of cost
sharing users of Pictometry oblique imagery. This will be a
multi-year or possibly decade long pursuit of bringing
together users who are willing to pool resources to maximize
the benefits of high resolution oblique imagery (i.e.,
Assessor, Public Safety, Public Works, GIS users and others.
Increases Assessor efficiency by reducing field trips,
increasing accuracy of assessment information and final
assessments). (OE3)
? Examine and process documents submitted for eRecording
within four (4) hours of receipt to facilitate customers in a
more efficient and secure recording and document return
process than paper recording. (OE3)
? Explore and pursue e-signature opportunities for fictitious
business name applications and renewals to save our customers
time and increase our efficiency and service to customers.
(OE3)
? Implement e-property tax notifications to save mailing
costs, increase efficiency and service to customers. (OE3)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Provide the public with services that are of value to them
in a competent and professional manner by achieving a
customer service rating of at least 93%.
Align service to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? To safeguard public funds and maintain public trust, the
Treasurer-Tax Collector will efficiently manage the provisions
of banking services for public entities and County
departments. The Treasurer-Tax Collector will also provide
accurate recording of all funds on deposit and facilitate
daily reconciliation of funds. (OE1)
? To continue to fund the delivery of superior services
throughout the San Diego County region, the Treasurer-Tax
Collector will invest public monies held in the Treasury and
maximize cash resources without sacrificing the principles
of safety or liquidity, for an anticipated weighted average
rate of return of 0.45% in Fiscal Year 2015–16 and 0.50% in
Fiscal Year 2016–17. (OE1)
? Provide a learning platform and forum to address current
government finance issues by facilitating four seminars
including Fraud Prevention, Cash Handling, Debt Financing
and Investment of Public Funds for local agencies. (OE1)
? Maintain a collection rate of 99.5% for secured taxes and
97% for unsecured taxes by preparing and mailing property
tax bills/notices, and processing tax payments in a timely
manner to ensure timely revenue collection on behalf of
San Diego County’s taxpayers. (OE1)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? In coordination with Assessor/Recorder/County Clerk,
Auditor & Controller, and the County Technology Office,
continue the design and development of the IPTS, which
will significantly improve property assessment, tax collection
and apportionment activities in the County. (OE3)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer service experience
? Achieve a customer satisfaction rating of 4.7 on a 5.0 scale
based on formal Customer Satisfaction Survey results.
(OE5)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Broaden the Countywide base of employees who are planning
for financial security during retirement by the following
measures. (OE6)
? Maintain enrollment in the Deferred Compensation 457
Plan to 46.3% through June 30, 2016 and achieve
modest improvement to 46.5% by June 30, 2017.
? Maintain the average participant contribution in the
Deferred Compensation 457 Plan above $91 per pay
period by June 30, 2016 and a modest improvement of
$100 through June 30, 2017.
? Continue to educate employees on the Deferred Compensation
Plan by presenting two Investment & Retirement
Symposiums each fiscal year.
? Continue to increase employee awareness and understanding
by conducting educational workshops and
redesigning promotional materials and presentations to
increase the knowledge base of all employees by June
30, 2016.
The Chief Administrative Office is responsible for a countywide
focus on ethics and integrity, fiscal stability, a positive customer
experience, operational excellence and a commitment to service
improvement in pursuit of our vision—a region that is Building
Better Health, Living Safely and Thriving.
? Promote a culture of ethical leadership and decision making
across the enterprise
? Model ethical courage by always doing the right thing and
acting in the best interests of all.
? Regularly communicate and discuss the importance of the
County’s Statement of Values to ensure a consistent and
deep understanding of ethics across the enterprise.
? Be transparent in all fiscal reporting and audits.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
while providing core service needs to our region
? Collaborate with the Maxwell School of Citizenship and
Public Affairs on a Public Administration and International
Affairs graduate research project to determine the benchmarks
of fiscal strength in a local government. (OE1)
? Manage risks with regional acumen, fiscal discipline and in
accordance with federal/state regulations and Board of
Supervisor policies.
? Oversee operations to ensure program needs are met.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Provide strategic planning and appropriate resources for
facility modernization and sustainability to enhance the
workplace and better serve our customers.
? Deliver direct communications on, online access to and
resourceful apps for program services.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Recognize a department and/or employee annually for
their creativity and demonstrated outcomes towards
ensuring a positive customer experience. (OE5)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Sustain a high level of government excellence through succession
planning, mentoring, training and attracting
forward thinking and competent talent to continue the
County’s journey to becoming world class. (OE6)
? Champion the Diversity & Inclusion strategic plan and
enterprise initiatives of the Employee Resource Group
Executive Council. (OE6)
? Champion employee wellness activities to ensure team
members thrive.
Expand data-driven crime prevention strategies and utilize
current technologies to reduce crime at the local and regional
level
? Combined with the Superior Court, under the Comprehensive
Collections Program, meet or exceed the collections
performance benchmark—Gross Recovery Rate of 34%,
established by California Judicial Council. Gross Recovery
Rate measures a program’s ability to resolve delinquent
court-ordered debt, including alternative sentence, community
service, suspended services and discharges. This
measure is reported annually through a template as provided
by the Judicial Council.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Earn the State Controller’s Award for Achieving Excellence in
Financial Reporting for the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2014.
(OE1)
? Continue to apply for recognition through GFOA Certificate
of Achievement for Excellence in Financial Reporting for
the CAFR and the Award for Outstanding Achievement in
Popular Annual Financial Reporting for the PAFR. (OE1)
? Support financial literacy in the county by developing A&C
curriculum and conducting trainings that focus on core
competencies of employees in accounting functions. (OE2)
? Publish in Department’s website all reports of completed
audit services, including State mandated and operational/
performance audits, to ensure the integrity of management
control systems, to improve performance across the enterprise,
and to ensure the most efficient use of resources.
(OE4)
? Submit 100% of federal, State and local financial reports
and annual financial statements that comply with regulations
and reporting standards for County departments,
outside government agencies, investors and taxpayers by
their due dates to ensure accountability and transparency
of financial transactions. (OE4)
? Meet or exceed an actual recovery rate percentage (total
dollars collected/total available accounts receivable) of
7.25%. This measure represents the effectiveness of collection
activities performed by the Office of Revenue & Recovery.
? Accurately identify current and future revenue, as well as
cost and cash flow trends, in a timely manner in order to
facilitate the allocation of limited resources to San Diego
County groups and departments.
? Process 100% of County payments within five business
days after receipt of invoice by Accounts Payable to ensure
timely payment of vendors and contractors. The prompt
payment of invoices ensures that the County captures any
discounts that are available for early invoice payment.
? Provide modern infrastructure innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? In coordination with other County Departments, the
Auditor & Controller will implement a digital signature
solution throughout the organization in order to reduce
the staff time required in the signature approval process,
decrease paper consumption and printing costs, and lessen
our impact on the environment. (OE3)
? Implement Kronos Workforce Mobile Timekeeping which
is an application that runs on mobile devices and is downloadable
from various online application stores. Once
Kronos Workforce Mobile is implemented, County employees
and managers will have the ability to enter and review
work schedules and approve timecards from their mobile
devices. (OE3)
? Design and implement an enhanced disaster recovery
solution for the County’s core ERP applications (Oracle
Financials with Oracle Fusion Middleware and Oracle Business
Intelligence, PeopleSoft, and Kronos). Once implemented,
the enhanced disaster recovery solution will
serve to reduce the amount of system downtime in the
event of a disaster.
? In coordination with the Assessor/Recorder/County Clerk,
Treasurer-Tax Collector, Clerk of the Board of Supervisors,
and the County Technology Office continue the design and
development of the Integrated Property Tax System (IPTS),
which will significantly improve property assessment, tax
collection and apportionment activities in the County.
? Continue the administration of the Ethics Hotline in coordination
with the Office of Ethics and Compliance. Monitor
the investigation and resolution of all cases reported
through the Ethics Hotline.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Provide ongoing customer service training to all Auditor
and Controller staff, to enhance customer service skills and
techniques. (OE5)
? Increase the number of online customer self-service 24/7/
365 payments by 3%.
Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Implement Phase II of the Data Loss Prevention initiative
for the monitoring of unauthorized disclosure of confidential
Personal Identifiable Information. (OE4)
? Integrate the County CCRM system to support the County’s
business case management system, Accela, as well as with
the County’s document repository and archiving solution,
Documentum. (OE3)
? Implement an Open Data portal as part of the County’s
Open Data initiative, making certain County data sets available
for public consumption. (OE4)
? Upgrade components of the County’s Enterprise Document
Processing Platform to remain current with the application
and enable additional product capabilities. (OE3)
? Upgrade the County’s enterprise SharePoint software to
remain current with the application and enable additional
product capabilities. (OE3)
? Continue to expand the Identity Management platform to
increase efficiencies and security management through
single sign-on and identity management controls. (OE3)
? Continue to enhance functionality in the County’s IT cost
management application, ITrack, to support users’ need for
a robust, user-friendly application. (OE3)
? Continue to provide quarterly ITrack User Group meetings
to support users’ ongoing need for information, resources
and tools so that they more efficiently and effectively
perform their tasks. (OE3)
? Continue to provide technical support for the KIP project.
KIP will provide HHSA, its community partners and other
County departments the capability to access a comprehensive
view of a client's history, thereby creating a coordinated
care network between multiple providers. (OE3)
? Continue to provide Program Management and overall
oversight over the IPTS project. IPTS will significantly
improve property assessment, tax collection and apportionment
activities in the County. (OE3)
? Continue to effectively manage the performance of the
County’s IT Outsourcing Provider to ensure timeliness and
value of IT services.
Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Resolve 55% of personnel disputes without the need for a
full evidentiary hearing resulting in time and cost savings.
Full evidentiary hearings can result in extensive staff time
and legal and administrative costs.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Distribute at least 95% of Commission decisions within 48
hours of Commission approval in order to provide timely
notification of outcomes to parties and the public. (OE4)
? Ensure direct access to information through proper referral
of inquiries from departments, employees, employee representatives
and organizations and the public, related to
human resources matters. (OE4)
? Ensure all decisions made by the Commission will take into
consideration fairness, due process and are in compliance
with the law. The decisions will be thoroughly reviewed by
Commissioners, staff and counsel.
? Maintain and update desk book manual on Commission
proceedings and easily searchable electronic database of
Commission case law and precedents, counsel advice, key
issues and other relevant information to increase staff efficiency
and effectiveness and operational consistency.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Achieve a positive customer satisfaction rating of 95% or
above. Customer satisfaction surveys focus primarily on
responsiveness, courtesy, and knowledge of staff. (OE5)
? Provide customers with hearings that are fair, impartial and
efficient in order to achieve legally sound decisions.
? Provide a neutral environment that facilitates open discussion
of issues for departments, employees and employee
representatives resulting in fair and unbiased outcomes.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Participate in ongoing training in areas of human resources,
technology, workplace safety and pertinent legal updates
to increase staff's knowledge in order to provide superior
customer service.
Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Ensure efficiency and transparency of the property tax
assessment appeal process by processing property tax
assessment appeal applications within seven days of receipt.
(OE4)
? Provide open access to County business by making audio
recordings of all Board of Supervisors available on the
Internet within three days of the related meeting.
Enhance the efficiency and transparency of the property
tax assessment appeal process by participating in the
development of the Integrated Property Tax System. (OE3)
? Expand the services available to customers by ensuring
that all forms posted on the Clerk of the Board’s website at
www.sandiegocob.com can be completed online and submitted
electronically and/or via email, as allowed by law.
(OE3)
? Enhance the Public Services work area to support ongoing
Business Process Reengineering efforts.
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Ensure satisfaction with services provided by achieving
consistently high ratings on surveys of more than 2,000
customers. (OE5)
? Provide opportunities to San Diego residents by processing
and mailing 100% of completed U.S. Passport applications
on the same day they are received. (OE5)
? Engage in Business Process Reengineering of U.S. Passport
acceptance to improve services provided to customers and
the efficiency and effectiveness of staff.
Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Support the County’s initiative to strengthen the local food
system and support the availability of healthy foods by providing
prompt and direct legal advice on regulatory questions
related to inspections and licensing of food-related
activities.
? Complete 95% of all applicable advisory assignments for
County departments by the agreed upon due dates.
? Achieve a 90% or more success rate in related County
Code Enforcement cases.
? Pursue policy change for healthy, safe, and thriving environments
with a special focus on residents who are in our care or
rely on us for support
? Implement a plan to provide services for people with severe
mental illness who are reluctant to engage in treatment, in
accordance with Assembly Bill 1421, also known as “Laura’s
Law,” in collaboration with Health and Human Services
Agency, Public Safety Group and other local law enforcement.
(HF4)
? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement strategies to
protect our youth from crime, neglect and abuse
? Provide effective legal services to HHSA in matters relating
to children who have been dependents of the Juvenile
Court to ensure the safety of any child who may have been
the victim of abuse. (SC6)
? Prevail in 98% of Juvenile Dependency petitions contested
in Superior Court.
? Prevail in 95% of Juvenile Dependency appeals and
writs filed.
? Enhance the quality of the environment by focusing on sustainability,
pollution prevention and strategic planning Ensure coordination of County Counsel responsibilities
with respect to new projects that require County approval
by early involvement of County Counsel staff with other
departmental partners and maintain consistent communication
among County Counsel staff on all aspects of
required review. (SE3)
? Complete 100% of all draft Environmental Impact Report
reviews within 40 days or less.
? Conduct at least 10 internal meetings with both advisory
and litigation land use staff to evaluate new projects and
status of ongoing project review.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Provide quality, accurate, effective and timely legal advice
to all County departments to enable them to fulfill their
mission and objectives in accordance with the law, reduce
the risk of liability and use taxpayer dollars efficiently and
effectively. (OE1)
? Complete 98% of all advisory assignments for the Board
of Supervisors and Chief Administrative Officer by their
due dates.
? Complete 95% of all advisory assignments for County
departments by the agreed upon due dates.
? Provide 50 specialized risk mitigation sessions, such as
risk roundtables, case evaluation committee discussions
and post-litigation debriefings to address risk issues,
helping to promote risk management and decrease
future legal liability.
? Aggressively represent the County in litigation, maintaining
fiscal stability while advancing the overall interests of the
County of San Diego and the public it serves. (OE1)
? Prevail in 90% of court decisions in all lawsuits filed against
the County.
? Achieve a 90% success rate in lawsuits where the County is
the plaintiff by winning in court or obtaining favorable
financial settlements.
? Handle 95% of the defense of all lawsuits filed in California
against the County, unless a conflict of interest requires
outside counsel to handle a case, thereby reducing outside
counsel costs to the County and taxpayers.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers.
? Complete deployment and implementation of Practice
Management System (T360), which is a web-based practice
management system that manages all case and advisory
information, has calendaring capabilities, retains client and
contact information, stores supporting legal documents,
and tracks time and billing information. The project was
delayed until Fiscal Year 2015–16 due to continuing concerns
with data validation and resource issues on the vendor’s
side of the contract. Data migration issues seem to be
on the path to resolution, and we anticipate an operational
system in Fiscal Year 2015–16. (OE3)
? Implement a paperless electronic billing technology which
will streamline invoicing procedures and payment processes.
This technology will create a bidirectional data feed
into the County’s Oracle Financial system, and will provide
efficiencies in data entry and reconciliation. (OE3)
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Develop and implement a five-year succession plan to train
and prepare future office leaders. Implement needs-based,
focused training programs, develop legal resource databases
for common issues, strengthen team support structures,
and keep current with changing legal technology. (OE6)
? Send at least one staff member to a Supervisor Academy,
or other training program that enhances supervisory
skills, in Fiscal Year 2015–16.
? Evaluate office structure and organization on a quarterly
basis at a minimum.
? Establish three in-house trainings for new and current
employees.
Plan, build and maintain safe communities to improve the
quality of life for all residents
? Review, prioritize and investigate 100% of citizens’ complaints,
issues and other County matters of civil concern
brought before the Grand Jury by assembling a well-qualified
and widely representative civil panel to ensure that
city and county government entities are operating as efficiently
as possible. (SC2)
? Support the District Attorney with hearings on criminal
matters in accordance with Penal Code §904.6.

Strengthen the local food system and support the availability
of healthy foods, nutrition education, and nutrition assistance
for those who need it
? Expand the Farmers Market from a single location at the
County Operations Center to include multiple locations at
County facilities for the purpose of supporting healthy food
choices at work and at home. (HF2)
? Leverage internal communication resources, resource
groups, and social media to enhance employee understanding
of Live Well San Diego
? Expand the Wellness Expos at County facilities from 10 to
12 locations to support healthy choices at home and at
work. (HF5)
? Increase employee participation by 1% in the Love Your
Heart blood pressure campaign, an annual event offering
blood pressure screenings at County facilities as part of
Live Well San Diego and American Heart Health Month, to
help reduce heart disease and support employee wellness.
? Achieve a 5% (902 to 947) increase in employee participation
in the Dare to Stair campaign.
? Achieve a 5% (476 to 500) increase in employee participation
in the Amazing Race campaign.
? Achieve a 5% (950 to 998) increase in employee participation
in the Maintain Don’t Gain campaign.
? Align services to available resources to maintain fiscal stability
? Successfully implement the redesigned Work Safe/Stay
Healthy Countywide safety and injury prevention program
aimed to reduce workplace injuries and their resultant
costs by June 30, 2016. (OE1)
? Negotiate fiscally prudent successor Memorandum of
Agreements with 12 of 25 bargaining units and 2 of 9 existing
employee organizations by June 30, 2017. (OE1)
? Increase financial literacy for County employees by collaborating
with the Finance and General Government Group
Executive Office in the development of an online Financial
Literary training course accessible through the Learning
Management System. (OE2)
? To ensure timely and effective services, reduce the hours of
lost productivity related to workers’ compensation claims
by 3%.
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Utilize the existing technology of PeopleSoft e-Benefits to
support employee benefit elections during the 2016 open
enrollment by replacing paper processes with the electronic
election of plans by December 31, 2015. (OE3)
? Integrate the Human Resources Management System PeopleSoft
into the enterprise’s Oracle Identity Management
solution to increase security and eliminate staff intervention
of password request and system logins by June 30, 2017.
(OE3)
? Successfully procure and implement an enhanced Workers’
Compensation Claims Management system by June 30,
2017. (OE3)
? Strengthen our customer service culture to ensure a positive
customer experience
? Complete Phase II of the Classification Modernization
Project by reviewing 326 classification specifications by
June 30, 2016.
? Increase veteran outreach and community partnerships by
increasing participation in Veteran Outreach Program activities.
? Provide excellent customer service to County departments
by completing 90% of classification activity request within
prescribed timelines.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Strengthen awareness of diversity, inclusion, and cultural
competence through increased learning opportunities by
June 30, 2017.
? Conduct the Discipline Case Advocacy Institute (DCAI) by
June 30, 2016.
? Develop the remaining three knowledge activities, for a
total of eight, that complement formal training to encourage
continuous learning opportunities by June 30, 2016.
? Advertise 100% of all recruitments in diverse publications
in order to attract a diverse applicant pool.
? Increase number of Learning Management System (LMS)
training hours completed by participants by 5% in Fiscal
Year 2015–16.
? Increase the number of professional training opportunities
available in LMS by adding 20 new trainings in Fiscal Year
2015–16.
Encourage and promote residents to take important and
meaningful steps to protect themselves and their families for
the first 72 hours during a disaster
? Participate in at least two drills each fiscal year to prepare
for and respond to major natural or man-made disasters
impacting the San Diego County region. (SC1)
? Organize 1–2 meetings per year of regional Public Information
Officers from various sectors, such as education,
healthcare and government, to review disaster preparedness
and response. Meetings will build critical relationships
needed during regional emergencies and provide a forum
for sharing ideas and resources. (SC1)
? Provide accurate and timely emergency and recovery information
to the public and media, using a wide variety of traditional
and new media tools, such as the County’s
emergency website and app, social media, new releases,
news conferences and video.
? Create and promote diverse opportunities for residents to
exercise their right to be civically engaged and finding solutions
to current and future challenges.
? Provide timely and relevant information to the public
about the County’s programs and services while demonstrating
the fact that the County is a responsible steward of
tax dollars through content posted on County News Center.
The department will provide at least one content item
(article, video or graphic) per day for a total of 365 items
during Fiscal Year 2015–16 and another 365 items during
Fiscal Year 2016–17. (SE7)
? Provide modern infrastructure, innovative technology and
appropriate resources to ensure superior service delivery to
our customers
? Provide information access to all customers ensuring consistency,
transparency and customer confidence. (OE4)
? Support County departments’ goals and objectives by
sharing vital information with the public, stakeholders and
employees by creating print, video, web, mobile and
graphic content shared through public awareness campaigns,
news conferences, public service announcements
and additional formats. This includes the live broadcast of
all Board of Supervisors meetings to ensure the public has
access to its County government.
? Provide easy, on-the-go access to important County information
through social media. Increase number of followers
on Facebook and Twitter by 20% during Fiscal Year 2014–
15, and an additional 20% during Fiscal Year 2016–17.
? Develop, maintain and attract a skilled, adaptable and
diverse workforce by providing opportunities for our employees
to feel valued, engaged and trusted
? Foster an environment of excellence, innovation and
exceptional customer service among County employees
who serve the public through the County’s intranet site,
posting at least 200 content items, such as an article or
video, during Fiscal Year 2015–16, and another 200 during
Fiscal Year 2016–17.
