GOAL 1: IMPLEMENT TECHNOLOGY IMPROVEMENTS TO INCREASE OR MAINTAIN OPERATIONAL
EFFICIENCY.
GOAL 2: IMPROVE BUSINESS LICENSE PROCESSES AND PROCEDURES TO ENSURE HIGH QUALITY
SERVICE AND COMPLIANCE WITH ORDINANCES.
Objective A: Reduction in amount of staff time needed to prepare and process assessment appeals.











Staff time required to input and review Assessment Appeal Applications 9.3 min 11 min 9.5 min 8.5 min 8 min
The Clerk of the Board (COB) utilizes an online Assessment Appeals Application form which eliminated the initial manual
data-entry step of processing an application. Therefore, the more online applications received, the greater the potential
reduction in processing time per application. In  COB made operational changes to the input and review process,
whereby staff reviews a case at the time of input. This resulted in a reduction of time required to process a case at the
onset. Therefore, COB is anticipating an improvement of the current performance level when processing Assessment
Appeals Applications, whether received online or hard copy.
Objective: Improve efficiency of tracking and processing business licenses.











Turnaround time for processing of new business licenses 36 days 29 days 29 days 69 days 29 days
Turnaround time for processing renewal business licenses 25 days 26 days 26 days 37 days 26 days
In , COB experienced a marked increase in the number of days required to process new and renewal business
licenses. Due to processing delays in , COB is working with the approving agency to implement a change in the
tracking and approval of business license applications. It is anticipated that this collaborative effort will return the approval
time to previous levels, if not show an improvement.
Objective B: Increase in electronic submission of Assessment Appeal Applications vs. hard copy submission of
applications.











Percentage of electronic submission of Assessment Appeal Applications N/A 12.3% 20% 36% 40%
Public use of the online form has increased due to implementation of an enhancement to the online application to retain
essential information, which has made the online application process more user friendly. COB will implement further
improvements to the online application process in the upcoming fiscal year. Currently applicants are unable to review
information contained in the application prior to submission. The additional enhancement will allow for review of an
application prior to submission. The intent is to reduce the number of errors contained in applications, as well as reduce
the number of duplicate applications.

GOAL 1: IMPLEMENT THE COUNTYWIDE VISION.
GOAL 2: IMPROVE COUNTY GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS.
GOAL 3: OPERATE IN A FISCALLY-RESPONSIBLE AND BUSINESS-LIKE MANNER.
Objective A: Determine County government’s role in realization of the Countywide Vision.
Objective B: Continue the County role of convening conversations on community collaboration and collective action.
The first two Countywide Vision Regional Implementation Goals have been adopted by the Board of Supervisors and
SANBAG Board. They focus on supporting the success of our children from “cradle-to-career” and creating a businessfriendly
environment. The CAO will continue to serve in a leadership role for the Countywide Vision Project, working with
the Vision Team, the Board of Supervisors and County staff, the SANBAG Board and staff, the element groups, and the
community to develop action steps to implement the Regional Implementation Goals, and incorporate the Board-approved
Paradigm and Job Statement to the organization.
Objective A: Enhance and protect the Board of Supervisors’ policy-making role and ensure authority exists for staff
actions.
Objective B: Create clear lines of authority within the County organization.
Objective C: Clarify roles, responsibilities and governance of all County programs.
The CAO will work with County Counsel to review and update the County Code and Policy Manual to reflect the current
organizational structure and Board of Supervisors policies. The Policy Manual is already subject to an ongoing review,
with revisions coming before the Board as appropriate.
The CAO will continue to work with departments and provide support for organizational reviews to document operations
and clarify legal authority, roles and responsibilities for County operations.
Objective A: Eliminate silos and consolidate administrative functions.
Objective B: Ensure that County Redevelopment Oversight Board appointees understand and represent County interests.
On December 6, 2011, the Board of Supervisors entered into an agreement with the City of Hesperia to establish a stateof-
the-art Public Safety Operations Center (PSOC) at the High Desert Government Center facility. The project concept
addresses several critical capital and programmatic issues, across a multitude of departments and functions, virtually
eliminating many long-standing operational silos. The project will feature a “fusion center” with technology and software
that will allow public safety personnel to work together across agencies and disciplines to identify trends and issues, and
develop effective plans of action. Led by the County Administrative Office, and with enthusiastic participation of all the
impacted elected officials and department heads, the project also advances development of the infrastructure required for
the 800 MHz Radio Upgrade Project and facilitates integrated service delivery through collaboration and co-location of
County departments. In addition, the overall construction and implementation project is currently ahead of schedule and
under budget.
The State’s dissolution of local redevelopment agencies in  created a process that included the creation of
Oversight Boards to ensure that ongoing redevelopment expenses and assets are managed properly. There are 26 such
Oversight Boards in San Bernardino County, each of which includes a County representative and a public representative
appointed by the Board of Supervisors. The CAO and the County Economic Development Agency will serve as a
resource to those appointees to ensure the County’s interests are represented on all Oversight Boards.

PROVIDE ACCURATE, TIMELY AND RELIABLE LEGAL ADVICE TO CLIENTS TO ASSIST THEM TO
ACHIEVE THEIR OBJECTIVES.

CREATE, MAINTAIN, AND GROW JOBS AND ECONOMIC VALUE IN THE COUNTY.
GOAL 2: OPERATE IN A FISCALLY-RESPONSIBLE AND BUSINESS-LIKE MANNER.
Objective: Develop financing plans and approaches that will ensure provision of the infrastructure necessary for
development and the movement of goods.
The  strategic plan developed by the County Administrative Office (CAO) includes one-time funding of $5.0 million
to Public Works for pavement management to maintain the current pavement condition index (PCI), and $10.15 million in
support of other Public Works projects including the Lake Gregory Dam, Rim Forest Storm Drain, and a traffic signal at
Valley Blvd. and Banana Ave. in the Fontana area.
Objective A: Develop and maintain a multi-year plan to address projected shortfalls in the County’s budget.
Objective B: Develop a budget for the coming fiscal year that brings the County into fiscal balance and addresses the
most pressing countywide needs.
Objective C: Develop a long-term budget plan which brings the County into operational and programmatic balance.
Objective D: Live within our means, fully funding liabilities and reserves, while forming capital to strategically invest in the
future.
Objective E: Invest County resources in ways which create more ongoing revenue to reinvest in maintaining services.
Objective F: Fully fund basic operating systems.











General Purpose Reserve as a percentage of locally funded appropriation 10% 11% 12% 11% 12%
Variable rate debt as a percentage of total debt outstanding 16.05% 14.42% <25% 14.91% <25%
Stability of the County’s financial health, especially in these hard economic times, is an important goal of Finance and
Administration. By maximizing the use of County resources, being vigilant regarding expenditures, billing at full cost of
services, and maintaining adequate reserves, the department strives to meet this goal. Based on the short-term and longterm
forecasting of ongoing revenue and expenses, the upcoming and future fiscal years will be very challenging for the
County. The  strategic plan closes the majority of the five-year budget gap.
Beginning December 2011, the CAO began hosting Forward Planning meetings with the Office of the Auditor-
Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector, the Purchasing Department, the Information Services Department, the Human
Resources Department, Land Use Services, and Fleet Management to discuss planning and strategic direction for internal
service fund departments. Thus far, these meetings have resulted in a reconciliation of information services application
maintenance and support costs and future planning requirements, which lead to the recommendation to include an
additional $1.6 million in on-going funding beginning in  to support general fund applications at ideal levels. The
 Recommended Budget also includes $700,000 for the Land Use Services Department to upgrade their permitting
software; $2.0 million for Public Works to fund system related costs including WINCAMS, PermitsPlus, and the Job Cost
system; and $368,000 for the Purchasing Department in support of the new electronic procurement network (ePro).
In March 2012, the County refunded the 2001/2002 Certificates of Participation (West Valley Detention Center) through a
private placement to provide annual budgetary savings of $540,000 due to the low interest rate environment and the
relatively short remaining life of the current lease obligation.
In , the Board approved increasing the General Purpose Reserve  to 20% of locally funded appropriation at
the beginning of each budget fiscal year and using one-time sources until the  is achieved. This General Purpose
Reserve is intended for unanticipated major emergencies; to allow a transition period when key economic indicators point
to a recession likely to substantially reduce county revenues and increase required safety net expenditures; and to ensure
the County’s ability to make debt service payments in periods of declining general purpose revenues. Currently, the
County has to borrow money yearly to meet cashflow needs. The   was not achieved since locally funded
appropriation was redefined to include ongoing operating transfers in, which increased the base.
In addition, County Policy 02-11 requires that variable rate bonds be structured to protect the County against cyclical
interest rate fluctuations and limits total variable rate debt to no more than 25% of the total debt outstanding.

DECREASE VEHICLE DOWNTIME FOR PREVENTATIVE MAINTENANCE AND ROUTINE REPAIRS.
GOAL 2: SUSTAIN GREEN COUNTY INITIATIVE BY REDUCING OVERALL MOTOR POOL VEHICLE EMISSIONS.
Objective: Reduce time to maintain and to repair vehicles.











Percentage of programmed maintenance (PM) services completed the same day the
vehicle is delivered to Fleet Management.
77% 87% 80% 77% 80%
Percentage of repairs completed within two days of vehicle delivery to Fleet Management. 85% 88% 85% 83% 85%
The department measures turnaround time by noting the start and completion times on each PM and repair work order.
Vehicle availability is critical to all County departments in order for them to deliver their services. Therefore, it is important
that Fleet Management complete all vehicle maintenance and repairs timely without sacrificing quality. Additionally, timely
vehicle maintenance/repair turnaround should improve overall customer satisfaction for Garage services.
Objective: Purchase the lowest emission vehicle available that meet the county’s operational and fiscal requirements.











Percentage of Motor Pool vehicles classified as ultra low emission vehicles or better. 85% 85% 90% 87% 90%
An element of the county’s mission is to improve the quality of life for its residents. Improving air quality by reducing
vehicle emissions supports the County’s mission. During its regular purchasing cycle, Fleet Management will continue
replacing the existing fleet with ultra low emission vehicles (ULEV) or cleaner/better emissions, including hybrid vehicles,
when practical. It is d that the entire fleet will consist of only ULEV’s (or better) by 2014-15.
The “lower than ”  for  is due to delaying vehicle purchases as Fleet Management has originally
intended in response to the current economic conditions.

ASSIST COUNTY DEPARTMENTS IN ATTRACTING AND RETAINING HIGHLY QUALIFIED STAFF.
GOAL 2: INCREASE AND IMPROVE DELIVERY OF HUMAN RESOURCES SERVICES.
Objective: Develop and implement an online countywide ethics and compliance training program.











Percentage of employees participating in compliance and ethics training. N/A N/A 85% 89% 91%
In September 2009, the Office of Compliance and Ethics (OCE) was transferred to the Human Resources Department.
The OCE aggressively worked to complete delivery of the ethics training module that was under development. This
mandatory training, designed to reach all county employees, will increase employee awareness of the county’s ethics
program, address the basic requirements and expectations for ethical behavior, and provide an overview of the resources
available to our employees.
Objective A: Expand participation in “My Health Matters!” through “Steps to Success” walking program.











Percentage of employees registered in “Steps to Success” program (increased
employees). 
According to the 2009 California Health Interview Survey, approximately 58.5% of adults in San Bernardino County are
obese. Given the staggering obesity prevalence, the County acknowledges the need for employee outreach and health
education specific to the benefits of maintaining a healthy lifestyle through proper nutrition and weight management.
Additionally, this statistic correlates to chronic medical conditions, such as high blood pressure, high cholesterol, diabetes,
etc. These conditions are a contributing factor to the significant increases in healthcare premiums for County employees.
The  MHM! Campaign will include a partnership between the County, Core Health-the Steps to Success portal,
and the Fitbit, an exercise and meal tracker. The Fitbit will provide the County detailed statistical analysis that will be used
to determine progress in the program.
Objective B: Train/Refresh Managers/Supervisors knowledge of Leaves and Disabilities











Percentage of managers/supervisors trained in leaves and disabilities.
 Base Year – 1,600 total managers/supervisors
N/A N/A N/A N/A 75%
(1,200)
Effective July 28, 2012, the County will contract with a new carrier to administer leaves and disabilities for County
employees. Employee Relations and Employee Benefits and Services will combine efforts to provide training and/or
refresher training to approximately 1,600 managers and supervisors regarding the employee and/or supervisor’s
responsibilities in the FMLA and short-term disability benefits processes.

PROVIDE TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS THAT ENABLE DEPARTMENTS TO BETTER SERVE COUNTY
RESIDENTS.
GOAL 2: IMPROVE CUSTOMER SATISFACTION BY DELIVERING PRODUCTS AND SERVICES THAT EXCEED
EXPECTATIONS.
GOAL 3: IMPROVE TELECOMMUNICATION AND DATA TRANSMISSION CAPABILITIES TO BETTER RESPOND
TO EMERGENCIES AND DISASTERS.
Objective A: Build and sustain a robust hardware and software support infrastructure to deploy countywide technology
solutions.
Objective B: Implement Wide Area Network (WAN) backbone redesign to increase capacity for additional throughput and
redundancy.











Percentage of all physical servers virtualized.
Objective A: Implement new application source code control system to provide improved manageability of application
programs, source code and related documentation.











Applications migrated to new team foundation server repository. N/A 37% 50% 50% 100%
In , the Application Development/Support division of ISD began to replace the existing source code management
system with a new tool called Team Foundation Services (TFS). The previous tool, Visual Source Safe (VSS), had
reached capacity limits and was prone to data corruption. The TFS system provides more capacity and improved
recoverability for application source code management, which in turn reduces the risk of lost or corrupted data. The TFS
system also provides project management features not available in the VSS tool. The achievement for implementation in
 was 37%, which exceeded the original  of 25%. The replacement is expected to be 50% complete for
.
Objective A: To increase the 911 calling line identification accuracy at 18 campuses.











Implement enhanced 911 calling identification software and hardware. 83% 98% 100% 100% N/A
Enhanced 911 services allow emergency personnel to accurately pinpoint where emergency callers are located, improving
emergency response times at these locations. The original project included twenty-two campuses, but after evaluation, it
was determined that only eighteen of these facilities could accommodate this system. By the end of , Information
Services Department (ISD) achieved 98% completion. For , ISD reached the 100% completion .

IMPLEMENT THE COUNTY OF SAN BERNARDINO ELECTRONIC PROCUREMENT NETWORK (ePRO).
GOAL 2: DEVELOP THE COUNTY TRAVEL PORTAL WITH ONLINE BOOKING AND REPORTING.
Objective A: Initiate and process purchasing requisitions electronically.
Objective B: Implement phase two of ePro including integration with the financial management system to automate
encumbrances now that bidding, requisitioning, contracting, receiving, and vendor management are in use.











1A. Percentage of departments utilizing ePro to requisition products and services. N/A N/A 80% 100% 100%
1B. Percentage of reduction in cycle times for purchase orders. N/A N/A N/A N/A 20%
In April 2011, the Board of Supervisors approved an agreement for electronic procurement. The first phase of this project
included vendor management, automated workflows, online bidding, electronic requisitions and purchase orders,
automated receiving, and budgetary controls derived from Financial Accounting System (FAS) data extracts that populate
ePro. Phase one was completed in May 2012, resulting in nearly 4,000 registered vendors and approximately 1,000
county users. More than 800 users received hands-on training during the six-week period leading up to the rolling launch
that began on March 28, 2012. Phase two will eliminate dual entry of encumbrances in FAS by Purchasing staff.
Objective: Create and customize an online booking tool to generate savings and facilitate county policy compliance.











Percentage of departments using online booking travel arrangements. N/A N/A 90% 0% 90%
With recommended travel procedures in mind, the scope of work was developed for a service contract to enable
implementation of online travel booking in accordance with county policy. In partnership with a travel management
company, and with approval from the Board, the revised policy will be put in place along with a system that will be efficient,
save money, and consolidate booking and reporting of travel arrangements.
This project is currently in the developmental stage pending completion of the travel management Request for Proposal
(RFP) and adoption of recommended travel policies and procedures. Upon completion of the RFP and adoption of the
new policies, the implementation stage will begin with an anticipated go-live occurring in .

MINIMIZE THE TOTAL COST OF RISK.
GOAL 2: SUPPORT COUNTYWIDE RISK CONTROL EFFORTS.
Objective A: Optimize insurance vs. risk retention.











Cost of risk as a percent of County budget.  less than 2%. 1.8% 1.9% <2% 1.8% <2%
Objective A: Provide formal training courses and informal consultation ing safety, loss control, and risk transfer
needs as identified by departments.
Objective B: Expand participation in Arrowhead Achievement Program.











Percentage increase in formal training classes offered. 5% 9% 10% 14% 15%
Number of departments participating in Arrowhead Achievement Program. 7 7 15 7 10
The Arrowhead Achievement Program is an action based, self-driven, incentive program designed to assist departments
in reducing their overall cost of risk by merging risk management techniques with fundamental safety principles; thus,
increasing productivity, public safety, customer service and positively impacting the cost of risk. The program consists of
five (5) basic components: identifying loss exposures, analyzing loss exposures, examining risk control techniques,
implementing risk control techniques and evaluating results. The  for  is lower than the  as a result
of less departments joining the program than was originally anticipated. Risk Management is actively working with
departments in an effort for them to join the program in .

FOSTER JOB CREATION AND IMPROVE THE WELFARE OF COUNTY RESIDENTS.
GOAL 2: ENHANCE THE COUNTY OF SAN BERNARDINO’S POSITION AS A TOURIST DESTINATION AND
PROMOTE THE COUNTY AS A VIABLE FILM LOCATION.
Objective: Identify, attract and facilitate the location and/or relocation of businesses that offer jobs suitable for the job
skills available within the County.











Number of new businesses attracted to the County through the attraction and expansion
efforts of the Department of Economic Development.
N/A 202 220 350 400
Number of d new jobs created through attraction and expansion efforts. N/A N/A New 5000 6000
The Department of Economic Development’s attraction efforts are based primarily on a site selection process. This
involves identifying sites that meet the requirements and coordinating site tours with brokers and developers. During this
process, other departments including Land Use/Building and Safety, etc., are brought in to ensure a seamless progression
of services for the requesting client.
In , the Department plans to create an action plan that will position the County to take advantage of key economic
development opportunities during the economic recovery. The Department will create collaborative forums with key
industry sector leaders and educators to discuss potential technical transfer programs and the potential for creating
regional innovation corridors.
To successfully foster job creation, increase private investment and enhance county revenues through retention, attraction
and expansion of business, the Department of Economic Development plans to create and develop strong regional
relationships with local businesses, cities and chambers of commerce.
Objective: Enhance the image of the County as a viable film location and create awareness of the economic benefits of
filming in the County through ongoing branding and marketing.











Number of International/Technical Tour excursions booked to the County. N/A N/A 50 50 60
Number of Film Permits issued annually. N/A 164 164 150 150
The Department of Economic Development, in an effort to build its tourism program, has hired an international tourism
development consultant to develop a strategic marketing program that incorporates destination branding; technical tour
programming; travel product development and project management to create a sustainable tourism industry for the
County. The Department has also hired the Inland Empire Film Commission to promote locations within the County and
execute film permits.

IMPROVE COMMUNITIES IN THE SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY BY FINANCING CONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS AND PUBLIC SERVICES.
GOAL 2: ENSURE DEVELOPMENT OF WELL PLANNED, BALANCED, AND SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES.
GOAL 3: CREATE 50 REPLACEMENT HOUSING UNITS FOR LOW AND MODERATE INCOME FAMILIES.
GOAL 4: COMPLY WITH MANDATES OF ASSEMBLY BILL X1 26.
Objective: Provide for the Health and Social Services needs of county residents.











Number of county residents benefiting from public service projects. 35,387 33,317 15,000 25,000 21,000
Objective A: Expand the supply of quality, safe, sanitary, and affordable housing for residents of San Bernardino County.
Objective B: Design and implementation of a comprehensive revitalization strategy for the Bloomington area.











Number of multi-family low, moderate or middle income units provided. 0 75 96 101 135
Number of homes purchased, repaired or rehabilitated for low, moderate and middle
income persons.
265 122 160 180 0
Objective: Enter into real estate agreement for the development of an affordable housing project that will meet the
former Redevelopment Agency’s replacement housing requirements. Fall of 2012











Number of activities taken to meet the replacement housing requirements. N/A N/A New 4 8
Objective: Develop an asset disposition and/or development plan for the Housing Successor’s real property. Fall 2012

TO COMPLY WITH THE MANDATES OF ASSEMBLY BILL X1 26.
GOAL 2: TO WORK TOWARD COMPLETION OF CAPITAL PROJECTS APPROVED BY THE DEPT OF FINANCE.
Objectives: Complete a Dissolution Finance Plan, Create and implement an Asset Disposition Plan and Ensure that the
Recognized Obligation Payment Schedule for January through June 2012 is approved by the Successor
Agency, Oversight Board and Department of Finance.











Number of dissolution activities completed to meet required deadlines. N/A N/A New 4 8
Objective: Work toward completing the capital projects; I-10 at Cherry Avenue Interchange, Cherry Avenue Widening
and San Bernardino Avenue Improvements.

INCREASE EMPLOYABILITY OF COUNTY RESIDENTS THROUGH SERVICES PROVIDED.
GOAL 2: INCREASE AWARENESS IN THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY OF THE SERVICES AVAILABLE THROUGH
WORKFORCE DEVELOMENT DEPARTMENT.
Objective: Provide Workforce Investment Act (WIA) Services to County residents.











Number of County resident enrollments. 24,379 23,327 23,000 22,660 21,000
This objective was selected based on the role the department plays in the overall Countywide vision and economic
development strategies of the county and the Economic Development Agency. This objective was influenced by federal
and state mandated performance outcomes and funding levels made available from the department’s primary funding
source. The Workforce Development Department (WDD) has provided employment services and assistance to over
22,000 county residents who are seeking employment and training opportunities and resources. These resources are
made available across the designated county region and outlying areas by way of Employment Resource Centers located
throughout the county. The 2012-2013  is slightly reduced as service demand is expected to wane in response to
changing economic climate.
Objective A: Increase number of businesses contacted by staff by 10%.
Objective B: Make presentations at chamber of commerce functions, job fairs and business events and coordinate
business-related workshops.











Number of businesses contacted. 4,339 2,876 3,164 3,381 3,719
In  WDD held a series of workshops for businesses which focused on creating, maintaining and growing jobs in
the county. Experts conducting the workshops provided information on marketing techniques, reducing operating costs
and increasing sales revenues. During the year, 945 businesses attended these workshops. WDD also provided layoff
aversion services to local businesses through contracted business advisors who provided customized business and
process improvement plans, resulting in 480 retained jobs. In , WDD plans to continue to develop and provide
workshops that are responsive to the needs of local businesses and to participate in regional education/business
collaborations to identify the training needs of the business community.

ALIGN WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, EDUCATION AND FUNDING
STRATEGIES TO ENHANCE THE COMPETITIVENESS OF SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY’S WORKFORCE
AND SUPPORT POSITIVE ECONOMIC GROWTH.

Objective A: Participate in regular meetings of stakeholders to align strategies, policies, networks, funding sources and
training services to meet the workforce demands of local businesses.
Objective B: Diversify funding sources available for demand driven training services to include sources other than WIA
funding.











3A. Number of regular meetings of stakeholders for the purpose of aligning strategies,
policies, networks, funding sources and training services to meet the workforce
demands of local businesses.
6 6 6 6 6
3B. Number of new funding sources available for demand driven training services to
include sources other than WIA allocation from the Department of Labor.
5 5 2 5 3
WDD understands its role to provide support to residents and businesses in San Bernardino County by working to develop
a well-trained workforce that meets the demand of local businesses and enhances the potential for future development.
WDD has partnered with other counties, cities and educational institutions for a regional approach to identify business
needs and areas of growth. WDD will continue to strengthen existing and forge new partnerships and will aggressively
seek additional funding sources to continue to provide ed training for the County’s workforce to enhance the
competitiveness of local businesses.

PUBLISH THE ANNUAL ASSESSMENT ROLL TIMELY AND ACCURATELY.
GOAL 2: MAINTAIN A HIGH LEVEL OF RECORDER SERVICES WHILE RESPONDING TO CHANGES IN
REGULATIONS AND LAW.
Objective A: Process changes of ownership.
Objective B: Establish a value for appraisable events.
Objective C: Apply timely filed exemptions.











1A. Completion percentage of change of ownership documents received for each
assessment year.

1B. Completion percentage of appraisable events received for each assessment year (e.g.
change of ownership, new construction, etc.).

1C. Completion percentage of timely filed claims for exemption (e.g. homeowner’s, welfare
church, etc.) received for each assessment year.

The Assessor/Recorder/County Clerk continues to reflect the status of the real estate market on the assessment roll.
Changes in ownership resulting in decline in assessed values continue to be posted; however, published supplemental
rolls have reflected modest positive assessed totals. Overall, assessed values are declining at a slower pace. In 2010, the
assessment roll declined 4.5% compared to 2009, and the 2011 assessment roll declined only 0.87%. Timely filed claims
for homeowners decreased 1% and institutional exemptions have slightly increased (3%) from 2010 to 2011.
Objective A: Maintain a high quality of service in current offices.
Objective B: Identify and comply with all legislative mandates.











2A. Every document received is processed within the established standard. 99% 95% 99% 99% 99%
2B. Compliance percentage in meeting deadlines for legislative directives. 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
The priority of the Recorder function is to maintain a high quality level of service to the public while responding to the
various changes in laws and regulations, as well as meeting deadlines for implementation. The first objective is to record,
file, or process each document within the established standard for that document.  2A allows for a 1% error
rate due to the volume of documents being processed. Customer service is enhanced when all service standards are met.
The Recorder’s Office is committed to responding to the ever-changing legislative and administrative regulations, including
changes to marriage regulations, social security number truncation, and new regulations regarding mortgages and
mechanic’s liens. Meeting the state’s changing mandates and deadlines is an ongoing challenge.

PROVIDE TIMELY AND ACCURATE FINANCIAL INFORMATION.
GOAL 2: MANAGE THE COUNTY TREASURY IN A SAFE, EFFECTIVE AND EFFICIENT MANNER.
Objective: Maintain and improve the financial accounting processes and reporting.











Received Certificate of Achievement for Excellence in Financial Reporting Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
The objective is to maintain the financial accounting system and to improve the internal processes for accounting and
reporting.
In a measurable aspect of the commitment to provide timely and accurate financial information regarding the finances of
the County, the Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector has received the Certificate of Achievement for Excellence in
Financial Reporting from the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) for 23 consecutive years for the
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR), including the most current award for . The  report has
been submitted to the GFOA and the department is confident it continues to conform to the Certificate of Achievement
Program requirements, and anticipates receiving the award.
Objective: Maintain the highest possible credit rating from the three major rating agencies for the county investment
pool.


The primary goal of the treasury function is to provide for safe and effective management of the cash and investments in
the county investment pool. The objective selected to meet this goal is the maintenance of the highest possible credit
rating in compliance to the County Investment Policy. The achievement of this objective will demonstrate the
department’s ability to effectively meet the goal of a safe and effective treasury. As guardian of the public’s money, we
employ conservative county investment policies, focused on the principles of safety, liquidity and yield.
*Ratings effective through March 31, 2012. During , the County made the decision to terminate the rating
contracts with Moody’s and Standard and Poor’s for a cost savings of $60,000 annually.

PROMOTE AND INCREASE COMMUNITY COLLABORATION AND INVOLVEMENT TO ENHANCE
ACCESS TO CARE.
GOAL 2: INCENTIVE PLAN
Objective: Collaborate with other county departments to maximize Low Income Health Program (LIHP). This program
will optimize existing resources providing medical care to enrollees previously part of the County’s W&I
§17000 Medically Indigent Adult program. Allow such designated departments to coordinate care to draw
down federal matching dollars at a rate of 50% of cost. These funds will have the effect of reducing
commensurate Safety Net Care Pool dollars, but overall provide for improved coordinated care that will
equate to better patient outcomes.

Objective: The Incentive Plan, formerly known as Delivery System Reform Incentive Plan is a detailed plan for
Infrastructure Development, Innovation Redesign, Population-Focused Improvement and Urgent
Improvement in Quality and Safety.

INCREASE ACCESS AND REDUCE BEHAVIORAL HEALTH DISPARITIES AMONG THE DIVERSE
RACIAL, ETHNIC, AND CULTURAL COMMUNITIES IN SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY.
GOAL 2: PROMOTE AND INCREASE COMMUNITY COLLABORATION AND INVOLVEMENT TO ENHANCE
ACCESS TO CARE.
Objective: Increase number of clients among specified ethnic/cultural groups that are currently underserved or
inappropriately served.

Develop and implement programs and strategies to increase access to coordinated behavioral and primary
health services.

PROMOTE AND INCREASE COMMUNITY COLLABORATION AND INVOLVEMENT TO ENHANCE
ACCESS TO CARE.
GOAL 2: PROMOTE AND ENSURE A HEALTHFUL ENVIRONMENT.


Objective: Develop and implement programs and strategies to increase access to coordinated behavioral and primary
health services.

Total number of clients enrolled and eligible to access comprehensive primary and
behavioral health services through countywide collaborative programs.
Objective: Increase animal adoptions through increased community involvement, education and outreach.











Animal Control strives to increase adoptions each year by at 5%. In many years this 
has been exceeded.

INCREASE TOTAL PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLDS PARTICIPATING IN THE CALFRESH (FOOD
STAMP) PROGRAM.
GOAL 2: INCREASE THE WORK PARTICIPATION RATE (WPR) OF RECIPIENTS OF CALWORKS BENEFITS.
GOAL 3: MAINTAIN CALFRESH ERROR RATE PROFICIENCY.
Objective: Increase public awareness/access of CalFresh benefits.











Percentage increase in CalFresh participation. 32% 16.5% 20% 11% 10%
The Food and Nutrition Service (FNS), a division of the US Department of Agriculture (USDA), has mandated States to
increase outreach efforts, and thus CalFresh participation. TAD, through additional community outreach efforts, and the
implementation of the on-line Application (C4 Yourself), started in October 2007, has expanded access to apply for
CalFresh benefits for San Bernardino County residents. TAD staff participates in over 40 community outreach health
events annually to help promote CalFresh participation in communities. Increasing food stamp awareness and
participation enriches the lives of our County residents through better nutrition and health. Based on research by the
USDA, for each dollar in federal CalFresh benefits, nearly double that amount is generated in economic activity.
Note: Current economic conditions contributed to the increase in the CalFresh program beginning in 2007-08 and are
expected to continue for the next few years but are expected to return to the projected 5%  once the economy
improves.
Objective: Increase the number of Welfare to Work (WTW) mandatory CalWORKs participants who are engaged in a
federal WTW activity.










Percentage of CalWORKs customers engaged in a Federal Welfare-To-Work
activity. 41% 38% 50% 50% 50%
This performance goal was developed to measure the percentage of successful placements of our CalWORKs customers
into Federal Welfare-To-Work activities. This goal will assist the department in achieving an overall increase in the number
of participants that are actively engaged in welfare-to-work activities and help move our customers to their ultimate goal of
self-sufficiency.
Objective: Maintain the CalFresh error rate below the federal tolerance level of 6% to avoid fiscal sanction.










Percentage of errors in calculating CalFresh Benefits.
TAD’s goal in this area is to maintain the CalFresh error rate below the federal tolerance level, which the department
previously achieved. Ensuring accuracy of CalFresh payments adds to the customer service satisfaction of this program
for which TAD is responsible. Additionally, maintaining the CalFresh error rate below the federal tolerance level reduces
the risk of potential sanctions and penalties.

INCREASE THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN AND YOUTH THAT REMAIN SAFELY AT HOME, BASED ON
THE DEVELOPMENT OF SAFETY PLANS DURING TEAM DECISION MAKING MEETINGS (TDM).
GOAL 5: PREPARE FOSTER YOUTH WITH MORE CONSISTENT ENGAGEMENT IN THEIR TRANSITIONAL
INDEPENDENT LIVING PLAN (TILP) TO ENSURE THEIR BEST POSSIBLE SUCCESSFUL EXIT FROM
FOSTER CARE.
GOAL 6: REDUCE THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN WHO ENTER FOSTER CARE EACH YEAR.
Objective: Increase the number of Team Decision Making meetings conducted with families throughout the County.











Percentage Increase in number of TDM’s conducted. 
This goal is new this year and Children and Family Services established goals 4 and 5 to meet the criteria outlined in the
upcoming System Improvement Plan in January 2013.
Objective A: Increase the number of Transitional Conferences (TC) with transitional aged youth to assist them in preparing
for a successful exit from Foster Care.
Objective B: Increase compliance with federal requirements for documenting National Youth Transitional Data.











5A. Percentage increase in number of TC’s conducted.
5B. Percentage increase in National Youth Transitional Data compliance. 
This goal is new this year and Children and Family Services established goals 4 and 5 to meet the criteria outlined in the
upcoming System Improvement Plan in January 2013.
Objective: Continue implementation of Family-to Family (F2F) and other practices that reduce the number of children
who must enter foster care.











Annual percentage reduction in the number of children entering foster care.
Children and Family Services established goals 4 and 5 to meet the criteria outlined in the upcoming System Improvement
Plan in January 2013 and will no longer be using this performance measure beginning in .
*(10%) and (24%) identifies a percentage increase in the number of children entering foster care in each respective year.

INCREASE THE NUMBER OF FOSTER CHILDREN IN THE INDEPENDENT LIVING PROGRAM THAT
EARN A HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA OR G.E.D.
GOAL 8: ASSIST AT-RISK ADULTS AND FRAIL ELDERLY TO MAINTAIN INDEPENDENCE AND LIVE SAFELY IN
THE LEAST RESTRICTIVE ENVIRONMENT.
GOAL 9: ENSURE THE SAFETY OF AT-RISK ADULTS AND THE ELDERLY TO IMPROVE OR MAINTAIN QUALITY
OF LIFE.
Objective A: Continue identifying and tracking the performance of child welfare dependents on the High School
Equivalency (Exit) exam.
Objective B: Secure/implement customized tutoring programs designed to address needs of exiting youth.











Percentage increase in foster youth graduating with a high school diploma or
G.E.D. 6% 20% 10% 15% N/A
Children and Family Services established goals 4 and 5 to meet the criteria outlined in the upcoming System Improvement
Plan in January 2013 and will no longer be using this performance measure beginning in .
Objective: Complete annual re-evaluation process for In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) customers within state
mandated timeframes.











Percentage of IHSS annual re-evaluations completed within state mandated
timeframes. 96% 96% 90% 96% 90%
Continued improvements are being developed and implemented on completion of the annual re-evaluations. The state
Quality Assurance Programs continues to identify areas for improvements that enhance the program integrity in customer
service in this area. s were developed using the state mandated timeframes. This will continue to be a challenge
due to the current budget changes pending in the IHSS program.
Objective: Respond to emergency Adult Protective Services (APS) referrals within state mandated timeframes.











Percentage of emergency APS referrals responded to within the State mandated
timeframes. 99% 100% 100% 100% 100%
APS emergency referrals are responded to within the 24-hour state mandate. Continued training on the response to both
emergency referrals and non-emergencies are being reviewed and updated annually.

ASSIST SENIORS TO MAINTAIN CHOICES AND IMPROVE QUALITY OF LIFE BY INCREASING
KNOWLEDGE AND AWARENESS OF AVAILABLE PROGRAMS AND ASSISTANCE.
SUMMARY OF BUDGET UNITS

Objective: Increase individual customers contacted by Senior Information and Assistance (SIA) outreach efforts.

Increase individual customers contacted by SIA. 1.5% 16% 8% 12% 8%
The departments outreach efforts by SIA have ed older individuals within the county while placing emphasis on older
individuals who are isolated, have Alzheimer’s disease or related disorders, and have the greatest economic and social
needs as mandated by the Older Americans Act. This objective remains a major focus, as information on programs and
services is a vital link to ensuring senior safety and independence. The 4% reduction from   is due to a change in the methodology of counting customers. This was necessary to eliminate duplicate counts.


PROVIDE FOR HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICE NEEDS OF COUNTY RESIDENTS.
GOAL 2: OPERATE IN A FISCALLY RESPONSIBLE AND BUSINESS LIKE MANNER.

Objective: Provide for the social service needs of residents through the collection of child support.

Percentage of collections on current support orders. 51% 53% 53% 56% 58%
The Department of Child Support Services (DCSS) measures the amount of collections received in relation to child
support owed. Increases in the collection of current support results in more money received by San Bernardino families,
thereby assisting in meeting their basic necessities, including food, clothing and adequate housing.
Objective: Enhance the Department’s cost effectiveness through increased collections.

Determine the department’s cost effectiveness by comparing the amount collected for child
support as measured against expenditures.

The Department acts in a fiscally responsible manner by utilizing allocated funds to collect child support payments. In
Federal Fiscal Year 2011, the Department collected $4.21 for each dollar expended. Continued growth in collections will
result in improved cost effectiveness.

ACHIEVE SCHOOL READINESS OF ENROLLED CHILDREN TO ENSURE THEY ARE MAKING PROGRESS
TOWARD POSITIVE OUTCOMES AS REQUIRED BY THE DESIRED RESULTS DEVELOPMENTAL
PROFILE PRESCHOOL PROGRAM (DRDP-PS), WHICH WILL IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF LIFE FOR
COUNTY CHILDREN AND THE FAMILIES INVOLVED IN THIS PROGRAM.

Children will be assessed three times per year in accordance to Federal and State Regulations. Teachers will
share child assessment information with parents and use this input to prepare home and classroom activities
responsive to children’s individual needs.

PSD will continue to use the Desired Results Developmental Profile Preschool (DRDP-PS) for measuring child outcomes to
comply with the State Department of Education and to meet Federal mandates for measuring child outcomes. The results
are expected to differ from year to year due to different groups of children that are tested each year and the different levels
of development. One of the highest priorities of the department is ensuring that children are prepared to be successful in
school. Studies show that children who have attended a quality preschool are less likely to be placed in special education
or be held back a grade. They also perform better on standardized math and reading tests, are more likely to graduate from
high school, earn more money and continue on to higher education.
INCREASE PARENT AND COMMUNITY SATISFACTION RATE TO ENHANCE THE WELL-BEING OF
COUNTY FAMILIES INVOLVED IN THIS PROGRAM.

The State Desired Results Parent Survey will be distributed to all families and results analyzed annually to
determine parent satisfaction with identified areas of the program. The survey information will also be
analyzed to assist PSD to respond to the needs of parents.

The State’s Desired Results Parent Survey is mandated annually by the California Department of Education and is an
effective tool in measuring whether parents’ needs and expectations are being met in the areas of school readiness and
family support services. The Desired Results Parent Survey was distributed to all parents in the program in January 2011.
The results for 3,412 surveys received were tabulated and analyzed in February 2011. Based on these results, 99% of the
responding parents were satisfied with the overall quality of the program, 98% of the responding parents felt that their
children were safe and content in the program and 95% of the responding parents felt that they were well informed of their
children’s development. The department anticipates that the survey results for 2012 will yield a similar level of satisfaction.

PROMOTE PUBLIC SAFETY BY PUNISHING CRIMINAL CONDUCT.

The District Attorney’s Office continues to promote public safety by holding offenders accountable for their actions and
seeking appropriate punishment for the offense. Prison sentences, where appropriate, bring justice to victims of crime and
remove the most serious offenders from our communities. San Bernardino County’s per capita prison commitment rate is
the highest in the state.
The department anticipates the percentage of prison commitments will remain at the same level for . With
implementation of Public Safety Realignment (AB109) by the State of California, a greater emphasis is now made on
placing convicted criminals into alternative programs rather than incarceration. The hope, according to proponents of this
realignment, is to reduce prison population.

ASSIST VICTIMS AND THEIR FAMILIES TO OVERCOME THE EFFECTS OF CRIME.

The personal contact with a trained Victim Advocate is the best reassurance the department can provide for traumatized
victims as they find their way through an often-confusing justice system. Advocates provide emotional support and
information regarding services and restitution to crime victims. It is the objective of the District Attorney’s Office to provide
that personal contact in as many cases as possible and to increase that level of contact in succeeding years.
The   is slightly less than the  due to reduced staff available to provide these important services.
However, the performance measure for  demonstrates the department’s continued strong commitment to serve
victims of crime and the  is increased with additional staff now being funded through AB109. Services provided
include the continuance of Camp Good Grief. This successful program is a joint effort between the department’s victim
services division and Loma Linda University Children’s Hospital.

REDUCE LENGTH OF TIME REQUIRED TO MOVE CASES THROUGH THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
SYSTEM.
GOAL 2: PARTICIPATE WITH LAW AND JUSTICE AGENCIES TO FACILITATE ADDITIONAL GRANT FUNDING.
Objective: Increase the number of cases that are electronically filed.

The Law and Justice Group’s e-Filing custom software program involves the electronic transmittal of court data between
the Superior Court and District Attorney case management systems. During , this project was expanded to
include the integration of the collaborative imaging project known as Storage Technology Optical Records Management
(STORM). STORM improved the business practices and electronic information sharing between the Sheriff/Coroner/Public
Administrator, District Attorney and Superior Court.
The current phase of the STORM project includes implementation of the Presynct forms package within the
Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator’s Department that provides for the electronic transmittal of police reports and
supporting documents. Presynct transforms existing paper report forms into a web-based version, allowing deputies,
clerks, and supervisors to enter data in a familiar format and have it stored electronically. Presynct integrates with
STORM, thus allowing the Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator’s Department to electronically submit District Attorney
filings. This saves both time and money, allowing county agencies to go green as well. The report writing phase of
Presynct is complete. Presynct was enhanced with a classification function that will allow a station court liaison to
organize a case prior to electronically sending it to STORM. In addition, it is anticipated that in future years the Public
Defender, Probation Department, and external law enforcement agencies will be brought online into STORM.

In , the Board of Supervisors (Board) accepted the 2011 Justice Assistance Grant ($834,114), the 2011
Correction Standards Authority Juvenile Accountability Block Grant ($183,164), and the 2011 Bulletproof Vest Partnership
Grant ($6,471) resulting in new grant revenue of $1,023,749. Through the efforts of the Administrative Analyst for the Law
and Justice Group, the department will continue to find new grant opportunities at both the federal and state level to
augment funding for the various law and justice agencies.

The primary goal of San Bernardino County Probation is to protect the community through assessment, treatment and
control methods designed to prevent probationers from committing new criminal acts. Measuring recidivism is the best
indicator of overall success for the department’s efforts.
The   was based on projected reductions to adult supervision staff due to an anticipated decrease in state
funding. However, funding was restored as part of AB 109 that transferred funding and supervision responsibility for
certain offenders to the counties. The d s for  are indicative of the AB 109 impact. The
department is managing the supervision requirement of this legislation, but full implementation will take several more
months. The department is completing the hiring process for additional officers to meet the AB 109 mandate, with plans to
get fully operational during . AB 109 will likely require an adjustment to the adult  results that cannot
be determined at this time.
For purposes of collecting recidivism information for the adult population, the Probation Department can currently report on
only those convictions that occur in San Bernardino County.

A major component of ensuring public safety is to use validated assessment tools to ensure proper supervision levels and
caseload assignments, and to use the results as a guide for providing evidence-based treatment options. The use of these
tools results in resource optimization and allows the probation officer to more effectively address specific needs of each
offender to reduce the likelihood of recidivism.
As with Goal 1, the d s for  are indicative of the AB 109 impact. Since this legislation
continues to be implemented, there is likely to be an adjustment to the adult  results that cannot be
determined at this time.

The integrity of the court system rests on the ability of Public Defenders to protect clients’ right to a jury trial under the
Sixth and Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution. The Public Defender’s Office diligently pursues trials
when appropriate. The d reduction in the number of trials in  is a result of continued budget cuts that
have resulted in decreased staffing levels and necessitated adjustments to workloads. Recognizing the importance of
trials to our clients, staff will pursue trials as needed in .

Early case resolution that includes investigations, and where appropriate, trial preparation and trials, ensures clients’ rights
to a speedy trial, reduces client anxiety while awaiting a resolution, and minimizes clients’ custody time and the associated
disruption to their lives. The Public Defender seeks to maintain timely case resolution standards despite shifting
workloads and continued staffing adjustments.

As reflected in the table above, the department projects to maintain the current level of service in the unincorporated area
throughout .

The  d amount is significantly greater than the  due to implementation of AB 109 (Public Safety
Realignment) that shifted responsibility for housing certain inmates from the state to counties. In response, the department
is recommending the addition of 34 new deputy sheriff positions in  in the detention’s general fund budget unit to
help ensure the overall safety of employees and inmates of the county’s jail system.

The   and the   number of monthly trap placements is decreasing based on the reduction of
the Light Brown Apple Moth and Asian Citrus Psyllid traps that are being placed/serviced and an expected change in traps
in the department’s primary contract for this service.

The  d number of businesses inspected is low due to staff retirements and the reduction of positions in
the  First Quarter Budget Report. The department is requesting the restoration of 2 previously deleted positions to
address this workload for  and funding thereof is included within the  Recommended Budget.

The Department of Airports conducted a survey of its tenant and user base to measure the quality of customer service.
The survey revealed that many airport users value well maintained pavements. Based upon these findings, the
department established a goal to improve airport infrastructure, with emphasis on rehabilitating or improving pavement
surfaces (i.e. crackfilling, slurry seal, fogseal, striping, glass beading, edge dressing). The departmental  is to
improve or rehabilitate 15% of the 15,700,000 square feet of pavement surfaces throughout the 6 airport systems. The
cost of these projects is expected to be funded primarily by the Federal Aviation Administration’s Airport Capital
Improvement Program (ACIP) and supplemented by the Department of Airports Capital Improvement Program budget.
The  s were depressed by limited ACIP Program funding.

To generate new income for the airport system, the department has established the objective to increase revenue through
the use of property. The anticipated growth rate has been re-evaluated and a goal of 1% per annum for property
development has been established as attainable. The prior year objective had a focus of increasing revenue producing
land exclusively at Chino and Apple Valley airports. For , the department plans to pursue revenue producing land
opportunities at all 6 airports.

Continued reduction of administrative costs through staffing efficiencies, utilization of Job Order Contracting,
and technology improvements

In , the library successfully filed and signed contracts for e-rate funding, a federal subsidy that will allow the
upgrade of T1 Circuits across the library system to a high-speed connection in each branch. This increase of bandwidth
over the next 12 months will greatly increase the patron’s internet usage experience.

Volunteers are a core part of the San Bernardino County Library System and have continually donated over 100,000 hours
per year over the past 3 years. The library will continue the utilization of volunteers to augment services and programs as
well as working on a training and best practice model that will be used to increase participation. The library will also be
conducting a system wide recruitment and campaign for new opportunities to include volunteers in.

It was anticipated the department would receive a grant in  through the State of California Prop 84 in the amount of
$4.4 million over 3? years to facilitate completion of the Hall of Geological Wonders’ public exhibition displays; the grant
was not awarded. The   contributions include funding for Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and Museum
Lobby Capital Improvement Projects.

In accordance with the permit Streamlining Act, jurisdictions must make a determination that an application for project
development is complete and ready for processing within 30 calendar days of submission. Incomplete applications must
be returned to the applicant with information specifying the deficiencies and corrective actions necessary for resubmission
of a complete application.
In addition, CEQA requires an Initial Study be prepared for most discretional projects submitted to the department in order
to determine potential adverse environmental impacts. This will be accomplished through the continued streamlining of
business processes within Planning as well as more effectively utilizing existing planning resources. Examples of this
include implementing electronic filing of site plans and utilizing geographic information systems in a more efficient manner.

Though the economy continues to improve, impacts to the building industry continue to be felt throughout the County.
Consequently, though there has been an increase in the numbers of 2011-2012 Building and Safety plan submittal,
staffing levels continue to remain the same. In order to facilitate the high-level turnaround for plan submittal and review,
contract services for specialized plan reviews have been facilitated to improve performance. With the addition of limited
term staff, performance levels will continue to increase during workload peaks. Therefore, the 2012-2013  of plan
review is achievable within specified time frames.

Code Enforcement and Fire Hazard Abatement perform services within County boundaries that are related to enforcement
activities. Evaluation of a comprehensive review of business processes and seasonal activities will determine if more
efficient processes can be implemented to increase overall response time and performance. This will include evaluations
of existing city contracts for fire hazard abatement services provided by the County as well as analyzing performance on
similar services, such as graffiti abatement. This will allow for a cost-benefit analysis to be performed on cost recovery of
services provided.

State mandates require California cities and counties reduce the amount of waste disposed in landfills by 50% through
programs and education promoting waste reduction, recycling and reuse. Compliance is measured by the jurisdiction’s per
capita waste disposal rate. San Bernardino County’s base per capita disposal rate is 12.4 lbs/person/day. In 2009, the
 per capita disposal rate was 4.5 lbs/person/day or 63.7% diversion. The economic downturn has resulted in a higher
diversion rate than what would have been experienced in a more stable economy and Solid Waste Management Division
expects that as the economy rebounds there will be an increase in the amount of waste that will be generated. Our goal is
to maintain a diversion rate of at least 58% or 5.2 lbs/person/day disposal rate through ongoing programs and education
ing commercial, multifamily and construction waste. Effective July 1, 2012, state-mandated commercial recycling will
be implemented for businesses that generate 4 or more cubic yards of waste a week.

The recharge volume for  was 81,500 acre-feet, which represents a significant increase from the previous year.
This increase was a result of substantial rainfall across San Bernardino County and the State which raised many
reservoirs to near capacity levels. These conditions made it possible for more State Project Water to be made available
for groundwater recharge and provided opportunity for greater capture of storm water. Projections for the current year are
expected to be somewhat less because this winter has been much drier than last year.

Percentage of projects scheduled that contain milestones, timelines, and critical completion
dates used for leases for more than 10,000 square feet of space and acquisitions that
include five or more parcels.

Three projects were identified for : Lake Gregory Regional Park Dam, Moabi Regional Park Sewer Lift Station,
and the Mojave Narrows Regional Park Levee. Of those three projects, the Moabi project was completed and one part of
the Lake Gregory Dam project was completed (Emergency Action Plan); and the remainder will be ready for construction
in . Not included, but completed, are the sewer and water infrastructure improvements at Prado Regional Park.
In , the Department anticipates completing 4 major projects such as the Lake Gregory Dam Emergency Release
Valves, the Mojave Narrows Levee at Horseshoe Lake, the renovations at the Glen Helen Campground, and
facility/utility/infrastructure upgrades at Calico Ghost Town.

The Department provides an Outdoor Environmental Science Day Camp at Yucaipa Regional Park for 4th & 5th graders
throughout the school year. In addition to this program, the department also offers the Jr. Fishing Workshops and Derby.
In , the Department will be looking to add new youth programs.