Provide stable governmental leadersOip, consistent
decision-making and efficient processing to inspire
confidence in investors and ensure a business-friendly
environment.
STRATEGY
Increase electronic submissions of Assessment Appeal
applications to continue to provide accurate, timely and
efficient processing of applications.
Provide stable governmental leadersOip, consistent
decision-making and efficient processing to inspire
confidence in investors and ensure a business-friendly
environment.
STRATEGY
Implement business practice cOanges related to tOe
approval process for applications to improve turnaround
time for issuance of neR business licenses.

Provide stable governmental leadersOip, consistent
decision-making and efficient processing to inspire
confidence in investors and ensure a business-friendly
environment.
STRATEGY
Implement business practice cOanges related to tOe
approval process for applications to improve turnaround
time for issuance of neR business licenses.

Continue the County role of convening conversations on
community collaboration and collective actionB
OBJECTIVE
Continue to promote the Countywide Vision and support tOe
Element GroupsB
STwATEGY Continue to facilitate and support Countywide Vision
IeadersOip Team and Element Group activitiesB
STwATEGY Coordinate launcO of a literacy initiative in support of tOe
Vision's Cradle to Career Regional Implementation GoalB
OBJECTIVE Gevelop consistent messaging for the organizationB
OBJECTIVE
Monitor and evaluate operations and implement strategies to
continually improve efficiency, effectiveness, and
collaborationB
STwATEGY Review and coordinate public communications to ensure
consistent messaging and brandingB
STwATEGY Oversee Countywide roll-out of contract tracking and 'wiki'
systems as resources for County departments

Monitor and evaluate operations and implement strategies to
continually improve efficiency, effectiveness, and collaboration.
STRATEGY Draft policies and ordinances pursuant to Board of Supervisors
direction RitOin requested timelines.

Ensure tOat employees knoR tOat tOey and tOeir Rork are valued.
STRATEGY
Conduct an annual customer service survey RO icO Rill alloR clients
to provide feedback on the service tOey receive from County
Counsel.

Monitor and evaluate operations and implement strategies to
continually improve efficiency, effectiveness, and collaboration.
STRATEGY Increase training to County departments to reduce potential
exposure.

Monitor and evaluate operations and implement strategies to
continually improve efficiency, effectiveness and collaboration.
STRATEGY
Prepare a budget presentation tOat folloRs the guidelines
establised by te National Advisory Council on State and Iocal
Budgeting and Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA)
best practices on budgeting.

Continue to develop and maintain consistent messaging for the
organization.
STRATEGY Ensure Board of Supervisors Oas sufficient revieR time for
recommended budget documents.


Monitor and evaluate operations and implement
strategies to continually improve efficiency,
effectiveness, and collaboration.


Invest County resources in ways which create more
ongoing revenue to reinvest in maintaining and
improving services.
O.JECTIVE
Eliminate silos and consolidate and centralize
administrative functions, including financial
management and oversight.

Monitor and evaluate operations and implement strategies to
continually improve efficiency, effectiveness, and
collaboration.
On an annual basis, audit specified components of the EMACS
system in order to ensure compliance with Federal, State and
MOU requirements and overall accuracy of the payroll and
recordkeeping function. For 2015-16 tOis activity Rill include
revieR of dependentCbeneficiary data for ACA reporting. TOis
Rill be accomplisOed by verifying social security numbers are
on file for all dependents on a medical plan.

In accordance RitO the CountyRide Vision, implement a
strategy to increase department aRareness and support for
outreacO, educational and training activities focused on
ensuring a County Rorkforce tOat reflects the diversity of our
community. TOis strategy Rill include the establisOment of
approximately 8 departmental committees per year tOat Rill
Rork in collaboration RitO HR to plan and implement
department-specific strategies for diversity including
recruitment, mentoring and outreacO activities.

available tecOnology, unify platforms and move toward a standardized
enterprise approacO.
STwATEGY
Unify tOe County's enterprise telecommunication services by improving
functionality and supportability. For 2015-16, implement year tOree of a seven
year project to convert 14% (2,8EE) of all County telepOones to Voice Over
Internet Protocol (VOIP) tecOnology.

available tecOnology, unify platforms and move toward a standardized
enterprise approacO.
STwATEGY To provide a OigO availability Gata Center infrastructure to Oouse critical
equipment tOat supports tOe County's mission.

To provide a OigO availability and secure Wide Area Network (WAN)
infrastructure for efficient and secure transmission of County data tOat
supports tOe County's mission.

To improve public safety by upgrading tOe County's 800 MHz Public Safety
radio system to digitally capable. TOe workplan for 2015-16 is to complete
tOe upgrade of tOe County's microwave network and conversion of subscriber
radio fleets to operate digitally.

Develop a long-term budget plan wOicO brings County operations
into botO fiscal and programmatic balance, including full funding
of reserves for infrastructure and operation system maintenance
and replacement.

Monitor and evaluate operations and implement strategies to
continually improve efficiency, effectiveness, and collaboration.


Partner witO County and non-County agencies and
maximize tOe use of Federal and State programs and
funding to address tOe public OealtO, safety and social
service needs of County residents and move participants
to self-sufficiency.

Continue business retention and expansion programs
while implementing office and industrial attraction
strategies for companies providing high-paying jobs.

Utilize County programs and resources to support the
local economy, maximize job creation and promote
tourism.

Partner with County and non-County agencies and maximize the use of Federal and State
programs and funding to address the public health, safety and social service needs of
County residents and move participants to self-sufficiency.

Utilize County programs and resources to support the local economy, maximize job
creation and promote tourism.

Focus on training and employment for the
unemployed and under-employed, developing a
more highly-educated and trained workforce.
O.JECTIVE
Utilize County programs and resources to support
the local economy, maximize job creation and
promote tourism.

Focus on training and employment for the
unemployed and under-employed, developing a
more highly-educated and trained workforce.

Invest County resources in ways wOicO create more
ongoing revenue to reinvest in maintaining and improving
services.

Partner witO County and non-County agencies and
maximize tOe use of Federal and State programs and
funding to address tOe public OealtO, safety and social
service needs of County residents and move participants
to self-sufficiency.

Increase specialty beOavioral OealtO care for tOe County's Medi-
Cal population wOo experience significant mental, emotional or
substance use disorders.

Provide stable governmental leadership, consistent decision-making and
efficient processing to inspire confidence in investors and ensure a businessfriendly
environment.

OBJECTIVE	Partner with County and non-County agencies and maximize the use of Federal and State programs and funding to address the public health, safety and social service needs of County residents and move participants to self-sufficiency.
STRATEGY	Provide timely responses to calls from County Residents for Health Care Reform (HCR) from Customer 

COUNTY GOAL: PROVIDE FOR THE SAFETY, HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES NEEDS OF COUNTY RESIDENTS		Measure	2013-14  Actual	2014-15  Target	2014-15  Est.	2015-16  Target
OBJECTIVE	Partner with County and non-County agencies and maximize the use of Federal and State programs and funding to address the public health, safety and social service needs of County residents and move participants to self-sufficiency.	Percentage of current child support collected compared to the total current child support due.				


Partner with County and non-County agencies and maximize the use of Federal and State programs and funding to address the public health, safety and social service needs of County residents and move participants to self-sufficiency.
Work in collaboration with parents to obtain accurate and appropriate child support orders for families in San Bernardino County.
Increase the collection of current child support which will result in more money being received by San Bernardino County families.
Educate parents about the child support program, the importance of paying consistently, and the need for reliable child support on a monthly basis.

STRATEGY	Continue to utilize a dedicated team for the collection of child support arrears/past due child cupport with a focus on increased collections.
STRATEGY	Encourage parents with non-DCSS cases to utilize the department's services early in the life of their case to minimize the accumulation of child support arrears.
COUNTY GOAL: PROVIDE FOR THE SAFETY, HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES NEEDS OF COUNTY RESIDENTS	
OBJECTIVE	Partner with County and non-County agencies and maximize the use of Federal and State programs and funding to address the public health, safety and social service needs of County residents and move participants to self-sufficiency.
STRATEGY	Implement efficiencies in department processes in order to increase collections and improve cost effectiveness.
STRATEGY	Continue to implement efficient processes regarding the Automated Statewide Child Support System to identify changes that will improve collections and cost effectiveness.

Promote school readiness.
Increase literacy skills with focus on letter and word knowledge in preschool age (3-5 yrs) children attending a year round program to prepare for kindergarten.

ncrease social & emotional skills in toddlers (18 mos-3 yrs) attending a year round program to prepare for transition into a preschool program.


Identify obese and/or overweight children in an effort to promote a healthy lifestyle.
Promote nutrition education programs for parents at each school site.
Ensure that children receive both nutrition curriculum and physical activity daily within the classroom schedule.
Decrease the number of children who are initially identified as obese or overweight from the higher level of Body Mass Index (BMI) classification to the next lower level by children's heights and weights.

Maintain federal accreditation and maximize staff knowledge of federal benefits and services by ensuring Veteran Service Representatives (VSRs) meet the federal mandate for completion of 15 hours of continuing education per year.

Partner with County and non-County agencies and maximize the use of Federal and State programs and funding to address the public health, safety and social service needs of County residents and move participants to self-sufficiency.
Minimize impact of crime upon the lives of child victims by providing assistance at the Children's Assessment Center.

Assess each new adult offender to determine expected risk of recidivating and their criminogenic risk factors to ensure appropriate supervision level.

Increase the number of gang contacts accomplished through an emphasis on in-field contacts and documentation
Improve the department's ability to solve crime by providing investigative leads, as well as an opportunity to engage in early intervention/diversion strategies.

Deliver mental health services for inmates who are found incompetent to stand trial
Provides timely treatment to individuals found incompetent to stand trail and allows for speedier trials
Reduce long waitlists for state hospital beds and shorten the length of time it takes to restore defendants to competency

Perform device inspections with a goal of inspecting a minimum of 85% of the devices (i.e. scales, gas pumps).
Service exotic insect traps on a monthly basis to guarantee completion of the contracted servicing levels.


Partnering with State agencies, perform safety compliance inspections at pesticide companies with a target inspection goal of 60% of the locations.

Work with Federal, State and regional governments and organizations, to ensure San Bernardino County receives its fair share of resources.

Improve and maintain Airport infrastructure, such as runways and drainage systems by maximizing utilization of Federal Aviation Administration and Cal Trans Aeronautics funding.
Continue to develop and maintain focus on structured and preventative maintenance programs to address infrastructure deficiencies.

Maximize structured outreach activities to private sector business entities thus informing prospective businesses of real estate opportunities at various County airports
Closely monitor existing airport businesses to ensure continued success; assist by providing clearinghouse guidance to available resources.

Invest County resources in ways which create more ongoing revenue to reinvest in maintaining and improving services.
Continue to implement and build upon strategies developed under the County's energy efficiency partnership with SCE


Maintain a replacement cycle for computer hardware between 4 - 5 years to ensure that staff and public access computers are available for use and fully functional with reliable hardware and software


Offer programs for multiple age groups to promote the Countywide Vision of cradle-to-career education, fostering personal and professional development and enrichment


Museum Outreach - Great ShakeOut earthquake drills to educate people in homes, schools, and organizations to improve preparedness and practice how to be safe.

Open new exhibits and offer enhanced educational programming to promote repeat attendance and boost admission sales and interest in the Museum.

Develop a long-term budget plan which brings County operations into both fiscal and programmatic balance, including full funding of reserves for infrastructure and operation system maintenance and replacement.
Partner with the Museum Association to develop special events and programs that benefit the community and promote greater interest in the Museum.
Develop partnerships with key regional corporations to secure funding and programmatic sponsorships.

Set standards for timely permitting processes in keeping with industry norms

Maximize utilization and effciency of flood control facilities for flood protection and water conservation.

Increase efficiency in use of labor, equipment and materials in delivery of roadway preservation projects.

Increase efficient use of financial resources by ensuring department construction projects are completed on time and within budget.
Increase number of preventative maintenance tasks for County equipment and building systems to extend useful life

Renew leases or relocate County departments prior to the lease termination date

Collaborate with community partners to provide training opportunities in the field of land management.


Promote youth entry into workforce/workplace environment through summer youth employment.

Reduce reliance on the County General Fund by continuing to address infrastructure repairs and thereby reducing utility costs.
Enhance and develop new amenities that will enhance the park experience for patrons, which generate additional revenues hence less reliance on the County General Fund.
Continue to streamline park operations and identify supply cost inefficiencies using preventive maintenance measures to reduce ongoing repair costs.

Identify partners and other sources that provide financial support for the department's Active Outdoors Program which offers outdoor recreation programming.
Continue to expand the Active Outdoors Program through collaborative partnerships for fishing, camping and educational programs.

Identify partners and other sources that provide financial support for the department's Active Outdoors Program that offers outdoor recreation programming.
Continue to expand the Active Outdoors Program through collaborative partnerships for fishing, camping and educational programs.

Expand the Elections Office Election Deadline, Assignment and Task Engine (EDATE) system to maximize effectiveness and efficiency of election operations.
Expand the Elections Office website by adding new applications that query and present personalized customer information.

Participate on national, state and regional committees focused on improving election administration and shaping the future of California's elections.
Utilize new automated water meter infrastructure (cellular read meters) to provide timely notification of leak detection analysis to customers.

Use maintenance management system to increase preventative maintenance levels for water and sanitation systems.

Implement electronic patient care reporting and ambulance billing using electronic tablets, web based software, and support from ICEMA to improve collection rate.
Participate in the Federally funded Ground Emergency Medical Transport (GEMT) cost reimbursement program.
Implement billing of First Responder Fee.
Contract with Medi-Cal managed care providers to participate in federal Medicaid fund reimbursements for ambulance transports through the Intergovernmental Transfer (IGT) funding mechanism.

In collaboration and partnership with the Arrowhead Regional Medical Center (ARMC), implement a pilot community paramedic program to reduce hospital readmissions.

Partner with County and non-County agencies and maximize the use of Federal and State programs and funding to address the public health, safety and social service needs of County residents and move participants to self-sufficiency.
Maintain the number of qualified providers in the Registry to refer to IHSS recipients.

Cooperatively develop service contracts with State and Federal agencies to fund department activities

Ensure patient safety and improve patient care through quality improvement review of air transport documentation.

Cooperatively develop service contracts with State agencies to fund department activities.
Ensure EMS Continuing Education/Training Programs are compliant with Title 22, California Code of Regulations and educational standards.