Address the challenges of Assembly Bill (AB) 109, Public
Safety Realignment (2011) and the transfer of responsibility
for certain offenders from the State to the counties, work
collaboratively with all criminal justice agencies and achieve
the Public Safety Group’s vision by:
  Promoting strategies that prevent crime and make
neighborhoods safe places to live, work and play.
  Provide early intervention with at-risk youth in the
crime-prone years.

Implement community oriented policing strategies,
stressing prevention, early identification and timely
intervention.
  Educate residents through community outreach and
employ prevention and safety programs.
  Promoting and implementing strategies that protect
residents from crime.
  Maintain a proactive law enforcement presence in
the unincorporated area and cities with whom the
County contracts.
  Monitor offenders subject to community supervision
to mitigate new crime offenses.
  Employ intelligence-led policing strategies to crime
problems at the local and regional level.
  Providing for a strong, collaborative criminal justice
system that holds offenders accountable.
  Collaborate with the local courts to ensure offenders
are appropriately detained or sanctioned.
  Employ appropriate punitive measures that are balanced
with rehabilitation opportunities, where appropriate.
  Ensure quality investigation and crime analysis that
leads to successful identification and prosecution of
offenders.
  Reducing recidivism by implementing treatment strategies
that help offenders successfully reenter society.
  Provide a continuum of treatment and diversion programs
while adult offenders are in jail, addressing
both health and behavioral health.
  Employ transitional services for offenders as they
exit out of detention facilities.
  Integrate evidence-based practices and principles in
collaboration with community and justice partners.
  Continuing to strengthen the County’s and communities’
ability to prepare, respond and recover from disasters.
  Collaborate with regional fire service agencies to
improve fire protection and emergency response services.
  Engage residents, private sector and local jurisdictions
through community outreach events and emergency
readiness planning.
  Leveraging new technology innovations to improve service
delivery and operational efficiency.
  Continue implementation of technologies, including
an electronic content management system, that
facilitate paperless processes in the courtroom.
  Explore and develop, where appropriate, mobile
applications to improve service delivery and enhance
the flow of information to the public.

Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
  Continue to work collaboratively with local law enforcement
on the implementation of Assembly Bill (AB) 109,
Public Safety Realignment (2011), and the reintegration
of offenders into the community.
  Expand services for domestic violence victims in the
northern region of San Diego County through the
implementation of a High Risk Domestic Violence Team
in partnership with local providers and law enforcement.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
  Develop a strategy to implement Electronic Content
Management to address document workflow, management
and retention, which will improve the efficiency of
document sharing, retrieval and use.
  Participate as a member of the multidisciplinary advisory
committee comprised of the Superior Court, Probation
and local law enforcement in developing
alternative placements for first-time juvenile offenders
who have committed violence against family members.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
  Complete implementation of the eDiscovery system to
streamline the dissemination of discovery materials to
defense counsel.

Implement secure wireless network capabilities in all
District Attorney offices allowing staff to access District
Attorney’s applications using electronic mobile
devices. This will increase staff efficiency, productivity
and workforce collaboration.
  Develop a strategy to further automate the travel
request process for District Attorney business travelers
creating a more efficient method for reimbursement of
out-of-pocket expenses

Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Implement the Alternate Custody Unit to mitigate overcrowding
in the County Detention Facilities by December
2012 and monitor an average of 300 offenders out
of custody.
?? Deploy the San Diego Regional Sex Offender Management
System to all local law enforcement agencies by
February 2013.
?? Deploy the San Diego Regional Sex Offender notification
system to the public by December 2012. This system
will allow the public to subscribe to receive alerts
on changes to the status of sex offenders as reported
in the Megan’s Law database.
?? Develop an annual program and conduct five enforcement
operations to coincide with significant annual
youth-oriented events (i.e. graduations, prom, winter
break, spring break, etc.), that will utilize various social
host ordinances throughout the County to reduce
opportunities for teenage alcohol and drug abuse.
?? Increase cooperation with the Probation Department
by expanding the Tracking Known Offenders (TKO)
program to additional Sheriff stations by May 2013.
?? Develop strategies to manage the shortage of detention
facility beds, projected to begin in November 2012
and grow to between 600 and 1,000 beds, due to the
implementation of Assembly Bill (AB) 109, Public
Safety Realignment (2011).
?? Implement the Reentry Services division in Detention
Services Bureau, including the expansion of the East
Mesa Detention Facility to house a Reentry program by
June 2014. As part of the reentry services, develop and
implement programming for inmates sentenced to custody
for longer than one year.
?? Upgrade the RCS Core by March 2013 with funding
awarded from 2009 and 2011 UASI grants. Upgrading
the core will help extend the useful life of the existing
system until a new system can be funded, procured
and installed.
?? Continue planning efforts for the RCS replacement system
to include obtaining commitment from the RCS
Participating Agencies to participate in the new system.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Essential
Infrastructure
?? Complete construction of the new Rancho San Diego
Station in conjunction with the Department of General
Services by June 2013.
?? Continue planning efforts related to the new Women's
Detention Facility with groundbreaking for roads and
infrastructure by July 2012, and construction beginning
in March 2013.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Conduct seven academies with at least 100 Detention/
Court Services and 107 Law Enforcement cadets completing
training in order to maintain adequate detention
facility staffing at 90% of authorized positions by June
2013.

Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Initiate legal action to determine parentage and obtain
fair and appropriate child support and/or medical support
in a timely manner.
?? Maintain the percentage of open cases with an
enforceable order at or above 85% (71,900 of
84,300), consistent with the statewide goal.
?? Ensure the percentage of cases with parentage
established is at or above 90% (63,900 of 70,700),
consistent with the statewide goal.
?? Maximize compliance with support orders by promoting,
enabling and ensuring payment for families. Collect
reimbursement for public assistance programs.
134
Child Support Services
CAO Proposed Operational Plan Fiscal Years 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 Public Safety Group
?? Increase the percentage of current support collected
to current support owed at or above 63% ($114 million
of $181 million).
?? Increase the percentage of arrears cases with a collection
at or above 64% (40,100 of 62,500).
?? Maintain collections for child support at $179 million.
?? Inform and educate the community about child support
services through proactive media relations and community
outreach.
?? Conduct at least three video meetings for custodial
parents, non-custodial parents and employers.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Meet or exceed the federal performance measure goal,
which measures program cost effectiveness, and collect
at least $3.50 for every $1.00 spent on operations.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Develop and implement a paperless litigation file for
use in the court to reduce paper usage and increase
case processing efficiencies.
?? Collaborate with the Law Library to provide remote
customer service on Saturdays at Law Library locations
in the County.
?? Collaborate with the Probation Department to develop
and implement a process to assist probationers with
child support issues.

Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Maintain public accountability of Sheriff and Probation
peace officers, to the extent allowed by law, by conducting
timely investigation and board review of citizens’
complaints of misconduct.
?? Issue and publicly distribute 12 monthly workload
reports to the Review Board and Sheriff’s and Probation
Departments. Complete a comprehensive annual
report with a thorough accounting of new complaints
and case closures, including an analysis of citizen complaint
trends and recommendations for policy change.
?? Ensure 90% of complaint investigations are completed
within one year of receipt, unless delayed due to
lengthy investigations because of the complexity of the
case.
?? Provide 12 monthly “early warning” reports to the Sheriff’s
and Probation Departments regarding the nature of
complaints filed and the identity and assignment of the
employees, when known, to enable corrective action
when necessary.
138
Citizens’ Law Enforcement Review Board
CAO Proposed Operational Plan Fiscal Years 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 Public Safety Group
?? Maintain a transparent and independent citizen complaint
process, to the extent allowed by law that provides
relevant feedback and recommendations to the
Sheriff and the Chief Probation Officer.
?? Provide redacted case synopses that give more information
to the public while respecting peace officer
confidentiality rights.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Increase community awareness of the Review Board
through quarterly, multidisciplinary outreach.
?? Implement Business Process Reengineering measures
to define a standard, measurable process and reduce
the amount of effort and lead time required to complete
high quality investigations.

Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Engage residents, private sector and local jurisdictions
to help communities prepare, respond and recover
from natural and manmade disasters.
?? Continue to increase student awareness of the
importance of personal preparedness by providing
“OES for Kids” presentations to fourth graders at five
elementary schools in the county.
?? Continue to promote AlertSanDiego, the County’s
reverse 911 mass notification system, throughout the
county to increase the number of registrants. This
includes Accessible AlertSanDiego, which targets
individuals with access and functional needs.
?? Assist in the planning and coordination of three
disaster trainings or exercises that incorporate community-
based organizations.
?? Continue to increase the private sector’s ability to
prepare for, and recover from, a disaster by holding
summits and providing quarterly information, such as
bulletins or other communications, through the
ReadySanDiego Partner Connection website by June
2014.
?? Continue to provide community emergency preparedness
information through a combination of
attending safety events and conducting presentations,
to reach a goal of 40 total activities.
?? Ensure readiness in the region by participating in one
nuclear power plant exercise, which will examine the
region’s ability to respond to an event at SONGS.
Participants will include federal, State, local jurisdictions
and private sector partners.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Aggressively represent the needs and interests of residents,
businesses and local jurisdictions by leveraging
resources and creating innovative opportunities and
best practices to prepare for, respond to and recover
from any type of disaster.
?? Continue to design and create preparedness materials
in various formats including print, video and
audio.
?? Continue to coordinate and expand the region’s
Access and Functional Needs Working Group by
increasing their membership to include additional
representatives from the disabled community. The
group will conduct one tabletop exercise to evaluate
the capabilities throughout the region to respond to
disasters impacting residents in San Diego County
with access and functional needs.
?? Continue to implement and train regional partners on
the proper use of the AlertSanDiego mass notification
system.
?? Continue to promote the WebEOC automated management
system training and implementation to
regional partners.
?? Facilitate the development of Advance Recovery
Pre-Approved Vendor Classifications to address
needs and gaps that impact timely stabilization of
the County’s response to a disaster.
?? Continue to manage and administer Homeland Security
Grant program funds. OES is the manager of passthrough
funds distributed throughout the San Diego
region for 18 cities, 58 special districts, and other
agencies to improve preparedness, response and
recovery from terrorist and catastrophic events.
?? Develop a mobile application that will provide interactive
access to disaster information on smart phones.

Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Continue enabling timely sharing of detailed information
with customers (families, law enforcement agencies,
hospitals, insurance companies, media, etc.)
regarding the cause and manner of death.
?? Complete 85% of investigative reports within 60
days or less.
?? Complete 95% of toxicology reports within 60 days
or less.
?? Complete 80% of examination reports within 60 days
or less.
?? Complete 95% of case reports within seven days or
less.
?? Enable timely progress of the justice system by completing
95% of homicide examination reports within 60
days or less.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Continue to contribute to research efforts in childhood
death by providing statistics and case examples, and
lending expertise through active participation in groups
such as the San Diego County Child Fatality Committee,
the Methamphetamine Strike Force, Medical
Examiners and Coroners Alert Project (MECAP),
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
(NICHD) and the California Sudden Infant Death
Syndrome (SIDS) Advisory Council.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Continue to assist in the healing process of those who
have lost a loved one by providing timely and compassionate
service and accurate information about Medical
Examiner procedures.
?? Notify 90% of next-of-kin for identified Medical
Examiner cases within 12 hours or less.
?? Enable timely funeral services for families by making
97% of bodies ready for release within seven days or
less.
?? Provide educational opportunities by fulfilling 100%
(est. 50) of appropriate requests to provide training,
lectures and demonstrations for approved educational
purposes within four months of request.

Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Continue enabling timely sharing of detailed information
with customers (families, law enforcement agencies,
hospitals, insurance companies, media, etc.)
regarding the cause and manner of death.
?? Complete 85% of investigative reports within 60
days or less.
?? Complete 95% of toxicology reports within 60 days
or less.
?? Complete 80% of examination reports within 60 days
or less.
?? Complete 95% of case reports within seven days or
less.
?? Enable timely progress of the justice system by completing
95% of homicide examination reports within 60
days or less.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Continue to contribute to research efforts in childhood
death by providing statistics and case examples, and
lending expertise through active participation in groups
such as the San Diego County Child Fatality Committee,
the Methamphetamine Strike Force, Medical
Examiners and Coroners Alert Project (MECAP),
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
(NICHD) and the California Sudden Infant Death
Syndrome (SIDS) Advisory Council.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Continue to assist in the healing process of those who
have lost a loved one by providing timely and compassionate
service and accurate information about Medical
Examiner procedures.
?? Notify 90% of next-of-kin for identified Medical
Examiner cases within 12 hours or less.
?? Enable timely funeral services for families by making
97% of bodies ready for release within seven days or
less.
?? Provide educational opportunities by fulfilling 100%
(est. 50) of appropriate requests to provide training,
lectures and demonstrations for approved educational
purposes within four months of request.

Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Improve opportunities for children and families by
assisting juvenile delinquency clients to be successful
in their rehabilitation programs and on probation.
?? Use juvenile record sealing statutes to assist juvenile
clients in clearing their records to gain employment,
participate in training and/or education programs for
80% (360 of 450) of requests.
?? Maintain the number of elapsed days between
admission and sentencing in juvenile cases at an
average of 28 days to accelerate rehabilitation.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Establish a professional rapport and bond of trust with
clients and work with criminal justice partners to ensure
a reasonable and efficient criminal justice system and
obtain the best possible outcome for the client.
?? Resolve 70% (35,000 of 50,000) of misdemeanor
cases prior to trial when doing so benefits the client
more than litigation.
?? Resolve 62% (7,750 of 12,500) of felony cases within
60 days of arraignment when doing so benefits the
client more than litigation.
?? Encourage clients to take advantage of programs that
will allow them to thrive by successfully completing
probation and reduce the likelihood of reoffending.
?? File approximately 250 misdemeanor expungement
requests in order to help clients obtain meaningful
employment.
?? File approximately 400 felony expungement requests
in order to help clients obtain meaningful employment.
?? Promote collaborative justice by participating in specialty
courts aimed at linking services to clients with
specialized needs.
?? Participate in Offender Reentry Court, Adult and
Juvenile Drug Court, and Homeless Court to help
ensure clients obtain the services they need to
become self-sufficient and maintain a crime- free lifestyle.
?? Maintain 90% (27 of 30) of caseload capacity in the
Behavioral Health Court Calendar.
?? Maintain 90% (18 of 20) of caseload capacity in the
Veterans Treatment Review Calendar.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Ensure a qualified, well-trained and diverse workforce
to effectively represent all cases appointed to the
department.
?? Achieve 15 hours of annual continuing legal education
for all attorneys (approximately 220).
?? Achieve eight hours of annual investigation-related
training for all investigators (approximately 44).
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Develop and maintain partnerships with educational
and community organizations to leverage resources
and address common needs.
?? Maintain at least 90,000 hours provided by volunteers.
?? Participate in four community outreach events
through the Public Defender’s Community Outreach
Program.
?? Train approximately 800 non-staff attorneys concurrently
with staff attorneys to build relationships and
strengthen the criminal justice system.
?? Provide 25 streaming video trainings to branch
offices, and other indigent defense agencies.

Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Provide regional leadership with the full implementation
of the County’s Fire and Life Safety Reorganization
Report establishing CSA 135 and continue collaboration
with other fire agencies to improve overall efficiencies
with consolidation and sharing of resources.
?? Continue to build relationships to improve regional
fire protection and emergency response services,
including collaboration with Tribal Governments.
?? Execute additional Memorandum of Understandings
with fire protection agencies to eliminate duplication
of services, reduce costs, share resources and
improve operational efficiencies.
166
San Diego County Fire Authority
CAO Proposed Operational Plan Fiscal Years 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 Public Safety Group
?? Collaborate with other fire agencies to review and
explore options to improve the alternate energy fire
standards.
?? Implement programs that will help protect residents
from wildfire and other natural disasters.
?? Oversee the U.S. Forest Services Fire Safety and
Fuels Reduction grant program to remove large
dead, dying and diseased trees from private property
within the Greater Julian area.
?? Provide vegetation management/defensible space
outreach and education by distributing flyers to
property owners within County Service Area 135.
Evaluate the feasibility of expanding the Vegetation
Management Program to all fire agencies in the unincorporated
area.
?? Negotiate new contracts with CAL FIRE and Fire Protection
Districts for five-year term contracts.
?? Establish and implement programs to enhance volunteer
firefighter emergency readiness.
?? Improve volunteer firefighter retention by collaborating
with partnering agencies to provide courses for
advanced volunteer firefighter training.
?? Evaluate the volunteer fire stations’ existing connectivity
network to leverage resources to improve communications
with volunteer firefighters.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Pursue grant funding opportunities to support the partnering
fire services agencies.
?? Develop a proposal for the creation of a Community
Facilities District, to offset the financial impact on fire
operations and facilities, caused by new development
within CSA 135 by July 2013.

Continue implementation of Live Well, San Diego! strategies
to provide the right services, to the right people, at the right
time by:
?? Building a better service delivery system that is innovative
and outcome-driven.
?? Implement Year 1 of the Community Transformation
Grant (CTG) support public health efforts to reduce
chronic diseases, promote healthier lifestyles, reduce
health disparities, and decrease health care costs.
?? Implement the Community Based Care Transition
program to reduce readmissions to hospitals by
Medicare recipients.
?? Evaluate data from the two pilot programs integrating
physical and behavioral health services.
?? Establish Extended Foster Care program, an outcome
from Assembly Bill 12, the California Fostering
Connections to Success Act, to extend foster care to
21 years of age.
?? Supporting positive choices that empower residents to
take responsibility for their own health and well-being.
?? Implement Year 1 of the Community Nutrition Education
Program (CNEP) grant to increase access and
nutrition education for CalFresh eligible or potentially
eligible clients

Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies for the right services, to the right people,
at the right time.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system by providing protection,
permanency and stability to children who are at
risk or have been abused and neglected.
178
Regional Operations
CAO Proposed Operational Plan Fiscal Years 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 Health and Human Services Agency
?? Improve outcomes for children by having 34% (3,842
of 11,300) of families participate in joint case planning
and meetings.
?? Support stability of foster youth by placing 44%
(1,320 of 3,000) with a relative or non-related
extended family member.
?? Support stability of children in foster care (8 days or
more, but less than 12 months) by ensuring 81%
(1,544 of 1,907) have fewer than three placements.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system to maximize the
health and well-being of at-risk children and families.
?? Promote healthy outcomes by ensuring 40% (220 of
550) of women in the Maternal Child Health and
Nurse Family Partnership programs continue to
breastfeed their infant at 6 months of age.
?? Reduce the onset of preventable illness or disease
by immunizing 98% (3,920 of 4,000) of children age
0-4 years and 98% (3,920 of 4,000) of children and
adolescents age 11-18 years served at Public Health
Centers and clinics.
?? Enroll an additional 1% (from 277,811 to 280,589) of
children in Medi-Cal and Healthy Families programs.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Advance operational excellence in customer service
through technology, timely processing and improved
accuracy.
?? Implement technological enhancements to improve
customer experience at the Family Resource Centers.
?? Execute a plan to reduce wait times at ACCESS call
center, a public benefits transaction center.
?? Ensure clients eligible for CalFresh receive and maintain
their benefits through 90% timely processing of
CalFresh applications (approximately 10,800 of
12,000 per month) at the Family Resource Centers
and ACCESS.
?? Implement plan to improve accuracy of payment and
valid decisions of CalFresh benefits.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Support positive choices by ensuring pregnant and
parenting foster youth are receiving proper care vital to
their safety and well-being, including their children, by
establishing a referral process and tracking system.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system by supporting the
health of the children who seek routine immunizations
at the ‘Vaccines are Important for Preschoolers’ clinic,
by promoting access to routine health care.

Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system that promotes
stability and permanency of at-risk children through the
Neighborhood for Kids initiative.
?? 75% (242 of 322) of children will be placed in a familiar
environment, such as protective custody with a
relative or family friend, or a school.
?? 75% (129 of 172) of children will be placed with their
parents within 12 months.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Support positive choices by linking culturally appropriate
service providers to refugee families to promote
self-sufficiency.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Support positive choices for healthy living of NFP participants
and their children.
?? 91% (531 of 583) of NFP participants will initiate
breast feeding.

Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system through NFP,
resulting in healthy outcomes for children of NFP participants.
?? 90% (30 of 77) of NFP participants will initiate breast
feeding.

Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system by providing
public health nurse (PHN) services and implementing
Neighborhood for Kids.
?? Providing at least 600 monthly PHN service contacts
to military families, building effective community relationships
for the safety and protection of children
and military families.
?? Implement Neighborhood for Kids which will support
stability and educational growth of children coming
into protective custody by placing children in a home
where they can attend their school of origin.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system through NFP,
improving health outcomes for NFP children.
?? 91% (10 of 11) of NFP graduates’ children will be
immunized by 24 months of age.
?? 91% (45 of 49) of NFP participants will initiate breast
feeding.

Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system for vulnerable
children through implementation of Neighborhoods for
Kids which will support stability and educational
growth of children coming into protective custody by
placing children in a home where they can attend their
school of origin.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system through NFP,
improving health outcomes for NFP children.
?? 91% (11 of 12) of NFP graduates’ children will be
immunized by 24 months of age.
?? 91% (58 of 64) of NFP participants will initiate breast
feeding.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Advance operational excellence in customer service by
improving access to public assistance programs by
increasing the number of video interview clients by 5%
(from 886 to 931).
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system by improving
care coordination and communication.
?? Deploy a referral tool to the Info Line 2-1-1 San
Diego Web directory for pregnant and post partum
women.
?? Create a referral and communication process for
families served through South Region Child Welfare
System, Public Health Maternal Child Health Program,
and Nurses Family Partnership Program.
?? Strengthen the community safety net to support stability
for children at risk of entering protective custody
by increasing service providers participating in
FAP from 35 to 42.

Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies to provide the right services, to the right
people, at the right time.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system to support selfsufficiency
among clients eligible for public assistance
programs.
?? 30% (3,300 of 11,000 individuals per month) of Welfare
to Work participants will have paid employment,
moving them closer to self-sufficiency. California’s
Welfare to Work is a program designed to assist welfare
recipients to obtain or prepare for employment.
?? 85% (1,105 of 1,300) of enrollees referred for case
management will participate in case management
services, strengthening care and treatment for the
indigent health program enrollees.
?? 70% (1,470 of 2,100) of Low Income Health Program
(LIHP) enrollees, who have entered the program
through a LIHP Mental Health Clinic, will access
physical health care services through a LIHP community
clinic.
?? Support positive choices among eligible participants in
CalFresh, a public assistance nutrition program, by
enrolling 90% (18,900 of 21,000) of eligible participants
in the CalFresh Restaurant Meals Program.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Advance operational excellence through accountability
by supporting program integrity and ensuring services
are accurately authorized by conducting 2,000 unannounced
In-Home Supportive Services home visits.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement
?? Advance operational excellence by enhancing Agency
capability to measure, analyze, review and improve
processes and performance, while ensuring these
improvements are aligned with priorities.
2012-14 Objectives
Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies to provide the right services, to the right
people, at the right time.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system to protect seniors
and dependent adults from abuse and neglect, and
improve quality and efficient care.
?? 95% (7,125 of 7,500) of face-to-face contacts will be
conducted within 10 days of receiving an APS referral.
?? 91% (6,825 of 7,500) of APS cases will not rereferred
within six months of case closing.
?? Implement the Community Based Care Transitions
Program to reduce readmissions to hospitals for
Medicare recipients. Public Health Nurses in AIS will
receive referrals from hospital staff for individuals
who will benefit from short-term assistance to proactively
manage their chronic medical conditions.
?? Support positive choices that foster independence
among seniors and educational opportunities for veterans
and their families.
?? Connect 2,295 older adults with volunteer opportunities,
promoting Live Well, San Diego! through active
living.
?? Maintain 95% (523 of 550) participation in the MSSP
case management program helping to avoid, delay
or remedy inappropriate placement in nursing facilities.
?? Notify 98% (4,900 of 5,000) of customers assisted by
Veteran’s Services within 14 calendar days of the
result of their college tuition waiver application.
Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies to provide the right services, to the right
people, at the right time.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system for children and
adults with behavioral and physical health needs.
?? Provide timely intervention to children who have
complex behavioral/emotional needs through the
KidSTART program by serving 100 children ages 0-5
years.
?? Improve quality and efficient care by integrating
physical and behavioral health services with two
modified service delivery system pilot programs.
Pilot data will be reviewed quarterly to ensure that
Primary Care Initiative outcomes are being met.
?? Support positive choices among participants in alcohol
and drug treatment programs.
?? Support educational growth and overall well-being of
adolescents who complete alcohol and drug treatment
by ensuring 90% (833 of 925) either complete
high school (or the equivalent) or are enrolled in an
educational setting.
?? Support healthy and safe living by ensuring that 35%
(4,550 of 13,000) of participants complete alcohol
and drug treatment.
?? Pursue policy and environmental changes by increasing
utilization and efficiency at outpatient mental health
clinics by reducing the number of adults who cancel or
fail to show by 10% (from 18,137 to 16,323).
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Advance operational excellence in customer service
through timely and improved access to services.
?? Ensure access to outpatient mental health assessments
for at-risk children and youth by maintaining
an average wait time of 5 days.
?? Ensure access and care and treatment into nonresidential
alcohol and drug treatment for adolescents
by admitting 85% (1,224 of 1,440) within 14 days.
?? Improve access to outpatient mental health services
to older adults by serving an additional 5% (from
5,662 to 5,945).
Required Discipline – Accountability, Transparency
and Ethical Conduct
?? Advance operational excellence by demonstrating
accountability and commitment to outstanding patient
care.
?? Maintain full accreditation with the Joint Commission
Standards Compliance for SDCPH.
?? Maintain State rating of substantial compliance for
Edgemoor DPSNF.
?? Meet the national benchmark (1.78 occurrences or
less per 1,000 patient days) for the use of mechanical
or manual restraints at SDCPH.
Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies to provide the right services, to the right
people, at the right time.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system for vulnerable
children and youth by promoting stability, strengthening
families, and supporting activities for a successful
transition to adulthood.
?? Place 65% (390 of 600) of children entering Polinsky
Children’s Center in less than 24 hours with a family,
relative or other foster care setting.
?? Strengthen families by ensuring that 30% (193 of
644) of children are adopted within 24 months of
entering child welfare services.
?? Place 65% (90 of 139) of youth in an intensive, wraparound
program that provides a family-like setting.
?? Support educational achievement of foster youth in
the 12th grade, including children in San Pasqual and
other residential settings, by ensuring that 85% (161
of 190) earn a high school diploma or equivalent.
?? Establish the Extended Foster Care program to promote
successful transition of former foster youth,
ages 18 through 21 years.
Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies to provide the right services, at the right
time, to the right people.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system through implementation
of programs to protect the health of the public.
?? Reduce spread of disease by investigating 100%
(estimate 80) of reported selected communicable
disease cases within 24 hours.
?? Prevent transmission of tuberculosis (TB) by ensuring
95% (estimate 260) of cases are reported within one
working day from start of treatment.
?? Increase access to health care by connecting 98%
(980 of 1,000) of new case management clients with
an HIV primary care provider within 90 days.
?? Ensure preparedness for response during a disaster
or public health threat by activating the public health
emergency response system a minimum of five
times.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system for vulnerable
children.
?? Ensure preventive health examinations are performed
to identify and correct health issues for 85% (2,550
of 3,000) of children in out-of-home placement.
?? Expedite California Children Services (CCS) referrals
and improve accuracy by receiving 55% (35,750 of
65,000) of referrals electronically.
Promote positive choices by changing at least one procurement
practice within one unified school district to
increase fruits and vegetables or decrease sodium
content in school meals, part of the Community Transformation
Grant activities.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Advance operational excellence by conducting a minimum
of six quality improvement projects.

Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies to provide the right services, to the right
people, at the right time.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system by safeguarding
and protecting vulnerable adults from financial, physical
and emotional abuse.
?? Ensure that 100% (180) of conservatorship investigations
are begun within two business days of referral
being assigned to an investigator as mandated by
the Omnibus Conservatorship and Guardianship
Reform Act.
?? Complete 85% (107 of 127) of face-to-face visits
with conservatees living in San Diego County within
30 days of previous date of face–to-face visit.
?? Begin 95% (466 of 491) of all bank inquiries within
two business days to safeguard and protect the
assets and resources of clients.
?? Submit 100% (10) of Inventory and Appraisal reports
of all estate cases in the PG Program within 90 days
of receiving letters of conservatorship to the Court.
212

CAO Proposed Operational Plan Fiscal Years 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 Health and Human Services Agency
?? Ensure 80% (844 of 1,056) of PA investigations are
begun within two business days of a referral being
assigned for investigation.
?? Submit 100% (20) Inventory and Appraisal reports of
all formal probate cases in the PA Program within
120 days of receiving letters of Administration to the
Court. A formal probate case is an estate valued over
$150,000 and is under court supervision.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Advance operational excellence of a skilled workforce
by maintaining 100% (19) mandated California State
PA/PG certification for applicable PA/PG staff in order
to improve services to conservatees and families of
decedents.

Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies to provide the right services, to the right
people, at the right time.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system.
?? Support successful implementation of Building Better
Health strategy by identifying areas for integration.
?? Increase efficiency and improving records management
through the reduction of records storage space
by 5% (from 18,865 to 17,921 boxes).
?? Promote positive choices by educating the public to
make positive choices in physical and mental health.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Advance operational excellence by pursuing policy and
environmental changes that support healthy, safe and
thriving communities by identifying appropriate legislation
that supports Live Well, San Diego!
Required Discipline for Excellence - Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Advance operational excellence by monitoring how
public funds are spent and the results achieved.
?? Complete 20 comprehensive financially focused
compliance review of contractors. A comprehensive
financial focused compliance review consists of testing
financial material, review of contractor financial
systems and controls, and observation of contractor
systems, activities and processes. A review can take
from one month to nine months to complete.
?? Complete 28 quality assurance reviews of Region/
Divisions to ensure adherence to contracting policies
and procedures.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Advance operational excellence through technology by
supporting improvements in the Agency’s technological
framework to help the Agency build a better service
delivery system.
?? Begin the process of enhancing or replacing legacy
information technology (IT) systems so they will be
capable of interfacing with the Enterprise Information
Exchange (EIE) technology. EIE will allow various IT
systems that could not intereact to be able to
exchange information.
?? Ensure any new IT systems meet criteria for interface
with the Enterprise Information Exchange.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Advance operational excellence through a skilled workforce
by implementing the second phase of the succession
plan to advance the Live Well, San Diego!
initiative.

Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Provide safe and accessible parks and preserves, foster
innovative programs and initiatives that promote
government agency partnerships and community
involvement and enhance emergency communications
and preparedness.
?? Complete a new GIS application for damage assessment
reporting during disasters. The new application
will increase reporting frequency and thus reduce the
time the County must wait for information on disaster
impacts.
?? Complete an environmental analysis of the Proposed
Eye Gnat Program and revised County Ordinance to
support an Eye Gnat Program for Board of Supervisors
approval and adoption.
?? Ensure food quality safety and integrity, and verify that
produce advertised as “organic” is registered and certified
as organic by increasing organic spot inspections
by 33% to 40 inspections.
?? Inspect 20 miles of targeted sewer mains and clean
390 miles of sanitary sewer collector mains to protect
public health and the environment by minimizing the
risk of sanitary sewer overflows.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Promote green building, including sustainable building
practices, renewable energy and energy efficiency
through economic incentives such as reduced fees and
fee waivers.
?? Protect a sustainable watershed via outreach, education,
inspections and the development of plans to meet
bacteria levels in accordance with the San Diego
Regional Water Quality Control Board.
?? Protect water quality and promote water conservation
via workshops and the deployment of water kiosks
throughout the agricultural community and at various
annual events.
?? Acquire, develop and maintain facilities that support
and promote park stewardship and environmental sustainability
and efficiency.
?? Design and initiate construction on at least seven road
and road-related infrastructure improvement projects
that enhance the transportation network’s long-term
sustainability.
?? Protect residential gardens and commercial produce
from insidious pest infestations and avoid the widespread
use of pesticides against new pests by placing
and maintaining traps designed for early pest detection.
?? Create new permit requirements by June 2013 to incorporate
the recently adopted Rule 66.1, Miscellaneous
Surface Coating Operations, for coating operations
thereby reducing volatile organic compound emissions.
?? Develop a database and methodology to tabulate
probable causative occurrences leading to both total
and fecal coliform water sample failures for small drinking
water systems. This information can be provided to
system owners and operators as guidance for ways to
reduce water quality violations.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Develop and enhance park patron experience and promote
healthy lifestyles by increasing recreational
opportunities and educational programs.
?? Provide parent education in early literacy, school readiness
and nutrition, emphasizing healthful nutrition
practices, food safety and food resource management.
?? Complete an implementation plan and draft changes to
the County Ordinance to institute a letter grading system
similar to the one used in restaurants for meat
markets and for mobile food facilities that prepare
food.
?? Repaint and re-mark crosswalks and roadway legends
adjacent to all 121 public schools and 12 private
school locations throughout the unincorporated area of
the County.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Implement Board of Supervisors directed recommendations
to improve the land development process for
customers. This includes streamlining the land development
process to reduce processing costs and time
for customers as well as the County.

Develop procedures and implement a program to scan
and enter emission inventory summaries into the
BCMS at the facility level by June 2013 to increase
staff efficiency in determining New Source Review
requirements and facility compliance status.
?? Increase operational efficiency by transitioning the Pesticide
Regulation Program enforcement response
determination document into the BCMS. This document
is used to track the action taken when a violation
is found.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Promote and make customer service a top priority by
developing and providing customer service training,
emphasizing customer focus in all management and
section meetings and instructing staff on good communication
skills with the public and regulated community.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Enhance customer service by providing Web access to
allow customers to perform file reviews without coming
to County offices.
?? Expand the mobile workforce capabilities for building
inspectors and code enforcement through new systems
that enable real-time access to permit systems
from mobile devices that field inspectors will use.
?? Reduce payment processing time and cost by implementing
bar coding of registration invoices sent to customers
who have point of sale systems to facilitate
faster processing of the payments.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Administer and participate in meetings of the federal
San Diego/Tijuana Air Quality Task Force to identify and
reduce air pollution problems in the border region in
order to better protect public health and the environment.
?? Develop standard operating procedures and fact
sheets to provide guidance on how to collaborate with
other agencies to collect and sample illegally disposed
hazardous waste from businesses with multiple locations
across the state. These procedures will be available
for use by the other Unified Program Agency’s
throughout the State.

Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Protect residential gardens and commercial produce
from insidious pest infestations and avoid the widespread
use of pesticides against new pests by placing
and maintaining traps designed for early pest detection.
?? Increase return on investment and leverage funds available
for invasive weed infestations by focusing on locations
where maximum effectiveness can be achieved.
?? Ensure consumer confidence and equity in the marketplace
by performing 60 undercover test sales of California
Redemption Value (CRV) beverage containers.
?? Improve efficiency by implementing changes to the
Snail Master Permit Export Program, which allows
qualified nurseries to ship “at will” to states with snail
restrictions without additional inspections or fees,
reducing total shipping fees paid by growers for
domestic export certificates by 30%.
?? Ensure agricultural commodities meet international
shipping requirements by continuing cropland trapping
for Light Brown Apple Moths until current restrictions
are lifted.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Protect public safety on 50% of County roads (or roads
in the unincorporated areas of the county) with weed
control which will increase visibility and decrease fire
hazards.
?? Ensure food quality, safety and integrity, and verify that
produce advertised as “organic” is registered and certified
as organic by increasing organic spot inspections
by 33% to 40 inspections.
?? Increase agricultural worker knowledge and safety
when working in pesticide treated fields by providing
three educational outreach presentations.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement & Innovation
?? Improve efficiency and accountability while streamlining
the investigation processing function in the Pesticide
Regulation Program by conducting Business
Process Reengineering.

Increase operational efficiency by transitioning the Pesticide
Regulation Program enforcement response
determination document into BCMS. This document is
used to track the action taken when a violation is
found.
?? Increase efficiency during quarantines and ability to
locate high priority host plants by migrating current
pest detection mapping grid to the new statewide
mapping grid by June 2013.
?? Improve efficiency and field staff access to information
by electronically digitizing 50% of all host fruit locations
for urban pest detection trapping by June 2013.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Reduce payment processing time and cost by implementing
bar coding of registration invoices sent to customers
who have point of sale systems to facilitate
faster processing of the payments.

Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? By June 30, 2014, implement a “near-road” air quality
monitoring station that meets EPA requirements to
assess the impact of mobile sources of emissions.
?? Request a redesignation from the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency for the County of San Diego’s attainment
of the 1997 federal 8-hour ozone standard and
submit an Ozone Maintenance Plan that demonstrates
how the region will maintain compliance with this standard
for the next 10 years.
?? Create new permit requirements for all affected existing
permits by June 2013, to incorporate recently adopted
Rule 66.1 for coating operations thereby reducing volatile
organic compound emissions.
?? In order to simplify the interpretation of air quality data
for the public, the currently available air quality concentration
levels posted on the District’s website will be
replaced by corresponding Air Quality Index (AQI) values,
a more familiar measurement, by June 2013. This
multi-year program will give the public a better understanding
of air quality’s health effects.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Implement a gaseous air quality monitoring precision
checking system that replaces the current labor-intensive
system with an automated calibration system,
thereby improving District efficiency and lowering staff
costs.
?? Develop procedures and implement a program to scan
and enter emissions inventory summaries into Business
Case Management System at the facility level by
June 2013 to increase staff efficiency in determining
New Source Review requirements and facility compliance
status.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Administer and participate in meetings of the federal
San Diego/Tijuana Air Quality Task Force to identify and
reduce air pollution problems in the border region in
order to better protect public health and the environment.

Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Complete an environmental analysis of the Proposed
Eye Gnat Program and revised County Ordinance to
support an Eye Gnat Program for Board of Supervisors
approval and adoption.
?? Trap rodents at port of entry sites where freight from
foreign origin is received by boat, airplane or truck.
Conduct tests twice a year for plague from rodents
trapped in these areas.
?? Trap and test captured mice/voles, by taking blood
samples, for the presence of Hantavirus, a rare pulmonary
syndrome caused by the virus.
?? Establish an Asian Tiger mosquito surveillance program
to assess whether these mosquitoes have migrated
into San Diego from Los Angeles County. The Asian
Tiger mosquito is an invasive species that is a competent
vector of diseases including yellow fever and dengue
fever.
?? Inspect at least 90% of the identified waste tire sites in
the Tire Enforcement Agency Inspection Work Plan
(194 inspections) in order to ensure compliance and
reduce illegal handling and disposal of waste tires.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Continue to partner with the California Department of
Public Health to implement Phase Two of a local study
to evaluate the effect of public swimming pool operator
training on overall regulatory compliance.
?? Incorporate Assembly Bill (AB) 300, the Safe Body Art
Act into the local body art inspection program.
?? Conduct training and develop a report for small drinking
water system operators to assist with the development
of their annual Consumer Confidence Reports.
?? Review and respond to reports and work plans submitted
to the Local Oversight Program for remediation of
underground storage tank fuel releases within 60 days.
?? Develop a database and methodology to tabulate
probable causative occurrences leading to both total
and fecal coliform water sample failures for small drink244
Environmental Health
CAO Proposed Operational Plan Fiscal Years 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 Land Use and Environment Group
ing water systems. This information can be provided to
system owners and operators as guidance for ways to
reduce water quality violations.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Respond to 100% of reports from the County Department
of Public Health Services of elevated blood lead
levels in children within 24 hours to two weeks,
depending on the blood lead level reported.
?? Educate children on awareness and protection from
mosquito-borne diseases and other vector-related diseases;
proper disposal of household hazardous, electronic
and universal wastes; hazardous materials,
pollution prevention and risk mitigation; increased
awareness of the restaurant grade card system and
careers in environmental health by conducting outreach
presentations to primary and/or secondary
schoolchildren at schools or other outreach events
each year.
?? Complete an implementation plan and draft changes to
the County Ordinance to institute a letter grading system
for mobile food facilities.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Develop a customer service program that instructs
staff on good communication skills with the regulated
community.
?? Respond to complaints about mosquitoes, rats and
flies by contacting of complainants within three days.
?? Investigate and treat aerial identified green pools within
21 days of identification. These unfiltered pools have
proven to be a breeding ground for mosquitoes.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Develop standard operating procedures and fact
sheets to provide guidance on how to collaborate with
other agencies to collect and sample illegally disposed
hazardous waste from businesses with multiple locations
across the state.
?? Continue to coordinate with other local jurisdictional
household hazardous waste programs to explore
options for regional cooperation, cost sharing and joint
public education opportunities. Participate and assist
in facilitating regional committee meetings to identify
program elements that will improve service delivery
and reduce program costs through regional collaboration.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Develop an online Unified Program Facility Permit
application and have 10% of new permit applications
in Fiscal Year 2012-13 use an online form to apply for
their permit.
?? Preliminary studies in 2011 by the Vector Control Program
(VCP) Diagnostic Laboratory demonstrated up to
20% of rabbit ticks tested positive for the agent of
Lyme disease. In order to assess the risk to public
health, the VCP will initiate a study to determine the
extent of Lyme disease in the county.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Enhance customer service by providing Web access to
conduct file reviews for records associated with Site
Assessment and Mitigation projects and septic system
installations.
?? Image the remainder of records associated with mobile
home park inspections and septic system installations
(year four of the four-year goal of 63,000 records).
?? Expand the use of social media tools, e.g., Facebook,
Twitter, etc., to provide real time beach water quality
status to the public.
?? Implement the new BCMS and use of mobile hardware
technology for field inspections.

Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Improve youth development, school readiness and
nutrition in the region.
?? Provide administrative and instructional material
support for 350 4-H volunteer leaders in order to
conduct community-based educational programs to
25 4-H clubs, seven after-school sites and eight Military
4-H sites.
?? Provide parent education in the topics of early literacy
and school readiness to 1,000 parents of preschoolers
throughout the county.
?? Provide nutrition education for 400 low-income families
with children, emphasizing healthful nutrition
practices, food resource management and food
safety.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Protect water quality and promote water conservation.
?? Complete eight agricultural water workshops to educate
agricultural and other water users about stormwater
regulations and requirements, best
management practices, recordkeeping and
employee training.
?? Deploy two additional informational water quality
kiosks throughout the agricultural community to
teach the importance of preventing excess water
from leaving agricultural properties and entering the
storm drainage system.
?? Provide annual displays at the Carlsbad Flower
Fields and the San Diego County Fair on examples of
water quality and runoff control best management
practices for growers and the general public to view
and use the self-assessment materials on their own
properties.
?? Continue conducting research projects on various crop
types to evaluate water use levels and newer varieties
or alternate crops for the region, including blueberries,
avocados, guava, mandarins, pomegranate, and carambola
(starfruit). As water prices continue to rise, the
new crop types would be anticipated to consume less
water thereby increasing and bolstering economic
growth.
?? Protect water quality and prevent costly consumer saltwater
boat repairs by providing outreach information
for agency staff, boating organizations, associated
industry groups and boaters on controlling invasive
species that foul the bottoms of recreational boats.
?? Provide outreach information for agency staff, associated
industry groups and other interested stakeholders
on controlling invasive, freshwater mussels that foul
freshwater delivery systems and outcompete native
life.
?? Expand the number and size of demonstration pilot
sites of habitat restoration techniques learned from
research in collaboration with U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, City and County Parks and Recreation Departments,
Barnett Ranch Open Space Park, University of
California, Irvine and Irvine Ranch Conservancy to 200
acres.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? As wildfires continue to pose a threat to San Diego residents,
investigate stakeholder needs and resource
opportunities to further develop wildfire education and
outreach programming.
?? As the Goldspotted Oak Borer continues to decimate
oak trees, research the capacity to expand and
enhance the existing program established as a foundation
for Goldspotted Oak Borer program education and
outreach.

Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Provide safe and accessible parks and preserves, foster
innovative programs and initiatives that promote
government agency partnerships and community
involvement, and enhance emergency communication
and preparedness.
?? Reduce the incidence of crime by incorporating the
principles of Crime Prevention through Environmental
Design (CPTED) at two park facilities and based
on the experience develop guidelines that incorporate
these principles into future park projects. This
can be achieved with practical access control (doors,
fences), surveillance (lighting, windows, landscaping),
territorial reinforcement (signs, sidewalks), and
maintenance (code enforcement, community cleanups)
in park facilities.
?? Enhance parks image and safety through public partnerships
whereby 1,040 hours of service contributions
are provided for removal of graffiti, homeless
encampments, weed abatement, debris and exotic
or non-native plant species.
?? Increase communications and public safety by
updating the department’s park-to-park radio system
throughout the park system by restructuring the
radio communication/emergency system in collaboration
with the Sheriff’s Department and provide
three service radio communication trainings.
?? Evaluate and post signage of evacuation routes for
100% of all DPR campgrounds.

Complete Playground Safety Inspections on 30 playgrounds
and provide three trainings on safety
inspection guidelines for Development and Operations
staff.
?? Create safer parks and preserves by providing extra
security through volunteer patrol, contributing 5,000
volunteer patrol hours annually.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Acquire, develop and maintain facilities that support
and promote park stewardship and environmental sustainability
and efficiency.
?? Utilize the Mitigation Land Policy to generate
$80,000 of revenue for acquisitions and operations
and maintenance for Multiple Species Conservation
Program (MSCP) lands.
?? Acquire 375 acres within the MSCP plan areas. Complete
two Resource Management Plans that include
passive recreational opportunities.
?? Upgrade two park facilities with artificial turf to conserve
water resources, reduce overall maintenance
and provide state of the art playing fields for yearround
sports programs.
?? Install two photovoltaic systems (solar panels) at
existing facilities to reduce County reliance on fossil
fuels and reduce annual operating costs.
?? Increase environmental stewardship by educating
2,000 youth about the importance of natural
resources, including conservation and sustainability
strategies through Energy Saving Adventures and
Outdoor Adventure Programs.
?? Enhance the existing Discovery Kit environmental
education program material and expand the program
to two additional sites.
?? Replace trees affected by the Gold Spotted Oak
Borer at five park locations to protect the current
Coast Live Oak tree population and replace diseased
or dying trees with varieties of pest resistant oak
trees.
?? Mitigate fire fuel hazards and maintain fire safe zones
in 24 park facilities through continued implementation
of fuel management practices.
?? Install five new solar trash compacting receptacles at
parks to maintain service levels and reduce maintenance
costs and staffing time for trash disposal.
?? Improve energy and water efficiency in eight department
facilities by various means, such as native
landscaping retrofitting, installing new water- and
energy-efficient equipment, replacing older vehicles
with energy-efficient vehicles, and reducing water
and energy usage.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Develop and enhance park patron experience and promote
healthy lifestyles by increasing recreational
opportunities and educational programs
?? Perform comprehensive Active Living assessments
at three parks using DPR’s new Healthy Edge Park
Design Guidelines. Use the assessment to develop a
“health report card” and improvement strategy for
the facilities.
?? Promote healthy lifestyles for 2,000 adults and
seniors through participation in 60 recreation programs.
?? Foster positive development of 5,500 youth through
150 recreation programs and services that increase
physical, intellectual, social and/or emotional abilities.
?? Develop and enhance two County park trails to promote
health and fitness.
?? In collaboration with six school-sponsored sports
activities, increase recreational opportunities for
youth at park facilities.
?? Incorporate the County’s health initiative “Live Well,
San Diego!” and other health-related messages into
two environmental educational programs and three
promotional publications.

Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Reduce risks to lives by ensuring buildings and
improvements are designed and constructed in accordance
with building safety codes.

Review proposed building plans to ensure homes are
properly and safely designed.
?? Explain building code requirements and develop
educational tools to simplify codes for the public.
?? Conduct building inspections during construction to
ensure homes are built in accordance with approved
building plans.
?? Improve community health and safety conditions
through elimination of dilapidated buildings and
removal of substandard housing.
?? Respond to the public within 24 hours of receipt of
code complaints.
?? Improve public safety through the abatement of hazardous
living conditions such as abandoned homes
and dilapidated structures within the unincorporated
areas of the county.
?? Complete a new GIS application for damage assessment
reporting during disasters. The new application
will increase reporting frequency and thus reduce the
time the County must wait for information on disaster
impacts.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Improve the efficiency of land use programs that guide
the physical development of the County’s land through
a balance of growth and conservation while collaborating
with communities.
?? Present to the Board of Supervisors by March 2013
the Forest Conservation Initiative General Plan
Amendment which will enhance economic opportunities
in the East County.
?? Complete and report by June 2013 on the Purchase
of Agriculture Conservation Easement Pilot Program
which supports the local agriculture industry and the
preservation of community character.
?? Initiate by June 2013 public review of the Equine
Ordinance Environmental Impact Report (EIR) which
will streamline regulations related to commercial
horse operations.
?? Present to the Board of Supervisors by June 2013 a
new Housing Element Amendment to maintain a
General Plan that is in compliance with State law.
?? Promote green building, including sustainable building
practices, renewable energy and energy efficiency
through economic incentives such as reduced fees and
fee waivers.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Implement Board of Supervisors directed recommendations
to improve the land development process for
customers. This includes a shift in culture and role to
find project solutions and help customers navigate the
land development process.
?? Continue to identify and implement performance
improvements to streamline the land development process
to reduce processing costs and time for customers
as well as the County.
?? Complete the Site Plan conversion of discretionary permit
requirements to ministerial permits by December
2012.
?? Initiate a new discretionary to ministerial permit conversion
to substantially reduce processing time and cost
for applicants and the County.
?? Expand online permit opportunities for building permits
so that customers can minimize actual visits to County
facilities, thus reducing wait times and saving customers’
money.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Expand the mobile workforce capabilities for building
inspectors and code enforcement through new systems
that enable real-time access to land development
permit systems from mobile devices used by field
inspectors.
?? Convert Code Enforcement forms from hard copy to
electronic format to improve turnaround times and
reduce overhead costs.
?? Upgrade the customer routing/flow management system
(Q-Matic), for the permit center to make the permit
process more responsive to customer needs and thus
reduce customer time and cost.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Develop and implement a staff training and mentoring
program that is centered around customer service and
incorporates values such as project ownership and
accountability, organizational acumen, effective communication
and outcome focus.
?? Complete implementation of the Business Case Management
System (Accela) which will integrate permit
activity, timekeeping and financial management for
land development projects.

Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Create and implement a program that allows applicants
for privately-initiated development projects to rely on
the General Plan Update Environmental Impact Report
for certain environmental impact assessments. As a
result, applicants will no longer need to assess, analyze
and/or mitigate cumulative project impacts that are
required under the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA). This will save applicants money and several
months in the permit process.

Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Clean 390 miles of sanitary sewer collector mains
within the sanitary sewer system to protect public
health and the environment by minimizing the risk of
sanitary sewer overflows.
Inspect 20 miles of targeted sewer mains within the
sanitary sewer system to identify sewer defects and
facilitate proactive facility repairs to reduce the risk of
sanitary sewer spills.
?? Upgrade the Jamacha wastewater pump station facility
to protect public health and safeguard drinking water
supplies at the Sweetwater Reservoir by minimizing the
risk of sanitary sewer spills.
?? Complete three public outreach presentations to North
County neighborhood associations and local organizations
regarding McClellan-Palomar Airport operations
and the County’s efforts to minimize noise impacts.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Design and initiate construction on at least seven road
and road-related infrastructure improvement projects
that enhance the transportation network’s long-term
sustainability.
?? Protect a sustainable watershed.
?? Provide water quality and watershed education by
conducting 150 presentations to high school students
at 90% of unincorporated county public high
schools as part of a long-term strategy for achieving
positive behavioral changes.
?? Conduct outreach to residents with information and
resources on stormwater pollution prevention at 15
community events throughout the unincorporated
areas of the county.
?? Perform over 8,000 stormwater inspections during
the construction phase on private development projects
to ensure compliance with the state’s requirements,
reduce erosion and minimize downstream
pollutants.
?? Develop watershed-based plans addressing mitigation
measures to meet bacteria levels in waterways
in accordance with the San Diego Regional Water
Quality Control Board requirements as approved by
the Board of Supervisors.
?? Remove 25,000 cubic yards of debris from culverts,
drainage channels and roads through a systematic
cleaning program to prevent pollution of the county’s
rivers, bays and ocean.
?? Sweep 16,200 lane-miles of roadway to clean debris
from road surfaces and prevent pollution of the
county’s rivers, bays and ocean.
?? Attend 50 Watershed Urban Runoff Management Program
(WURMP) meetings to foster water quality
improvement through collaborative planning with partner
agencies. The County actively participates in developing
and implementing WURMPs to improve surface
water quality in eight county watersheds. Collaboration
with partner agencies helps align priorities, leverage
resources and identify regional efficiencies.
?? Manage solid waste and oil generated in the unincorporated
county.
?? Work with all private developments with permits or
permits pending that have 40,000 square feet or
more of building space (estimated 35), to increase
tonnage of construction and demolition materials
being diverted from landfills with a goal of diverting
5,000 tons or 90% of inert materials and 70% of
other recyclable materials.
?? Complete ten oil collection and outreach events -
recycling 90,000 gallons of used oil and 13,000 used
oil filters.
?? Assist 80 businesses and 20 multifamily complexes
in initiating recycling programs.
?? Provide education about recycling programs and
benefits to 50 school classrooms.
?? Provide residential composting education at nine
workshops and one community event. Install one
new composting demonstration site. Provide one
Master Composter course to residents to further
their home composting knowledge.
?? Promote recycling hotline and database to achieve at
least 5,000 inquiries from the public.
?? Add information on 50 recycling centers/events to
the recycling database at www.wastefreesd.org.
?? Provide Recycling Market Development Zone (RMDZ)
assistance to five businesses. Work collaboratively with
applicable jurisdictions to provide assistance in siting
and permitting.
?? Partner with East Otay Mesa property owners, SANDAG,
CalTrans, the City of San Diego to plan and construct
a regional sanitary sewer network to support the
phased implementation of the East Otay Mesa Specific
Plan while safeguarding public health and the environment.
?? Partner with property owners and the Rincon del Diablo
Water District to plan and design the Harmony Grove
Water Reclamation facility to provide safe and reliable
collection and treatment of wastewater and for the production
of reclaimed water for beneficial reuse in the
water district service areas.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Ensure construction work by utilities and private developers
in the County’s right-of-way that is within 1,000
feet from a school site provides safe access to schools
for families and children.

Repaint and re-mark crosswalks and roadway legends
adjacent to all 121 public school and 12 private school
locations throughout the unincorporated areas of the
county. This keeps children safe from motoring traffic
around their schools and provides safe routes to get to
school. This is an annual goal because markings need
to be fresh and visible to ensure maximum benefit.
?? Work with school administrators to analyze, identify
and implement school zone improvements for pedestrians,
bicyclists, buses and automobiles at 12 schools.
This represents 9% of all public and private schools in
the unincorporated areas of the county.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
improvement and innovation
?? Promote and drive customer service as a top priority
throughout the organization by providing customer service
training to all employees, emphasizing customerfocus
in all management and section meetings, setting
up a shared online customer services resource site,
and participating in all land development services
improvements and initiatives as directed by the Board
of Supervisors.
?? Implement recommendations from two business process
reengineering events conducted in Fiscal Year
2011-12 to streamline efforts and enhance quality
assurance. One is consolidation of roadside landscaping
services formerly managed in several sections of
the department into the Special Districts unit. Another
is consolidation of project design and preparation of
road maintenance projects, such as concrete-asphalt
overlay projects into DPW’s Capital Improvement Program,
rather than having a hand-off between two sections
at the point of contract package preparation.

Community Services Group activities over the next two
years continue the departments’ support of the County’s
Strategic Initiatives, dedication to internal and external customer
service, and maintaining a culture of accountability
and transparency in the use of public resources. Objectives
include:
?? Open the new Lincoln Acres Library, community room,
and business offices for Sheriff staff and the Lower
Sweetwater Fire Protection District.
?? Increase the number of permanent vote-by-mail voters
by 5%.
?? Complete the addition of Chinese language to voting
and election materials.
?? Improve County operations through sustainability
efforts in alternative energy systems, energy conservation,
recycling, and green building design.
?? Ensure that most of the dogs and cats in County animal
shelters are reunited with their owner or adopted into a
new home.
?? Expand contracting and other procurement training
with online courses.
?? Develop new communication channels to release
timely housing-related information in emergencies as
well as ongoing housing and community development
opportunities.
?? Conduct the activities of the County Oversight Board to
conclude the programs and activities of the former
Redevelopment Agency.

Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Achieve goal of 0% euthanasia of any healthy, friendly
animal by reuniting animals with their owner or through
adoption.
?? Promote child safety and injury prevention by conducting
a minimum of 80 animal safety and dog bite prevention
presentations to area schools and other
organizations that encounter dogs while conducting
their normal operations.
?? Respond to 94.4% of patrol responses on time according
to department protocols for responding to various
levels of priority calls.
?? Conduct eight classes per year for the Responsible Pet
Ownership program to teach responsible pet ownership
to animal law violators and to reduce the burden
on the court system.
?? Inform and educate county residents on emergency
preparedness for their pets and themselves to ensure
they are protected in case of an emergency.
?? Participate in four Community Emergency Response
Team (CERT) meetings per year.
?? Conduct 10 presentations to community groups.
?? Enhance children’s awareness of animal welfare issues
and promote the humane treatment of animals through
participation in a joint facility tour and humane education
program with the San Diego Humane Society, and
by co-hosting a minimum of 12 classroom or youth
group visits per year to the Campus for Animal Care or
other County animal shelters. These educational
endeavors will help ensure that both animals and people
are protected from neglect and abuse, promoting
safe communities.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Encourage children to read by supporting the County
Library’s Read for a Reason program and by providing
an additional incentive to read.
?? Assist young people in developing job skills that will
help them become thriving, self-sufficient adults
through participation in the County’s Workforce Academy
for Youth, the Animal Health Technology Program
at Mesa College, the PIMA Medical Institute and
Regional Occupation Programs from various schools
within the County. The department will provide job
training opportunities to at least one participant in each
program per year.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Ensure customers are provided with superior services
by being responsive to customers’ needs, professional,
courteous, attentive and knowledgeable. Achieve a
customer satisfaction rating of 4.72 or better (on a
scale of 1 to 5 with 5 being Excellent).
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Maintain the current level of services by offering an
average of 200 after-school programs each month, to
offer students and families a safe place for the pursuit
of education and constructive civic engagement.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Meet the informational, recreational and cultural needs
of the community and actively promote reading and
lifelong learning by ensuring the public has access to
library resources and services and that the SDCL has
the capacity to meet these goals.
?? Maintain the planned schedule of library operations.
?? Provide virtual library services that are available and
relevant such as E-books, audio downloads, video
downloads and access to premium databases.
?? Ensure that collections, materials and programs are
current and relevant to meeting the needs and interests
of a dynamic community.

Meet the planned annual average circulation per
item.
?? Maintain participation in adult programs that promote
lifelong learning and civic engagement by serving
66,000 participants.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Support County of San Diego healthy families’ initiatives
increasing the current level of services by offering
more than 120 healthy lifestyle programs for all ages
every month.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Complete two library remodels in support of redesign
of circulation, programming, information services, and
support services performed in the branches and headquarters
to increase efficiency allowing SDCL to meet
ongoing demands for services with staffing that has
been significantly reduced due to resource constraints.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Complete the radio frequency-enabled loss prevention
security gates pilot project to deter theft of library
materials at the Vista and El Cajon branch libraries during
Fiscal Year 2012-13; and to model implementation
at other required branches, to plan for implementation
in Fiscal Year 2013-14.

Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Improve County operations through sustainability
efforts such as energy conservation, alternative energy
generation systems, green building design and recycling.
?? Reduce total electricity usage at County facilities
each year by 2% over prior fiscal year based on a
kWh per square foot metric.
?? Reduce vehicle emissions for on- and off-road diesel
vehicles and stationary diesel equipment in accordance
with California Air Resources Board requirements,
by replacing or retrofitting older higher
emission vehicles.
?? Prepare County operations greenhouse gas inventories
for calendar years 2012 and 2013. Achieve 1%
reduction in total greenhouse gas emissions each
year compared to the prior calendar year.
?? Develop a Green Fleet Action Plan which identifies
opportunities and establishes a strategy to reduce
the County’s green house gas emissions.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Support client departments in their public safety
efforts.
?? Maintain availability of County-supported fire apparatus
at a minimum of 95%.
?? Ensure maximum availability of law enforcement
patrol vehicles at 95%.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Essential
Infrastructure
?? Provide time-critical (24/7) maintenance response to
emergency requests involving life and safety issues or
those posing an imminent risk to County assets and
infrastructure, by responding to and initiating corrective
action for 100% of all “emergency” requests within four
hours of notification.
?? Complete 96% of targeted preventive maintenance
goals to maximize the operational efficiency of County
assets/infrastructure, as well as maintain or prolong the
design life of these systems.

Complete 100% of 143 real estate lease acquisition
inspections by fiscal year end to ensure operational
efficiency for County departments.
?? Plan and execute the County’s capital projects and
other infrastructure projects in a timely and cost-effective
manner, to meet departments’ needs.
?? Complete construction and fully occupy Phase 1B
office buildings and Conference Center at the COC
by December 2012.
?? Complete construction of the new Rancho San
Diego Sheriff’s Station by summer 2013.
?? Complete occupancy of Phase 1 of the new
Women’s Detention Facility project by summer 2014,
with construction of the facility completed by January
2016, subject to State funding.
?? Complete construction of the new Cedar and Kettner
parking structure development by December 2014.
?? Begin construction of the County Administration
Center Waterfront Park with completion anticipated
by summer 2014.
?? Complete relocation of 41 business tenants from
property adjacent to the County Operations Center
by August 2012 in order to relocate Registrar of Voters
(ROV) by December 2013.
?? Begin construction of the new ROV Building at the
COC for completion by the end of December 2013.
?? Complete sale of County Operations Center Annex
property by December 2013.
?? Award design-build contract for new East Mesa
Reentry and Rehabilitation Facility, with completion
scheduled for February 2014.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Complete 96% of vehicle and mobile equipment preventive
maintenance actions to maximize the operational
effectiveness of County vehicles.
?? Implement a new service, Fleet mobile maintenance, to
reduce costs and increase operational efficiency within
County departments.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Maximize postage discounts by bar coding a minimum
of 95% of all standard business letters.
?? Reduce the cost of space for County operations in
leased facilities by monitoring the local market and
negotiating favorable rental rates, with average rental
rate for all County office leases at or below 95% of the
market rate for Class B office space.
?? Maintain and monitor timely collection of rent revenue
to ensure 97% of all DGS leases managed are less
than 30 days delinquent.

Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Provide 15 competitive academic scholarships annually
to heads of household and/or their children who
have established five-year family self-sufficiency goals
in academic or vocational self-sufficiency, or that
reside in Public Housing.
?? Provide funding of $67,500 for the Health and Human
Services Agency’s Hotel/Motel Voucher Program to
help close the gap needed for emergency housing for
homeless families in the County’s jurisdiction as identified
by the Regional Task Force on the Homeless. The
Regional Cold Weather Shelter Voucher Program provides
emergency shelter through the issuance of hotel
vouchers for homeless families, disabled and elderly
individuals.
?? Promote self-sufficiency by providing permanent housing
for up to 100 eligible homeless families graduating
from transitional housing programs provided by 12
homeless service agencies through the County’s Continuum
of Care program.
?? Provide funding for continuation of the HOME Tenantbased
Rental Assistance programs that serve up to 65
youth aging out of the foster care system and 44 families
with children that are participants of the County’s
substance abuse recovery and family reunification programs.
?? Provide rental assistance to permanently house up to
200 homeless veterans through the Veterans Affairs
Supportive Housing (VASH) program. Utilization of
these vouchers is dependent upon HCD receiving
referrals from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
(VA).
?? Establish partnerships with HHSA to provide three new
resources to Family Self-Sufficiency Program participants
offering needed services to those working
toward self-sufficiency.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Ensure environmental reviews are performed on 100%
(80 projects) of federally funded programs included in
the Fiscal Years 2012-13 Annual Funding Plans. In
keeping with County policy of functional threading,
environmental reviews will be conducted by the
Department of Public Works. In compliance with the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) regulations, HCD performs environmental
reviews on all program projects in order to analyze the
effect a proposed project will have on the people and

the natural environment within a designated project
area and the effect the material and social environment
may have on a project.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Promote crime-free communities by renewing annual
Crime-Free Certifications at all four public housing
sites, in collaboration with the local police department.
?? Educate the community by conducting four community
outreach meetings throughout the county regarding
affordable housing and community revitalization funding
opportunities available annually through four federal
entitlement programs: Community Development
Block Grant, HOME Investment Partnership Program,
Emergency Shelter Grant and Housing Opportunities
for Persons with AIDS.
?? Address issues impacting community living standards
by conducting 10 community revitalization meetings
with policy makers and stakeholders.
?? Promote fair housing by completing a minimum of 35
random site tests on multi-family rental properties to
ensure compliance with fair housing laws.
?? Ensure that permanent affordable housing providers
are in compliance with the Uniform Federal Accessibility
Standards (UFAS) by requiring at least 20% (8 out of
40 providers) complete the UFAS Accessibility Checklist.
This self-certification is intended for accessibility
reviews of properties owned, operated and/or managed
by recipients of federal financial assistance.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Hold four Section 8 owner/landlord seminars to educate
owners on the requirements of the program, as
well as promote the benefits of participating as a partner.
?? Ensure customers are provided with superior services
by being responsive to customers’ needs, professional,
courteous, attentive and knowledgeable. A key indicator
of how well service is provided will be to achieve a
customer service satisfaction rating of 4.70 or better
(on a scale of 1 to 5 with 5 being Excellent).
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Create two new communication channels by using
information services (e.g., emails, recorded messages,
videos, the County Television Network (CTN), social
media) that will allow for provision of timely housingrelated
information in the event of an emergency and to
highlight community development, housing, employment
and self-sufficiency opportunities.
?? Provide enhanced customer service and create program
efficiencies by implementing a Web-based module
that allows 24/7 self-service when completing or
updating rental assistance applications. As a new program
enhancement, it is anticipated that 2,500 applicants
will establish user accounts and processing time
for waiting list database updates will decrease from
seven days to one.

Strategic Initiative –Sustainable Environments
?? Conduct a minimum of 10 outreach activities in Fiscal
Year 2012-13 and 10 in Fiscal Year 2013-14 for the
local business community in order to increase the supplier
base and increase opportunities for competition.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Achieve cost savings of $1.8 million in both Fiscal
Years 2012-13 and 2013-14 for County customer
departments by using innovative procurement methods
such as reverse auctions, cooperative agreements,
blanket purchase agreements and P-Card usage
(which serves as a credit card for small purchases).
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Ensure departments’ records retention schedules due
for revision in Fiscal Years 2012-13 and 2013-14 are
processed and finalized in compliance with County
policy.
?? Expedite services to County customer departments by
converting requisitions to Standard Purchase Orders in
a timely and efficient manner.
?? Convert at least 75% (825 of 1,100) of customer requisitions
to Standard Purchase Orders within 21 calendar
days of receipt.
?? Convert 50% (550 of 1,100) of customer requisitions
to Standard Purchase Orders within 15 calendar
days of receipt.
?? Streamline the procurement process by working with
customer departments to identify and pre-plan for 60%
of approximately 250 projects annually, as measured
by obtaining agreed-upon plans and timelines for
acquisition from customer departments in advance.
This will allow the Department to manage and deploy
resources with maximum efficiency.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Update 100% (19) of essential procurement processes,
forms and templates currently published in the Contracting
Guide during Fiscal Year 2012-13 to ensure
staff are using the most recent and accurate information.
?? Provide training for at least 40 County staff in accessing
and interpreting purchasing fiscal data in Oracle,
the County’s financial system, in order to better manage
contracts and budgets.
?? Provide annual, individualized training to all County
departments to ensure required operational practices
related to records and content management are being
implemented.
?? Develop training materials on contract administration in
Fiscal Year 2012-13 to ensure consistent practices
across all County departments. Deploy developed
training electronically in Fiscal Year 2013-14 via the
Learning Management System (LMS), making training
available to all County staff that require it.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Enable the receipt of electronic proposal documents
through the County’s e-procurement website. This will
shorten solicitation timelines, reduce the need for
potential suppliers to travel to County offices or ship
documents, and reduce the need to store and route
large paper documents.
?? Complete the technological enhancement for two-step
proposals and bids submitted via BuyNet, the County’s
online procurement system. The first step is for potential
suppliers to submit their qualifications for review
before proceeding to the next step, submission of bids
and/or proposals by those suppliers deemed qualified.
This will shorten procurement timelines and clarify
communications with proposers. This project will also
support P&C’s move toward electronic receipt of all
solicitations.
?? Create and publish four new Oracle LMS classes and
classroom-based courses giving greater flexibility for
end users to access training. Online LMS classes allow
end users to receive training at their convenience and
eliminate costs, such as transportation and travel time,
associated with traveling to classroom-based courses.

Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? At the direction of the County Oversight Board, expeditiously
wind down the affairs of the former County
Redevelopment Agency, maintaining compliance with
all laws.

Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Continue to distribute information on County environmental
risks by using “filler” pages printed in the Sample
Ballot and Voter Information Pamphlets mailed to all
registered voters for November 2012 Presidential General
and June 2014 Gubernatorial Primary Elections.
?? Conserve resources by printing the Sample Ballot and
Voter Information Pamphlets for all elections conducted
in Fiscal Years 2012-14 on post-consumer
recycled paper.

Conduct the November 2012 Presidential General and
the June 2014 Gubernatorial Primary Elections with
efficiency and integrity.
?? Increase the current number (712,000) of permanent
vote-by-mail voters by 5% (or 35,600), for a total of
747,600, for the November 2012 Presidential General
Election. For the June 2014 Gubernatorial Primary
Election, increase the permanent vote-by-mail voters
by 5% (or 37,380) for a total of 784,980.
?? By Monday after Election Day, process 85% of mail
ballots received for the November 2012 Presidential
General Election and 90% of mail ballots received for
the June 2014 Gubernatorial Primary Election.
?? Continue to recruit and replace non-accessible poll
sites to comply with federal and State accessibility
requirements:
?? By increasing the June 2012 Presidential Primary
Election target number of accessible poll sites (604)
by 3% (or 18) for a total of 622 for the November
2012 Presidential General Election; and
?? By increasing the November 2012 Presidential General
Election target number of accessible poll sites
(622) by 7% (or 43), for a total of 665, by the June
2014 Gubernatorial Primary Election.
?? Engage the community in the electoral process and
ensure polling sites are sufficiently staffed with qualified
personnel for the November 2012 Presidential
General and June 2014 Gubernatorial Primary Elections
by meeting the planned recruitment goals for poll
workers.
?? Process 100% of valid registrations received on or
before the 15-day close of registration by the seventh
day before the election to ensure eligible registrants are
printed in the official roster and have the opportunity to
vote a regular ballot.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Translate all voting and election material into Chinese
and support limited English-proficient Chinese voters
with bilingual poll workers for the November 2012
Presidential General and June 2014 Gubernatorial Primary
Elections. Support includes: translating website
content, ballot and sample ballot and voter information
pamphlet and other polling location material; and
implementing an outreach plan focused on the Chinese
community.
?? Ensure customer satisfaction with core services by
maintaining a 4.7 or better overall customer satisfaction
rating (on a scale of 1 to 5) during the transition to
a new ROV facility.
?? To encourage overall satisfaction and retention of volunteers,
mail all poll worker stipends in 15 working
days or less from Election Day for all elections in Fiscal
Years 2012-14 to ensure all poll workers are reimbursed
in a timely manner.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Realign voter precinct boundaries to the new Water
and Irrigation Districts redistricting boundaries as a
result of the 2010 decennial census before the November
2012 Presidential General election.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Continue encouraging employee awareness and
knowledge of safety and security concerns by holding
quarterly Safety and Security Committee meetings to
review accidents and identify high-risk security concerns.
?? Ensure 95% of poll worker trainers complete online
training assessments with scores of 90% (or higher) no
later than 26 days prior to the November 2012 Presidential
General Election and June 2014 Gubernatorial
Primary Election, ensuring knowledgeable instructors
are available and prepared to train poll workers.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Incorporate Management Controls Initiative by formulating
project plans that include scope, methodology,
schedule, deliverables and communication/training.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Continue to enhance the processing efficiency of voteby-
mail ballots by maintaining an automated mail ballot
processing system to screen, scan, sort, verify signature
and slice returned mail ballot envelopes, and by
verifying and reconciling ballots returned and counted.
?? Report 33% or more of all ballots cast in the Mail
Ballot report released after 8:00 p.m. in the November
2012 Presidential General and 2014 Gubernatorial
Primary Elections.
?? Achieve per-mail-ballot labor cost of vote-by-mail
ballots returned in the November 2012 Presidential
General and June 2014 Gubernatorial Primary Elections
at no more than 40 cents.

Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Negotiate fiscally prudent successor agreements with
23 of 25 existing bargaining units and 8 of 9 existing
employee organizations by July 2013. Negotiate fiscally
prudent successor agreement with 2 remaining bargaining
units and 1 employee organization by July
2014.
?? To continue to fund the delivery of superior services
throughout the San Diego County region, the Treasurer-
Tax Collector will invest public monies held in the Treasury
and maximize cash resources, without sacrificing
the principles of safety or liquidity, for an anticipated
weighted average rate of return of 0.60% in Fiscal Year
2012-13.
?? Arrange financing for the construction of a parking
facility at the intersection of Cedar Street and Kettner
Boulevard, including the sale of $19.2 million in longterm
obligations. The parking facility has been planned
in conjunction with the CAC Waterfront Park.

Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Submit 100% of federal, State and local financial
reports and annual financial statements that comply
with regulations and reporting standards for County
departments, outside government agencies, investors
and taxpayers by their due dates to ensure accountability
and transparency of financial transactions.
?? Provide open access to County business by making
audio recordings of Board of Supervisors meetings
available on the Internet in a timely manner.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Develop and deploy the Mobile Enterprise Application
Platform to facilitate the development and deployment
of mobile applications.
?? Complete the transition to a new Web-based legal
office practice management system (Tymetrix’s T360),
which manages all case and advisory information, has
calendaring capabilities, retains client and contract
information, stores supporting legal documents, and
tracks time and billing information.

Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Record property ownership in a timely manner facilitating
access to ownership information for the buying,
selling and financing of property.
?? Locate, identify and appraise all property so the public
and businesses are assured a fair and uniform assessment
of their property under the auspices of all applicable
State property tax laws, rules and regulations.
?? Record births, deaths, marriages and Fictitious Business
Name statements in a timely manner to enable the
public and businesses to establish identity in order to
conduct their affairs.
?? Complete Phase Two of Birth, Death and Marriage
Backfile Imaging Project to electronically preserve critical
recorded documents and vital records. Target start
date is July 2013 with completion by June 2014.
?? Redact identity information from documents recorded
during the period 1990 through 2008 in order to comply
with Government Code 27301a. Target completion
date is September 2013.
Required Discipline for Excellence - Fiscal Stability
?? Collect, distribute and account for all mandated fees
and transfer taxes so County departments, federal and
state agencies, cities and special districts can fulfill
their legal responsibilities.
?? Continue to review departmental fee structure to
ensure that costs for services are fully recovered.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Implementation of a new integrated recording and vital
records system. Full system implementation is scheduled
to occur by June 2013. This will allow the ARCC to
leverage necessary new technologies in order to maintain
a high level of fiscal stability and service to its citizens.
?? Implementation of the electronic recording module that
will allow the department to electronically accept
recorded documents. This is an immediate sub-phase
to the aforementioned integrated recording and vital
records system. Due to the extension of overall project
timeline, scheduled implementation is now between
October and December 2012. This will enable the
department to reduce document processing time and
enhance customer service.
?? Develop and implement both an internal and external
ARCC SharePoint site, a file sharing application. This
will provide a consolidated venue for all departmental
services and information for both staff and the public.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Provide the public with services that are of value to
them in a competent and professional manner and
achieve a customer service rating of at least 93%.
?? Provide the public with a variety of online forms and
related services. This will provide a more efficient and
effective level of customer service by leveraging the latest
in online form processing and electronic signature
technology.
?? Extend customer services at the Chula Vista branch
office; civil ceremonies to be offered in July 2012 and
document recording in January 2013.

Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? To safeguard public funds and maintain public trust,
will efficiently manage the provisions of banking services
for public entities and County departments. The
Treasurer-Tax Collector will also provide accurate
recording of all funds on deposit and facilitate daily reconciliation
of funds.
?? To continue to fund the delivery of superior services
throughout the San Diego County region, the Treasurer-
Tax Collector will invest public monies held in the Treasury
and maximize cash resources, without sacrificing
the principles of safety or liquidity, for an anticipated
weighted average rate of return of 0.60% in Fiscal Year
2012-13 and 0.70% in Fiscal Year 2013-14.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? To assist public agencies in making informed decisions
that minimize taxpayer cost when issuing debt and
ensuring correct and timely payments to bond holders,
the Treasurer-Tax Collector will provide broad-based
financial and consulting services to public agencies
within the San Diego County region.
?? Provide a learning platform and forum to address current
government finance issues by facilitating four seminars
for Fraud Prevention, Nonprofit Organization
Finance, Cash Handling, Debt Financing and Investment
of Public Funds for local agencies.

Tax Collection
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Maintain a collection rate of 97% for secured taxes,
and 97% for unsecured taxes by preparing and mailing
property tax bills/notices, and processing tax payments
in a timely manner to ensure timely revenue collection
on behalf of San Diego County’s taxpayers by
June 30, 2013.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Technology
?? Participate in the further development of the Integrated
Property Tax System (IPTS) in conjunction with the
Assessor/Recorder/County Clerk, Auditor and Controller
and County Technology Office to prepare for
deployment by a date agreed upon by the County and
the selected contractor.
Deferred Compensation
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Broaden the Countywide base of employees who are
planning for financial security during retirement by the
following measures:
?? Maintain enrollment in the Deferred Compensation
457 Plan at 48.0% through June 30, 2013 and
increase it to 48.2% by June 30, 2014.
?? Increase the average participant contribution in the
Deferred Compensation 457 Plan to $89 per pay
period by June 30, 2013 and to $91 by June 30,
2014.
?? Continue to educate employees on the Deferred
Compensation Plan by presenting two Investment &
Retirement Symposiums each fiscal year.
?? Continue to increase employee awareness and
understanding by conducting annual educational
workshops and redesigning promotional materials
and presentations to increase the knowledge base of
all employees.

During Fiscal Years 2012-14, the  
will work with the Board of Supervisors to ensure that
County government in San Diego remains fiscally sound,
operationally strong and able to meet the changing service
needs of County residents within available revenues. To
accomplish this, the CAO will continue to use the County’s
General Management System (GMS) to implement the
Board’s priorities, as well as to maintain the County’s established
management disciplines and commitment to innovation,
continuous improvement and excellence.
The CAO will continue to closely monitor changing economic
conditions and the uncertainties surrounding key
State revenue sources and will continue to work with CAOs
in other California counties to protect local revenues and
interests as the new State administration continues to redefine
State/County roles, responsibilities and revenues.
The CAO will also continue to enhance efficiency, productivity
and service quality throughout the organization by
identifying and implementing new ways of working that
enable the organization to better meet changing public
needs or program realities - using strategies that include
reengineering, expanded partnerships with other entities
that serve similar customers or have similar goals and use
of new technology tools.
Highlights of the CAO’s Fiscal Year 2012-14 Objectives and
how they relate to the County’s 2012-2017 Strategic Plan
are listed below. Additional accomplishments and detailed
information is provided in individual department and group
Operational Plan narratives. Together, they form a coordinated
strategy that enables the County to achieve its Mission
– “To efficiently provide public services that build
strong and sustainable communities” – and its Vision – “A
County that is safe, healthy and thriving.”
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Promote strategies that make neighborhoods safe
places to live, work and play:
?? Provide early intervention with at-risk youth in the
crime-prone years by implementing community oriented
policing strategies, stressing prevention, early
identification and timely intervention.
?? Educate residents through community outreach and
employ prevention and safety programs.

Provide safe and accessible parks and preserves,
foster innovative programs and initiatives that promote
government agency partnerships and community
involvement and enhance emergency
communications and preparedness.
?? Repaint and re-mark crosswalks and roadway legends
adjacent to all 121 public schools and 12 private
school locations throughout the unincorporated
area of the County.
?? Promote and implement strategies that protect residents
from crime.
?? Maintain a proactive law enforcement presence in
the unincorporated area and cities with whom the
County contracts.
?? Monitor offenders subject to community supervision
to mitigate new crime offenses.
?? Employ intelligence-led policing strategies to crime
problems at the local and regional level.
?? Provide for a strong, collaborative criminal justice system
that holds offenders accountable.
?? Collaborate with the local courts to ensure offenders
are appropriately detained or sanctioned.
?? Employ appropriate punitive measures that are balanced
with rehabilitation opportunities, where appropriate.
?? Ensure quality investigation and crime analysis that
leads to successful identification and prosecution of
offenders.
?? Reduce recidivism by implementing treatment strategies
that help offenders successfully reenter society.
?? Provide a continuum of treatment and diversion programs
while adult offenders are in jail, addressing
health and behavioral health.
?? Employ transitional services for offenders as they
exit out of detention facilities.
?? Integrate evidence-based practices and principles in
collaboration with community and justice partners.
?? Continue to strengthen the County’s and communities’
ability to prepare, respond and recover from disasters.
?? Collaborate with regional fire service agencies to
improve fire protection and emergency response services.
?? Engage residents, private sector and local jurisdictions
through community outreach events and emergency
readiness planning.
?? Complete a new GIS application for damage assessment
reporting during disasters. The new application
will increase reporting frequency and thus reduce the
time the County must wait for information on disaster
impacts.
?? Complete an environmental analysis of the Proposed
Eye Gnat Program and revised County Ordinance to
support an Eye Gnat Program for Board of Supervisors
approval and adoption.
?? Ensure food quality safety and integrity, and verify that
produce advertised as “organic” is registered and certified
as organic by increasing organic spot inspections
by 33% to 40 inspections.
?? Inspect 20 miles of targeted sewer mains and clean
390 miles of sanitary sewer collector mains to protect
public health and the environment by minimizing the
risk of overflows.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Promote green building, including sustainable building
practices, renewable energy and energy efficiency
through economic incentives such as reduced fees and
fee waivers.
?? Improve County operations through sustainability
efforts in alternative energy systems, energy conservation,
recycling, and green building design.
?? Protect a sustainable watershed via outreach, education,
inspections and develop plans to meet bacteria
levels in accordance with the San Diego Regional
Water Quality Control Board.
?? Protect water quality and promote water conservation
via workshops and the deployment of water kiosks
throughout the agricultural community and at various
annual events.
?? Acquire, develop and maintain facilities that support
and promote park stewardship and environmental sustainability
and efficiency.
?? Design and initiate construction on at least seven road
and road-related infrastructure improvement projects
that enhance the transportation network’s long-term
sustainability.
?? Promote increased civic engagement by increasing the
number of permanent vote-by-mail voters by 5% and
completing the addition of Chinese language to voting
and election materials.
?? Protect residential gardens and commercial produce
from insidious pest infestations and avoid the widespread
use of pesticides against new pests by placing
and maintaining traps designed for early pest detection.
?? Maintain the planned schedule of library operations
and current level of services, including an average of
200 after-school programs each month, at the County’s
33 branch libraries and 2 mobile libraries.
360
 
CAO Proposed Operational Plan Fiscal Years 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 Finance and General Government Group
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
Continue implementation of Live Well, San Diego! strategies
to provide the right services, to the right people, at the right
time by:
?? Building a better service delivery system that is innovative
and outcome-driven.
?? Implement Year 1 of the Community Transformation
Grant (CTG) support public health efforts to reduce
chronic diseases, promote healthier lifestyles, reduce
health disparities, and decrease health care costs.
?? Implement the Community Based Care Transition
program to reduce readmissions to hospitals by
Medicare recipients.
?? Evaluate data from the two pilot programs integrating
physical and behavioral health services.
?? Establish Extended Foster Care program, an outcome
from Assembly Bill 12, the California Fostering
Connections to Success Act, to extend foster care to
21 years of age.
?? Supporting positive choices that empower residents to
take responsibility for their own health and well-being.
?? Implement Year 1 of the Community Nutrition Education
Program (CNEP) grant to increase access and
nutrition education for CalFresh eligible or potentially
eligible clients.
?? Provide parent education in early literacy and school
readiness and nutrition education emphasizing
healthful nutrition practices, food safety and food
resource management.
?? Pursuing policy and environmental changes that make
it easier for people to engage in healthy and safe
behaviors.
?? Increase recreational opportunities and educational
programs at County parks to enhance park patrons’
experience and promote healthy lifestyles.
?? Complete and document community input to the six
regional Live Well, San Diego! plans by using the
MAPP process from the National Association of
County and City Health Officials.
?? Implement second phase of the succession plan to
advance Live Well, San Diego!
?? Begin improvements to Family Resource Centers
and ACCESS (a public benefits transaction call center),
including increasing accuracy of payment, and
technological enhancements to improve customer
service.
Required Disciplines for Excellence
Fiscal Stability
?? Negotiate fiscally prudent successor agreements with
23 of 25 existing bargaining units and 8 of 9 existing
employee organizations by July 2013. Negotiate fiscally
prudent successor agreement with 2 remaining bargaining
units and 1 employee organization by July
2014.
?? Continue to maintain the County’s high credit ratings
by managing within the construct of County GMS fiscal
disciplines, maintaining a structurally-balanced budget
and prudent reserves and ensuring that County residents’
tax dollars are spent as efficiently as possible.
?? Arrange financing for the construction of a parking
facility at the intersection of Cedar Street and Kettner
Boulevard, including the sale of $19.2 million in longterm
obligations. The parking facility has been planned
in conjunction with the County Administration Center
(CAC) Waterfront Park.
Skilled, Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Begin phase 2 of the Knowledge Integration Project
(KIP) to develop the foundation for information
exchange across multiple disciplines to improve the
information available and coordinate services for
shared clients.
?? To ensure the smooth delivery of future services and
continued organizational growth and improvement,
complete the first round of the County Mentor Partnership
Program and develop succession planning tools
that departments can use to enhance employees’ leadership
skills and support succession planning efforts.
Essential Infrastructure
?? Significant multi-year projects that are proposed for
Fiscal Year 2012-13 or in progress include:
?? New CAC Waterfront Park.
?? New parking structure at Cedar and Kettner streets
in San Diego.
?? Phase 1B of the County Operations Center (COC),
allowing the relocation of County staff from the COC
Annex, CAC and leased office space.
?? Development of the newly-acquired County property
on Chesapeake Drive, adjacent to the COC, to
include a new location for the Registrar of Voters.
?? Replacement Women’s Detention Facility.
?? New Rancho San Diego Sheriff’s Station.
?? East Mesa Reentry and Rehabilitation Facility.
Open the new Lincoln Acres Library, community room
and business offices for Sheriff staff and the Lower
Sweetwater Fire Protection District.
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Submit 100% of federal, State and local financial
reports and annual financial statements that comply
with regulations and reporting standards for County
departments, outside government agencies, investors
and taxpayers by their due dates to ensure accountability
and transparency of financial transactions.
?? Provide open access to County business by making
Board of Supervisors meetings available on the Internet
when they are held and afterward in audio and
video archives.
Information Services
?? Develop and deploy the Mobile Enterprise Application
Platform to facilitate the development and deployment
of mobile applications. Expand the mobile workforce
capabilities for building inspectors and code enforcement
through new systems that enable real-time
access to permit systems from mobile devices that
field inspectors will use. Explore and develop, where
appropriate, mobile applications to improve service
delivery and enhance the flow of information to the
public.
?? Complete the transition to a new Web-based legal
office practice management system (Tymetrix’s T360),
which manages all case and advisory information, has
calendaring capabilities, retains client and contract
information, stores supporting legal documents, and
tracks time and billing information. Continue implementation
of technologies, including an electronic content
management system, that facilitate paperless
processes in the courtroom.
?? Enhance customer service by providing Web access to
allow customers to perform land use file reviews without
coming into the office.
?? Reduce payment processing time and cost by implementing
bar coding of registration invoices sent to customers
who have point of sale systems to facilitate
faster processing of the payments.
?? Initiate the phased upgrade of the region’s aging
Regional Communication System (RCS), beginning
with replacing the RCS Core in Fiscal Year 2012-13,
and continuing planning for replacement of subsequent
major components to begin in Fiscal Year 2013-14.
?? Complete the replacement of the County’s aging legacy
Property Tax Collection system with a modern Integrated
Property Tax System in Fiscal Year 2013-14.
This project will replace the old technology currently
used to value properties, collect taxes and distribute
the revenue collected with a new system that will
enable the County to be more efficient, automate many
processes, and require less maintenance and support.
The new system will also give County property owners
the ability to complete certain required forms online
instead of traveling to County facilities or mailing physical
documents, improving customer satisfaction and
reducing the need for travel and printing.
Regional Leadership
?? Conduct the activities of the County Oversight Board to
conclude the programs and activities of the former
Redevelopment Agency.
?? Administer and participate in meetings of the federal
San Diego/Tijuana Air Quality Task Force to identify and
reduce air pollution problems in the border region in
order to better protect public health and the environment.
?? Develop standard operating procedures/fact sheets to
provide guidance on how to collaborate with other
agencies to collect and sample illegally disposed hazardous
waste from businesses with multiple locations
across the state. These procedures will be available for
use by the other Unified Program Agency’s throughout
the State.
Continuous Improvement and Innovation
?? Implement Board of Supervisors directed recommendations
to improve the land development process for
customers, streamlining the land development process
to reduce processing costs and time for customers as
well as the County.
?? Develop procedures and implement a program to scan
and enter emission inventory summaries into the Business
Case Management System – Accela (BCMS) at
the facility level by June 2013 to increase staff efficiency
in determining New Source Review requirements
and facility compliance status.
?? Increase operational efficiency by transitioning the Pesticide
Regulation Program enforcement response
determination document into the BCMS. This document
is used to track the action taken when a violation
is found.
?? Develop new communication channels to release
timely housing-related information in emergencies as
well as ongoing housing and community development
opportunities.
362
 
CAO Proposed Operational Plan Fiscal Years 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 Finance and General Government Group
?? Complete co-location of Public Administrator/Public
Guardian with Mental Health Conservatorship to
improve service coordination.
Customer Satisfaction
?? Promote and make customer service a top priority by
developing and providing customer service training
emphasizing customer focus in all LUEG management
and section meetings and instruct staff on good communication
skills with the public and regulated community.
?? Complete an implementation plan and draft changes to
the County Ordinance to institute a letter grading system
similar to the one used in restaurants for meat
markets and for mobile food facilities that prepare
food.
?? Implement Year 1 of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP) grant to implement a system for electronic
documents conversion and tracking, and to help
reduce processing time and minimize lost documents.

Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Submit 100% of federal, State and local financial
reports and annual financial statements that comply
with regulations and reporting standards for County
departments, outside government agencies, investors
and taxpayers by their due dates to ensure accountability
and transparency of financial transactions.
?? Process 100% of County payments within five business
days after receipt of invoice by Accounts Payable
to ensure timely payment of vendors and contractors.
The prompt payment of invoices ensures that the
County captures any discounts that are available for
early invoice payment.
?? Provide high quality audit services, including State
mandated and operational/performance audits, to
ensure the integrity of management control systems, to
improve performance across the enterprise, and to
ensure the most efficient use of resources.
?? Meet the arbitrage limit as established by bond counsel
within four months of the date of issuance of the Tax
and Revenue Anticipation Notes (TRANs). Meeting the
arbitrage limit within the specified time ensures that the
County avoids penalties associated with excessive
TRANs borrowing.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Earn the State Controller’s Award for Achieving Excellence
in Financial Reporting for the fiscal year ending
June 30, 2011.
?? Continue to apply for recognitions through the Government
Finance Officers Association – Certificate of
Achievement for Excellence in Financial Reporting for
the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the Award
for Outstanding Achievement in Popular Annual Financial
Reporting for the Popular Annual Financial Report,
and the Distinguished Budget Presentation Award.

Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? In coordination with the Assessor/Recorder/County
Clerk, Treasurer-Tax Collector and the County Technology
Office, continue the development and implementation
of the Integrated Property Tax System, which will
significantly improve property assessment, tax collection
and apportionment activities in the County.
?? Initiate the upgrade of the County’s budget application.
The upgrade of this application, which supports the
County’s overall budget development process, will
ensure continued support of this key application.
?? Document requirements necessary for the upgrade of
Revenue and Recovery’s Cashiering and Cash Management
System to create an online payment portal for
the collection of all county debt and improve compliance
with the State’s best practices as prescribed in
Penal Code §1463.007.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Maintain the County’s strong issuer credit ratings of
Aa1 (GSR) (Moody’s Investors Service), AAA (Standard
& Poor’s) and AAA (Fitch Ratings) to ensure lower debt
interest costs.
?? Accurately identify current and future revenue, as well
as cost and cash flow trends, in a timely manner in
order to facilitate allocation of limited resources to San
Diego County groups and departments.

Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Complete the project of upgrading the operating system
software to Windows 7 on all County desktop and
laptop workstations by June 30, 2013.
?? The County mobility roadmap was completed in May
2011 and outlined a strategy that enables County
employees to become “un-plugged” – a critical component
of the Government Without Walls vision. CTO
will develop and deploy Mobile Enterprise Application
Platform (MEAP) to facilitate the development and
deployment of mobile applications on or before
December 31, 2012.
?? Deploy technologies that will enable vendors, customers
and County employees to seamlessly, efficiently
and securely collaborate online and provide for a wide
variety of services.
?? Revise and update the IT standards and IT toolkit that
are used to develop online applications and services to
ensure that the new online capabilities are optimized
for use on all types of devices, including traditional
desktop computers, tablet devices, and smart phones.
?? In partnership with the Health and Human Services
Agency, implement a feasibility study for the Knowledge
Integration Project, which will create a method of
sharing information across business groups throughout
the County.
?? The County IDAM roadmap was completed in February
2012 and outlined a direction to deliver highly mature
identity management initiatives to County business
applications, including the identification of external citizens
requiring online services. The CTO will develop
and deliver a series of projects over the next two years
that will enhance access management, improve user
lifecycle management, optimize user repositories
(reduced to single sign-on), and automate management
reporting, auditing and monitoring.
?? Develop and deploy an internal, private cloud within
the County data centers based on virtual technologies
already in place. This new cloud strategy (applicable
only to certain applications) will provide a new billing
model based on usage or “pay as you go”.

Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Utilizing the results of the 2011 IT Customer Satisfaction
Surveys (including All County and IT Management
Surveys), CTO will conduct targeted research to determine
specific opportunities for continuous improvement,
develop strategies for implementing
improvement activities, and advance satisfaction in key
focus areas.
?? Develop a feedback process to assess how well infrastructure
and applications projects meet the needs of
County departments. Assess the extent to which the
solution was working for them, and determine whether
the projects achieved the results they expected.
?? Provide a comprehensive plan and infrastructure to
allow the County to securely manage a wide variety of
mobile devices for use by County employees (Bring
Your Own Device/Technology concept), as well as
establish the platform from which mobile applications
can be developed and hosted. This will eliminate the
need of carrying two mobile devices -- one for their
personal use and one for work.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Maintain IT costs for services at rates established in the
IT Outsourcing Agreement. New services will be
benchmarked and analyzed for best value to the
County to provide a fair and reasonable price.
?? Update IT cost management system (Chargeback) to
improve efficiencies in monitoring and reporting IT
costs to County users.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Complete the implementation of Project Portfolio Management
software (PPM), an HPES solution for managing
all aspects of Information Technology projects,
including status reporting, issues management, risk
management and time reporting.
?? Complete the implementation of Application Lifecycle
Management (ALM) software, an HPES solution for
managing applications through development, testing
and implementation.
?? Implement future phases of the Service Manager application
to modernize the tools and services used within
the County. This will provide a more efficient way of
performing required business functions used to deliver
services to constituents. These future phases may
include improvements to the existing asset management,
help desk, configuration and release management
tools.
?? Develop a retirement roadmap and any necessary evaluation
tools to assist departments with retiring business
applications. For example, as a result of the
recent Application Rationalization project, the CTO
identified several applications that have fewer than 10
users and are over 10 years old. Many of these applications
have minimal business value and can be expensive
to maintain due to outdated technology.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Provide regional and national leadership through participation
on advisory boards and speaking engagements.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Provide employees and community members with IT
learning opportunities via vendor fairs and IT education
days.

Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Achieve a positive customer satisfaction rating of 95%
or above.
?? Provide customers with hearings that are fair, impartial
and efficient in order to achieve legally sound decisions.
?? Ensure direct access to information through proper
referral of inquiries from departments, employees,
employee representatives and organizations and the
public, related to human resources matters.
?? Provide a neutral environment that facilitates open discussion
of issues for departments, employees and
employee representatives resulting in fair and unbiased
outcomes.
?? Resolve 55% of personnel disputes without the need
for a full evidentiary hearing resulting in time and cost
savings.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Participate in ongoing training in areas of human
resources, technology, workplace safety and pertinent
legal updates to increase staff’s knowledge in order to
provide superior customer service.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Ensure all decisions made by the Commission will take
into consideration fairness, due process and are in
compliance with the law. The decisions will be thoroughly
reviewed by Commissioners, staff and counsel.
?? Distribute at least 95% of Commission decisions within
48 hours of Commission approval in order to provide
timely notification of outcomes to parties and the public.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Maintain and update desk book manual on Commission
proceedings and easily searchable electronic
database of Commission case law and precedents,
counsel advice, key issues and other relevant information
to increase staff efficiency and effectiveness.

Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Ensure the efficiency and transparency of the property
tax assessment appeal process by processing property
tax assessment appeal applications quickly and accurately.
?? Provide open access to County business by making
audio recordings of Board of Supervisors meetings
available on the Internet in a timely manner.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Ensure satisfaction with services provided by achieving
consistently high ratings on surveys of over 2,000 customers.
?? Provide opportunities to San Diego residents by processing
and mailing 100% of completed United States
Passport applications on the same day they are
received.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
County Counsel will provide quality, accurate, effective and
timely legal advice to all County departments to enable
them to fulfill their mission and objectives in accordance
with the law, reduce the risk of liability and use taxpayer
dollars efficiently and effectively.
?? Complete 95% of all advisory assignments for the
Board of Supervisors and Chief Administrative Officer
by their due dates.
?? Complete 90% or more of all advisory assignments for
County departments by the agreed upon due dates.
?? Continue County Counsel law student internship program
to provide quality service to clients.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
County Counsel will aggressively represent the County in
litigation, maintaining fiscal stability while advancing the
overall interests of the County of San Diego and the public
it serves.
?? Resolve 80% or more of all lawsuits against the County
by a court decision/dismissal, and resolve 20% or less
by settlement.
?? Prevail in 90% or more of court decisions in all lawsuits
filed against the County.
?? Achieve a success rate of 90% or more in County code
enforcement and other lawsuits where the County is
the plaintiff by winning in court or obtaining favorable
financial settlements.
?? Handle 95% or more of the defense of all lawsuits filed
in California against the County, unless a conflict of
interest requires outside counsel to handle a case,
thereby reducing outside counsel costs to the County
and taxpayers.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? County Counsel will provide effective legal services to
the Health and Human Service Agency (HHSA) in matters
relating to children who have been dependents of
the Juvenile Court.
?? Prevail in 95% or more Juvenile Dependency petitions
filed in Superior Court.
?? Prevail in 95% or more in Juvenile Dependency
appeals and writs filed.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
County Counsel will support the County’s objective of promoting
responsible development, economic vitality and the
highest quality of life.
?? Complete 90% of all draft Environmental Impact
Report reviews within 40 days or less.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
County Counsel attorneys will engage in numerous leadership
roles in the County and throughout the State, which
will provide positive and constructive influences in the professional
practice of law in the region.
?? Maintain significant involvement in the activities of at
least 15 regional organizations and committees.


Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Develop and implement an automated “On-Boarding”
application to integrate and engage new employees
into the County work environment from onset of
employment offer through their first year of employment,
by June 2013.
?? Design and develop a system to track the electronic
routing and approval of classification activity requests
in order to streamline the process and provide
enhanced tracking capabilities.
?? Competitively procure a Medical Provider for the Workers’
Compensation and Medical Standards Program
contracts by September 2012; an Investigative Services
contract for Workers’ Compensation by August
2012; a Managed Care Services contract for Workers’
Compensation by July 2012 and an Employee Benefits
Broker and Consultant Services Contract by January
2014.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Develop and implement the second and third year
Employee Wellness Program components and maintain
a respective 10% and 15% employee program participation
rate.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Develop and implement an upgrade to the County’s
core Human Resources software application to
improve operational efficiency in personnel record
management, by December 2014.
?? Convert existing Procurement Card (P-Card) classroom
training content into Web-based materials and
resources for all P-Card holders and approvers by June
30, 2013.
?? Convert Workers’ Compensation paper case files,
where feasible, to electronic form to enhance file security,
enable more efficient sharing of data with authorized
personnel who require file access, and reduce
costs associated with the storage and production of
paper files by June 2013.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Maintain a high quality workforce by adhering to 98%
of established timelines for recruitment of County
employees.
?? Provide departments with positions that match their
staffing needs by completing 98% of classification
activity requests by established timelines.
?? Provide departments with assistance in creating succession
plans to assist them in forecasting and preparing
for future staffing needs and changes.
?? Implement Sexual Harassment Prevention training for
non-supervisors online to ensure Countywide completion
among all employees by June 30, 2013.
?? Reorganize the New Employee Orientation by June
2013 to streamline the session from a total of 8 hours
to 6 hours, which will enable employees to take mandatory
diversity training on the same day. This will
reduce classroom time and employee travel expense
by eliminating an additional day of classroom training.
?? Support the training needs of the Office of Emergency
Services on the Advanced Recovery Initiative by making
training available to approximately 3,000 employees
during Fiscal Years 2012-13 and 2013-14.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Negotiate fiscally prudent successor agreements with
23 of 25 existing bargaining units and 8 of 9 existing
employee organizations by July 2013. Negotiate fiscally
prudent successor agreement with 2 remaining bargaining
units and 1 employee organization by July
2014.

Satisfaction
?? Build credibility as the source of County information,
both internally among County staff and externally
among county residents.
?? Create easy-to-understand, complete instructions –
in written form or video – that explain where and how
the media and public can find information on County
websites. Complete 15 videos or articles in Fiscal
Year 2012-13, and another 15 in Fiscal Year 2013-14.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Create awareness among taxpayers about the value of
County programs and services, emphasizing the fact
that the County of San Diego is a responsible steward

of tax dollars by posting 190 video presentations in Fiscal
Year 2012-13 and another 190 in Fiscal Year 2013-
14.
?? Work proactively to deliver vital information including
County news, challenges and successes directly to
San Diegans and position the County to define itself,
rather than relying on traditional media to do so.
?? Update the County News Center regularly to establish
the site as a valid news source. Add at least one
new content item (article or video) every business
day for a total of 300 during Fiscal Year 2012-13, and
another 310 during Fiscal Year 2013-14.
?? Provide easy, on-the-go access to important County
information through social media. Increase number
of followers on Facebook and Twitter by 10 percent
during Fiscal Year 2012-13, and an additional 10 percent
during Fiscal Year 2013-14.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Participate in at least two drills to prepare for and
respond to major natural or manmade disasters
impacting the San Diego County region. Provide accurate
and timely emergency and recovery information to
the public and media, using a wide variety of traditional
and new media tools, such as the County’s new emergency
website, social media, new releases, video and
mobile technology.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Foster an environment of excellence, innovation and
exceptional customer service among County employees
who serve the public through the County’s intranet
site, posting 130 content items (article or video) in support
of the Strategic Initiatives and Required Disciplines
during Fiscal Year 2012-13, and another 135
during Fiscal Year 2013-14.