In response to the need for effective, safe and legal
ground squirrel management, the department will
collaborate with the University of California
Cooperative Extension to provide rodent control
training for agricultural producers. Sources for
registered rodenticide baits will be included in the
training material. The department will also
collaborate with local retail businesses to provide
training to non-agricultural producers concerning
ground squirrel management techniques in nonagricultural
settings where control options are more
limited.
? The department considers schools and licensed
daycare facilities as sensitive sites that may require
additional precautions when restricted use pesticides
are applied in proximity to these facilities. The
department will focus surveillance of pesticide use at
agricultural production sites located within onequarter
mile of schools and licensed day care
facilities.

? The department’s Templeton Office is now equipped
to serve as an emergency response hub or command
center for any type of emergency, including an
incident at the Diablo Canyon Power Plant.
Audio/visual equipment, Wi-Fi connections and a
radio base station were installed, enhancing
communication capabilities. Several departmental
vehicles were also equipped with mobile radios
specific to local emergency response frequencies.
Staff received training in the use of the Web EOC
computer program. The department’s Standard
Operating Procedure for the Diablo Canyon Power
Plant was updated. The department will continue to
work with the County Office of Emergency Services
to simulate activation of the Agricultural Information
Center in preparation for the Diablo Canyon Power
Plant Ingestion Pathway Exercise taking place in
2016.
? Senate Bill 485 established new weighmaster
licensing requirements for junk, scrap metal and
recycler businesses to help deter metal theft. To
receive a weighmaster license issued by the State,
operators must now demonstrate to weights and
measures officials that they possess the
photographic and fingerprinting systems required for
documenting certain scrap metal purchases. The
department will implement this new verification
program under contract and guidance from the
California Department of Food and Agriculture.
100% of the affected businesses will be inspected.
? To further the department’s succession planning
efforts, comprehensive training manuals for two
major Agricultural Commissioner/Sealer programs
will be developed. This will result in well trained staff,
continuity of departmental standards, procedures and
policies and uninterrupted delivery of high quality
service to customers.

Balance
Develop and implement water offset
programs for Urgency Ordinance 3246, an
ordinance covering new development
overlying the Paso Robles Groundwater
Basin.
Complete constraints mapping and draft an
ordinance that would set up a system to
allow new renewable energy projects to be
processed in a streamlined and cost
efficient fashion.
? Education
Expand the use of the department’s
YouTube channel to educate the public on
department services and programs making
the department and our services more
accessible and transparent.
Continue to provide training to the County’s
Community Advisory Councils in order to
create well-informed and trained Community
Advisory Council members.
? Leadership
Develop an electronic Desk Manual to
capture institutional knowledge to address
succession planning and employee
retirement and ensure consistent and
accurate permit processing.
Work with Federal Resource Agencies to
further the completion of the Habitat
Conservation Plan for the community of Los
Osos. Completion of this plan is a step
towards allowing additional development to
occur in Los Osos.
? Service
Continue to expand the types of permits
that can be obtained through an “e-permit”
to save our customers from having to drive
to San Luis Obispo to obtain a permit.
Operate a full service North County Service
Center to serve our North County
customers and save them from having to
drive to San Luis Obispo for services.

Distribute approximately $3.6 million dollars
in federal grant funds for affordable
housing, public facilities, public services
and economic development programs to
individuals, cities, unincorporated
communities and local non-profit
organizations.
? Rehabilitate El Camino Homeless
Organization (ECHO) in North County.
? Provide additional $187,144 to construct
sewer line replacement on 16th Street in
San Miguel.
? Use General Fund support to provide
shelter and other services for the homeless
persons and families.
? ADA improvements to the City of Morro
Bay Library.
? Provide additional $134,000 to Los Osos
Mobile Home Park to upgrade water/sewer
system.
? Provide $500,000 to Peoples Self Help
Housing Corporation to construct 33 rental
units in Cambria.

Work efforts on the Paso Robles Groundwater
Basin will include determining a successor to
the Blue Ribbon Committee, initiating formal
efforts on an enhanced AB 3030 Paso Robles
Groundwater plan, consideration of a
legislative platform, initiating feasibility efforts
and initial project development, and continuing
with modeling and technical evaluations of
problems.
? The department will continue to meet regularly
with Advisory Committees, the Public, the
Board of Supervisors, and numerous federal
and state agencies to discuss customer needs
and expectations and better serve the
department’s internal and external customers.
? Continue to work with the American Public
Works Association to assess the department’s
policies and procedures in all aspects of Public
Works duties with the goal of becoming
accredited by October 2014.

Complete the franchise renewal with Phillips 66
Petroleum.
? Develop a new County Code for State cable
franchise regulations.
? Work to transfer the Charter and San Simeon
Cable franchises to a State franchise.
? Complete water and sewer master plan
updates for the County Operations Center.
? Continue to work on the last phase of
infrastructure improvements required for the
Oak Shores (Lake Nacimiento) development
including road repair.

Chip seal or surface treat approximately 60
miles of roadway.
? Asphalt overlay approximately 5 miles of high
use arterial roadway.
? Continue to rehabilitate the roads in Los Osos
once collection system construction is
completed.
? Complete construction of San Miguel Gateway
? Phase II of the Price Canyon Road Widening
project
? Complete construction of the Cambria Main
Street Bridge Project over Santa Rosa Creek in
Cambria
? Begin construction of the Branch Mill Road
Bridge Project over Tar Springs Creek in
Huasna area.
? Complete major bridge painting project on
seven bridges county wide. 

Maintain high customer service satisfaction
ratings.
? Maintain a high live animal outcome rate.
? Review and update county animal care and
control codes to resolve current gaps and
deficiencies, provide improved clarity, and
address current animal welfare issues.

Establish court orders for child and medical
support for 97.4% of cases, to create a legal
basis for enforcing child and medical support
obligations, so that families are better able to be
self-sufficient.
? Collect 77.8% of all current child support owed,
so that children receive the support that they are
entitled to.
? Collect past due child support for 79.5% of
cases in which past due support is owed.
Collection of past due support can make the
difference between a family living in their own
home or living in a homeless shelter.
? Decrease cost to collection ratio to $3.25 by
collecting more support and reducing operating
costs.
? Maintain performance by continued focus on
collection of current and past due support, and
court order establishment.

Formalize the tracking of completed commercial
building pre-fire plans.
? Link pre-fire plans to mobile computers in fire
engines.
? Continue to increase county areas covered by
pre-fire and evacuation plans.
? Pursue additional grant funding to offset
operating costs and improve customer service.
? Continue re-directing department resources to
improve efficiency and cost-effectiveness of
operations, based on the Fire Service Level
Analysis.
? Continue to enforce fire ordinances to reduce
fire-related deaths and property losses.
? Utilize Homeland Security Grant funding to
improve technical and operational capabilities of
the department.
? Pursue additional employee development
opportunities.
? Continue rollout and enhancements of CAD to
CAD Mobile Data Computing (MDC) system.
? Continue site improvements at the new Fire
Training Drill Grounds at Camp San Luis Obispo.
? Continue efforts leading towards construction of a
new County Fire Headquarters facility funded by
the State.
? Work with the County Sheriff to advance the colocated
Emergency Dispatch Center to begin site
evaluation and preconstruction designs.
? Improve inventory management processes
through automation.
? Explore automation of vehicle maintenance
tracking and record-keeping.
? Provide training and equipment for our firefighters
for Active Shooter incidents.
? Work on Lessons Learned from Fukushima.

Limitations on office space and storage have
been a challenge for adequately
accommodating staffing and office needs.
Various on and off-site locations have been
considered and will continue to be explored in
the coming year.
? The development and implementation of an
ongoing, in-house attorney training program
continues to be discussed. Such a program
would enhance practices of veteran staff, as
well as bolster the younger less experienced
which have been hired in recent years due to
department budget limitations of recruiting
more experienced, senior attorney
candidates.

In June 2013 the San Luis Obispo County
Superior Court established a “Veterans
Treatment Court” as the result of amended
? Penal Code section 1170.9. Necessary
prosecution procedures were drawn and
implemented as a means to finding
appropriate dispositions to veterans’ criminal
charges by considering the defendant’s
treatment needs against the seriousness of
the offense(s) and the impact of the crime on
the victim and the community.
? The case of Missouri v. McNelly 569 U.S.
(2013) had an immediate, direct impact on
the District Attorney’s Office and quickly
necessitated a county-wide Driving Under the
Influence (DUI) Search Warrant Procedure
for forced blood draws. Pending further
statute change, the District Attorney’s Office
developed on-line procedural framework for
field patrol officers’ use in obtaining a DUI
search warrant for authorization by the
Superior Court and the District Attorney’s
Office use in the County of San Luis Obispo.
? A several months-long search and review
resulted in a significant change for on-line
attorney and investigator research tools.
? As the new Prosecutor by Karpel case
management system becomes fully
operational, additional changes will be
integrated as the office moves toward one that
? is nearly paperless. E-discovery and case
prosecutions replacing paper files with
electronic devices in the courtrooms are
entirely within reach, but will require
considerable planning and thoughtful
implementation. Each of these concepts will
continue to be a conversation as the courts
introduce wireless communications in the near
future.
? Careful planning for the retirements of office
staff in which roughly 30% are now of
retirement age. To avoid shortages and lack
of coverage in specialized areas, this will
entail ongoing review and identification of
staffing needs, recruitments, as well as
budgeting for those staffing changes in the
appropriate manner.
? Through collaboration with criminal justice
partners, develop and implement procedures
related to criminal justice realignment (AB
109) that affect crime victims’ rights or
services, including procedures for parole
revocation hearings, sheriff’s parole hearings
and restitution collection and disbursement.

Complete the update of the County’s Emergency
Operations Plan, which is the master plan for
emergency management planning and response
policies as approved by the Board of Supervisors.
? As the lead nuclear power plant emergency
management agency for the county, continue to
coordinate with local agencies and with the State
and FEMA on nuclear emergency readiness
including distributing more than 4,900 radiation
protection devices countywide and providing
related nuclear power plant emergency readiness
training and coordinating drills.
? Continue to act as local area fiscal agent to
oversee and coordinate State nuclear power plant
emergency readiness funding with the close to 40
jurisdictions and county departments.
? Implement the National Weather Service (NWS)
TsunamiReady program to promote tsunami
hazard preparedness in collaboration with federal,
state and local emergency management
agencies, the public, and the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

The Probation Department will produce
an annual statistical report which will
measure the outcomes of Probation’s
community correction services.
? Probation will begin construction on
phase three of the juvenile hall remodel.
? Probation will begin the development of
an in-custody treatment program in the
Juvenile Hall to reduce the number of
minors in group home placement.
? Probation will develop supervision
strategies to reduce the number of
probationers going to prison.
Continue construction on the Woman’s Jail
Project.
? Finalize construction of the Honor Farm
Laundry building.
? Further develop programs for inmates in the
jail that will change behavior and treat
drug/alcohol dependency.
? Continue community outreach through “town
hall” meetings.
? Complete building and finance plan on colocated
dispatch center with Cal Fire on,
Kansas Avenue.
? Continue strengthening our partnerships with
Local, State and Federal law enforcement
and commit resources to successfully
interdict and prosecute those who are using
our coastline as an entry point to smuggle
drugs and aliens.

Continue to meet all State and Federal
regulatory requirements.
? Complete the renewal of the franchise
agreement with Paso Robles Country Disposal.
? Obtain permits for the pump and treat facility at
the closed Los Osos Landfill.
? Work with other agencies to develop a regional
approach to Community Based Social Media
efforts for the NPDES program.

Monitor, analyze, and adapt to changing
treatment environment created by new Medi-
Cal eligibility and benefits.
? Increase departmental adherence to State and
Federal compliance requirements through
enhanced training, supervision, and monitoring.
? Complete implementation of the Behavioral
Health Electronic Health Records system in all
areas of the department.
? Continue integration of mental health and
substance use services both clinically and
operationally.
? Increase training in specific clinical areas,
including trauma-informed care, 0-5 age
specific interventions, and other evidence
based, recovery-oriented treatment modalities.
? Develop new a orientation program for all
department staff.
? Initiate outpatient detoxification program for
opiate addictions.
? Continue to work collaboratively with forensic
agencies to enhance rehabilitation and
treatment for both substance use disorders and
mental health challenges in this population.
? Explore options for in-custody restoration to
competency.
? Increase collaboration for children’s services
with Department of Social Services for Katie A
“sub-class.”
? Continue successful collaboration with schools
for children who are eligible for public mental
health services.
? Explore and increase substance abuse
treatment services for youth, including
introduction of Drug Medi-Cal services on high
school campuses with three new school
contracts added in the first year.
? Provide Mental Health First Aid training to over
100 community members, including agency
and school personnel.
? Expand crisis services to better meet the needs
of the community.

Development and integration of the DUI
program into the Behavioral Health
Electronic Health Records.
? Improve client assessment methods in
order to provide more individualized
services to the clients within a regulated
and standardized treatment program 

Pursue legal remedies (e.g., contract with
California Department of Corrections &
Rehabilitation-state prisons or long-term care
facilities to house medically fragile inmates)
for alternate placement of inmates whose
medical needs exceed capacity of the LEMC
unit.
? Continue working toward use of an EHR
system with an implementation goal of FY
2015-16.
? Seek efficiencies in medication storage and
distribution as well as medical record
maintenance, through an ergonomic
evaluation of the medication room and use of
trays, and completion of a record scanning
project to avoid off-site record storage,
respectively.
? Implement optometry care and enhanced
dental services for long-term inmates.
? Work with Custody and Department of Social
Services to enroll eligible, hospitalized
inmates in Medi-Cal to increase revenue.
? Continue educating minors on safe sex
practices; further increase the number tested
for STIs and referred for birth control.

Solidify processes and Memorandum of
Understanding with DSS for performance of
enrollment function.
? Conclude the cost and feasibility study for a
MISP TPA agreement.
? Rectify and pay claims, as appropriate, for care
rendered to all remaining Medi-Cal pending
clients from previous fiscal years.
? Provide care coordination assistance to clients
who would have previously been eligible for
CMSP or are deemed eligible for the new MISP
(est. 350).

Implement Electronic Laboratory Reporting
to state California Reportable Disease
Information Exchange (CalREDIE) system
? Implement a system to accept online credit
card payments from Environmental Health
customers
? Conduct state-mandated five-year needs
assessment for Maternal, Child and
Adolescent Health program
? Work with seven municipal Parks and
Recreation departments to strengthen
sugar-sweetened beverage policies and
increase access to drinking water
? Complete at least two components of the
three pre-requisites (Strategic Plan,
Community Health Needs Assessment and
Community Health Improvement Plan) for
seeking Public Health Accreditation
? Complete update of all Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
policies, in collaboration with Behavioral
Health to ensure all new standards are met
and that the County is prepared for any
possible federal audits.
? Develop an android-based version of the
widely utilized San Luis Obispo EMS smart
phone application for Advanced Life
Support (ALS) treatment protocols to make
timely, current treatment protocols
available to paramedics in the field, and
mobile intensive care nurses in the base
hospitals
? Continue to support Hands-Only CPR
training in partnership with public safety
agencies and the four hospitals
? Conduct a full-scale multi-agency drill
testing the County’s ability to respond to a
multi-casualty incident caused by a
hazardous chemical release 

Completed and presented an Emergency Medical
Services(EMS) Field Study to evaluate contract
ambulance response time performance and
standards; suggested revised geographical
boundary standards for future reviews
? Completed several Emergency Preparedness
goals: Health Agency Continuity of Operations
Plan, Vaccination drill for 1,300 first responders
and Medical/Health drill with 4 hospitals on largescale
outbreak (E.Coli)



The department will coordinate effectively with the
County’s Health Agency in ensuring a smooth
transition of the County Medical Services Program
(CMSP) population into Medi-Cal, as well as
managing the residual Medically Indigent Services
Program (MISP).
? The County will continue to surpass State
averages in at least 75% of performance
measures related to Child Welfare Services.
? The department will ensure effective
implementation of the 100,000 Homes initiative,
including monitoring of case management services
to ensure that they are being provided to the
individuals found to be most at risk.
? The County will meet or exceed all Federal
requirements under the Workforce Investment Act.
? Continue to collaborate with other County
departments and provide a high level of support to
the Homeless Services Oversight Council (HSOC)
to address homeless issues within the community.
? Acquire additional space in the coastal region of
the County to better serve clients in that area, and
continue with efforts to expand office space in the
North County region to accommodate increased
caseload in that area.
? Continue to pilot implementation of the Statemandated
Resource Family Approval program
which aligns the rules for becoming Foster and
Adoptive parents to support permanency for
Foster children.

The department will continue advocating and
assisting the County’s veterans in obtaining
their benefits and services earned through
military service. We will continue to work with
agencies at the Federal, State, and local level
to make sure our counties veterans are taken
care of. We will be continuing to exploring
new and more efficient ways of processing the
veterans claim to get them their benefits and
services as quickly as possible.
? The department has become a focal point for
our veteran’s community for all organizations
that assist veterans and their families. We
continue to work with our fellow service
providers in the community to disseminate
information through the Veterans community
in as timely a manner as possible.
? We are continuing to grow our veterans
outreach services to returning service
members and local veterans. We will
continue to look for ways to better reach the
counties veterans where they live, work, and
play and to make sure all county veterans are
aware of all the benefits and services they
have earned by serving our country. One way
we will be doing this is to open a new satellite
office on the north coast in Morro Bay,
Cayucos or Cambria. We will also be looking
to expand current outreach programs like the
VetSurf program, participation in local
Farmers Markets and other new innovative
ways we can reach our local veterans.
? The office will conduct its second annual
Stand Down. It will be expanded to cover 48
hours and hopefully reach a greater number
of the 200+ homeless veterans living in our
community and those veterans who are at risk
of becoming homeless. This event is a
collaborative effort with 30+ other agencies
from the Federal, State, and local level.
? Staff will continue to attend training sessions
throughout the year to maintain their
accreditation and to remain current on the
ever-changing laws that effect veterans and
their claims.
Complete construction of the Rental Car Quick
Turnaround Area (QTA) increasing convenience
and efficiency for rental car services.
? Implement parking payment technology to
enable customers to extend payment term using
a mobile application.
? Obtain $6 million in additional project funding to
the existing $14 million, securing $20 million total
for Construction Phase of New Terminal
Building. Pending Board approval of the
development of a new terminal building, 

County through an Airline Revenue Guarantee
Program.
? Developed a Pavement Management System at
the Regional Airport to enable efficient
maintenance practices and planning for future
capital projects.
? Completed design and development of New
Terminal Building utilizing Federal Grant
funding.
construction will span over two fiscal years,
beginning in FY 2014-15.
? Continue Community partnership for recruiting
additional commercial air service to the County,
including identifying new carriers and routes.
? Obtain and implement Property Management
software to increase the efficiency of managing
$1.1 million in annual airport leases.
? Solicit a Request for Proposal and negotiate with
new tenant for site Lima (former American Eagle
Hangar) to increase airport revenues.

Seek grants for research and extension
education programs in all our program
areas. Continue to compare the County’s
fiscal contributions to our department with
benchmark counties.
? By increasing the iThrive Training Team,
the SLO County 4-H Master iThrive
program will reach the goal of having three
pilot iThrive projects in our county. Staff
vacancy and turnover required that we
postpone our initial efforts to implement the
three pilot iThrive Projects in the FY 2013-
14 budget year. We anticipate that we will
be able to begin focusing on this goal in FY
2014-15.
? Significantly increase the response rate for
new and existing performance measures
through the use of audience response
software, and paper evaluations where
needed, that allows us to demonstrate that
UCCE provides “high quality, resultsoriented
services that are responsive to
community desires.”

UCCE Farm Advisors have been on the
forefront of sustainable agricultural
practices in the County for decades and
that tradition is continuing in FY 2013-14.
Horticulture Advisor Mary Bianchi
continues to develop outreach tools for
fresh produce buyers and food safety
professionals, educating them about onfarm
practices that manage for multiple
outcomes including protection of surface
and groundwater quality and safe
production of food.
? Viticulture and Soils Farm Advisor Mark
Battany continues to evaluate potential
practices for vineyards to conserve water
and reduce their overall irrigation water
requirement. Management practices such
as limiting cover crop growth in the spring
to maximize stored soil moisture, reducing
soil evaporation losses from surface
irrigation applications, and developing
viable alternatives to sprinkler frost
protection can help reduce the quantity of
irrigation required without resulting in a
reduction in vineyard productivity.
? Small Farms and Specialty Crops Advisor
Mark Gaskell expanded existing blackberry
pruning and water management trials to
optimize production for different target
market windows. Long term blueberry
cultivar trials at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo
have identified three promising varieties for
growers to expand and extend production
and marketing seasons into August and
September.
? The San Luis Obispo County 4-H Office
continues to work with Community Club
Leaders to incorporate iThrive Language
by sending out iThrive updates via e-mail
correspondence as well as incorporating
iThrive objectives and terminology in leader
trainings. In addition, an iThrive
presentation was given to Jr. Teen Leaders
and Club Officers who attended the annual
County Youth Development Workshop.
This presentation included youth activities
designed to highlight spark identification,
goal management and self-reflection.

Seek funding and secure permits to
pursue the replacement of the Morro Bay
Golf Course irrigation mainline.
? Continue to work with the Golf Course
Advisory Committee and concessionaire
partners to revise and update golf play
policies to benefit golf customers.
? Offer more player development programs
to introduce 200 new players to the game
of golf.
? Develop conceptual plans to create a
Monarch Butterfly interpretive trail
through Morro Bay Golf Course.
? Build and install owl boxes at Chalk
Mountain Golf Course to help reduce
rodent population through non-chemical
controls.
? Increase total rounds of golf by 3,000
rounds or 2% compared to current rounds
played.

A newly-remodeled library will open in Morro
Bay.
? Change existing hours of operation to facilitate
more convenient and customer-friendly access
to library services.
? Continue process improvement and customerservice
models.
? Increase access to information through the
removal of artificial barriers like the $1 hold fee.
? Improve operational efficiencies through staff
reorganization.
? Build stronger ties with our Foundation and
Friends of the Library groups to create greater
cohesiveness and targeted fundraising goals to
further improve library services to the
community.
? Refine our customer-service model by updating
policies/procedures and ensuring consistent
best practices are upheld throughout the library
system.
? Create a detailed, branch-by-branch 5-year
countywide maintenance/repair plan.

Implement the Day Use and Facility modules for
the new reservation system allowing for 24/7
reservations for park day use and facility rentals.
? Implement the first year of the five year business
plan for Camp Mabel French reconfiguring,
updating infrastructure and managing the camp.
? Seek additional opportunities to partner with
volunteer groups to help in the maintenance of
Parks facilities and infrastructure.
? Seek additional Rainbow Trout plants at Lopez
Lake to increase recreational opportunities for the
public and generate additional program revenues.
? Continue to create new and comprehensive
marketing strategies, advertising and promotions to
increase use and revenue opportunities.
? Replace severely damaged and missing piles on
Cayucos pier, restoring structural stability to the
historic pier.

Continue to coordinate the programs and services
provided by multiple departments to ensure that the
County is able to provide vital services to residents.
? Continue to expand the use of the automated
agenda management system by integrating the
Planning Commission eliminating up to 36,000
sheets of paper annually.
? Lead the Energy Community of Interest and
Executive Steering committee in the development
of long term strategies to improve energy efficiency
and increase use of renewable resources in County
facilities decreasing the County’s greenhouse gas
emissions.
? Begin Budget Preparation system replacement
effort including initial project requirements
gathering, analysis, and the release of a request for
proposal for software solutions and implementation
partners.
? Continue the evolution of the extremely well
received Annual Report, increasing accessibility
through the implementation of new techniques and
multimedia experiences.
? Assist in the feasibility evaluation of a joint colocated
dispatch facility integrating Sheriff and
County Fire for increased efficiency and possible
cost reductions.
? Provide leadership on the Paso Groundwater Basin
water management efforts and countywide drought
related activities.

Elimination of the workload backlog, which is
expected to be equal to the 9,371 work items
remaining at the end of FY 2012-13.


Continued participation in the Property Tax
System Modernization Project. The Assessor’s
Office staff will be heavily involved in testing
and implementing the new platform.

? Expedite the creation of Assessor Parcel Maps
in the Geographic Information System (GIS) to
improve accuracy of the base map parcel layer.

? Migrate to Office 2013, which will involve
training for all staff and a major upgrade of the
Assessment Evaluation Service (AES)

? Continue to document all office policies and
procedures, and continue to implement more
staff training as part of the succession plan.

Begin project to replace the County’s DOS
based Budget Preparation (BP) System
with a modern integrated software product.
The first phase of the project will include
requirements gathering and the issuance of
a Request for Proposal. The project will be
a team effort involving staff from the
Auditor-Controller’s Office, the
Administrative Office, and Information
Technology. Implementation work is
planned to begin in FY 2015-16.
? Continue to enhance the SAP BI system by
creating more standard reports and adding
more data for use by end-users in writing
their own reports. Initial priority will be
completing initial project reports, and when
complete, new BI development requests
will be prioritized.
? Apply latest SAP enhancement pack to
bring EFS to the current release level and
maintain readiness for new functionality.
? Continue working on the top four
consolidation objectives identified in the
previous year. These include creating an
optimal office structure, promoting an
integrated office culture, maximizing
human resources, and optimizing the office
layout.

Replace aging technology by upgrading
and re-platforming the software system
that manages cashiering and all Recorder
and County Clerk functions.
? Replace voting system with upgraded
system that takes advantage of current
technology, yet still maintains the integrity
of the voting experience expected by San
Luis Obispo County voters.
? Replace historical Board of Supervisors
index to provide greater search
capabilities as well as expand access to
other departments and the public. This
will remove the remaining Clerk-Recorder
legacy system from the mainframe.
? Conduct a Request for Information (RFI)
for election services including equipment
delivery and ballot and sample ballot
printing to ensure the best possible price
for services.
? Expand electronic filing to include
campaign finance statements. This will
not only save staff time in reviewing

There will also be time savings for the
DCSS staff.
? Successful implementation of the
electronic filing system to track Conflict of
Interest filers and allow electronic filing of
annual conflict of interest forms. During
the annual filing period, this is estimated
to result in savings of between 150 to 250
staff hours.
and filing documents but will assist
campaigns in managing their filings and
quickly make redacted information
available online for public access.

Complete the consolidation of the offices with the
Auditor-Controller, creating common office
technology infrastructure, realigning and crosstraining
staff, and improving efficiencies and service
levels.
? Continue to partner with the Information Technology
Department and the Assessor to convert the
County's mainframe property tax system to a
modern database environment within the next year.
The department will concurrently re-write the "Taxes
on the Web" program to take advantage of the
improved database to enable better information and
online services available to the public.
? Continue to increase electronic payments and
processing, by using billing inserts, press releases,
and general taxpayer correspondence to further
market “Go Green” e-Billing and paperless billing
programs, and to promote use of e-check payments
without additional fees to pay property taxes online.
This furthers the department’s mission of providing
quality service while reducing costs. For FY 2014-
15, the department expects to process over 90,000
payments electronically.

Provide Legal Counsel on the following
major projects:
o Juvenile Hall expansion project
o Paso Robles ground water basin
governance and management
o Continued construction of the Los Osos
Wastewater project
o Los Osos Habitat Conservation Plan
o Women’s jail expansion project

Begin construction of SB81 funded Juvenile
Hall Expansion project.
? Replace severely damaged and missing piles
on Cayucos pier, restoring structural stability
to the historic pier.
? Continue to manage the multi-year
construction on the AB900 funded Women’s
Jail Expansion project to the planned budget
and October 2016 completion date.

Achieved substantial completion of the
Atascadero Library and North County
Service Center to expand library space and
provide needed County services.
? Implemented electronic procurement
bidding; adding 2,350 new vendors, a 450%
increase, while saving 450 annual staff
hours.
? Reached successful resolution of a
Memorandum of Understanding between
the County and the Nipomo Community
Services District for the location of Jim O.
Miller Park in Nipomo.
? Established a San Luis Obispo County
Purchasing Alliance creating a
Memorandum of Understanding with cities,
Cal Poly, and State agencies providing
savings and transparency.
? Continue to manage the total inventory of
approximately 90 construction and
maintenance projects to planned schedules
and budgets.
? Complete SAP update to allow for better
tracking and reporting of metrics for plant
maintenance and capital projects.
? Define standard dashboards to report on key
performance indicators highlighting
operational and financial performance.

Complete California Air Resources Board (CARB)
diesel emissions final tier level through the
replacement of the final two County vehicles that
don’t meet the CARB Tier IV emission
requirements.
? Implement fleet size reduction program targeting
3% reduction of underutilized vehicles.
? Select and build up Sheriff’s Canine patrol Sport
Utility Vehicles to replace the Crown Victoria
Police Interceptor.
? Implement revised emission testing and
certification processes as required by the Bureau
of Automotive Repair.

Complete, on-time and within budget, all ITESC
directed projects.
? Support the implementation of a new Warrants
management system that will improve
efficiencies with the Sheriff’s Office and further
reduce the reliance on the County’s
mainframe.
? Upgrade the County information network and
storage systems to maintain reliable,
adaptable, and cost effective services to all
County facilities and support the growth of
information.
? Complete the migration of the County’s

Supported the Superior Court’s
implementation of a case management
system and ensured continued integration
with County systems.
Property Tax System off the mainframe to a
modern technology platform.
? Migrate the County email and scheduling
system to a new system that will meet the
mobile needs of our workforce and provide
better integration with other County systems.
? Complete a strategic plan creating a roadmap
to bring additional government services and
information online.

Negotiate with the seven employee bargaining
units that have open contracts in FY 2014-15 in
compliance with the Board’s Labor Strategy.
? Engage with the newly identified organizational
development vendor to greatly expand the
Employee University. Countywide employee
development opportunities through new
supervisory and management academies will
develop talent and support succession
planning initiatives.
? Maintain high performance of Risk
Management programs.
? Focus on impacts of the Affordable Care Act,
with emphasis on employment-related
compliance.
? Through collective bargaining, attempt to
reduce number of employees who “opt out” of
the County’s medical benefit plans to increase
opportunities for competitiveness in healthcare
market by eliminating incentive language in
100% of labor contracts.