Partner in the County’s emergency response
plan for the Diablo Canyon Power Plant. The
department will train three additional staff to fully
participate in the fall 2016 extensive, large scale
multiday federally evaluated nuclear power plant
exercise. The department will demonstrate the
ability to assist in the protection of public safety
related to ingestion pathway scenarios involving
local agricultural products.
? In response to new state regulations under
development for the cultivation of medical
marijuana, the department will collaborate with
state and county agencies to establish internal
policies to: define the department’s role in
monitoring and enforcement, train staff in
preparation for potential inspection of marijuana
crops, enforce pesticide use requirements and
test weighing devices used for commercial
commerce of medical marijuana products.

providing participants a greater understanding of
the county organization as a whole.
? Launched a regionalization approach for
inspection of routine weighing and measuring
devices in the county. Additional equipment has
been obtained and certified for the use in weights
and measures activities. Inspectors are stationed
out of the department’s three regional offices, with
specialized equipment and vehicles. As a result,
staff was able to respond to consumer complaints
and service requests from industry within 24 hours
96% of the time, compared to 63% of the time in
FY 2014-15.
? New pesticide permit conditions recommended by
the California Department of Pesticide Regulation
for the use of fumigants containing chloropicrin
were incorporated into the San Luis Obispo
County’s pesticide permit conditions. The
regulated community was informed of these
changes. During the first half of FY 2015-16 staff
monitored field fumigation jobs for compliance and
determined that 92.6% of jobs inspected were in
compliance with all of the inspection criteria,
ensuring protection of workers, the public and the
environment.
? In collaboration with the California Department
of Food and Agriculture (CDFA), the department
will implement AB 1871, which provides
enhanced regulatory oversight of Certified
Farmers’ Markets and Certified Producers. The
bill offers more enforcement options through
collaboration with Agricultural Commissioners
statewide to preserve the integrity of direct
marketing activities. 100% of production and
market inspections requested through the CDFA
Certified Farmers’ Market Inspection
Cooperative Agreement will be accomplished to
verify products offered for sale at local Certified
Farmers’ Markets are grown or produced by
certified sellers or producers.
? Implement the new statewide California
Pesticide Enforcement Activity Tracking System
and train nine Pesticide Enforcement Inspectors
to use the system on mobile inspection tablets.
The tracking system is designed to collect
statewide standardized pesticide use
enforcement data. This will provide greater
access to statewide pesticide use data and
enforcement actions which will help identify
trends, enhance the speed and accuracy of
communication with other County Agricultural
Commissioners and eliminate redundancies in
data entry processes.


Balance
San Miguel Community Plan update will complete.
Publish a public review draft of the Los Osos
Community Plan by Fall 2016.
• Education
Conduct outreach to the community for the
Energy Watch energy efficiency audits and
financing program throughout Fiscal Year 2016-
17.
Revise annual Community Advisory Training to
provide relevant and updated topics, by winter
2017.
• Leadership
Complete and coordinate department charters to
align mission and strategies.
Hold quarterly Building User Group meetings to
improve communication with the development
community.
• Service
25% of Building applications will be submitted
electronically.
Provide permit processing/inspections for 4,500
sewer connections to Los Osos Wastewater
Treatment Plant.

Distribute approximately $3.7 million in Federal
grant funds for affordable housing, public
facilities, public services and economic
development programs to individuals, cities,
unincorporated communities and local non-profit
organizations.
• Use General Fund support to provide shelter
and other services for the homeless persons
and families.
• Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA) improvements to Cities of Morro Bay
for Pedestrian Accessibility project, Paso Robles
Handicap Ramp improvements, and Atascadero
Mall Sidewalk Infill and crosswalk.
• Provide $401,000 to Los Osos Wastewater
Program – Assistance program for
disadvantaged persons in financing sewer
lateral connection.
• Provide $500,000 to Peoples Self Help Housing
Corporation to acquire affordable housing for
Rolling Hills and Los Robles Terrace.

Complete construction of the Shandon State
Water Turnout.
• Continue to coordinate work efforts to meet the
requirements of the newly passed Sustainable
Groundwater Management Act (SGMA).
• Continue to meet regularly with advisory
committees, the public, Board of Supervisors,
and numerous Federal and State agencies to
understand customer needs and be a valued
partner enhancing quality of life for our fellow
county residents through effective and
transparent management of County
infrastructure.

Complete transition from the construction phase
to the startup phase of operations. The startup
phase will take approximately six months.
• Complete the process of connecting the nearly
4,700 customers by the end of FY 2016-17
according to the phased connection plan.
• Begin collecting user charges on property tax
bills.
• Begin sales of recycled water to meet permit
conditions.

Complete water master plan update for the
County Operations Center.
? Construct Kansas Avenue waterline
improvements to provide necessary fire flow to
the Juvenile Hall expansion and new Sherriff
Dispatch Center.
? Engage community on infrastructure
improvements required for the Oak Shores
(Lake Nacimiento) development.
? Complete the franchise renewal with Phillips 66
Petroleum.
? Work to renew or transfer the San Simeon Cable
franchises to a State franchise.
? Replace the outdated Special Districts Budget
Preparation System in coordination with the
County’s Budget Preparation System
replacement.

Chip seal or surface treat approximately 60
miles of roadway to improve pavement
preservation.
• Asphalt overlay approximately five miles of highuse
arterial roadway to improve pavement
preservation.
• Widen Buckley Road in San Luis Obispo.
• Install left turn lane on El Camino Real at Santa
Clara in Atascadero.
• Complete Price Canyon Road Widening Phase
II construction.
• Complete Federally funded bridge maintenance
projects on eight bridges throughout county.
• Install centerline rumblestrips on 82 miles of
roadway, countywide.
• Install two new traffic signals in Nipomo.

Maintain a live animal outcome rate of 90% or
above.
? Facilitate collaborative review of county-wide
animal care and control ordinances with the
objective of establishing conformity between
jurisdictions.
? In conjunction with Public Works staff, finalize
evaluation and pre-planning for a new shelter
facility by completing negotiations with the cities
to determine which cities plan to participate, and
hire a construction management firm.

Establish court orders for child and medical
support for 96.7% of cases, to create a legal
basis for enforcing child and medical support
obligations, so that families are able to be more
self-sufficient.
? Collect 78.9% of all current child support owed,
so that children receive the support that they are
entitled to.
? Collect past due child support for 82.2% of
cases in which past due support is owed.
Collection of past due support can make the
difference between a family living in their own
home or living in a homeless shelter.
? Finalize and begin implementation of the
department’s five year Strategic Plan.
? In an effort to maintain and improve on overall
performance and cost effectiveness, study and
analyze the services provided under the
Memorandum of Understanding with the District
Attorney’s Office.

Continue efforts to improve the tracking of
completed commercial building pre-fire plans to
improve fire safety.
? Complete linking of pre-fire plans to mobile
computers in fire engines.
? Continue to increase county areas covered by
pre-fire and evacuation plans.
? Continue re-directing department resources to
improve efficiency and cost-effectiveness of
operations, based on the Fire Service Level
Analysis.
? Continue to enforce fire ordinances to reduce
fire-related deaths and property losses.
? Utilize Homeland Security Grant funding to
improve technical and operational capabilities of
the department.
? Continue efforts leading towards construction of
a new County Fire Headquarters facility.
? Work with the County Sheriff to advance the colocated
Emergency Dispatch Center project
toward construction.
? Improve inventory management processes with
the use of our new inventory software system.

Develop a First Responder video to include
victims with disabilities which Victim/Witness
Division advocates will present as a training
opportunity to all 35 county law enforcement
agencies.

Implementation of a pre-filing Misdemeanor
Diversion Program (MDP) as an alternative for
low-level and non-recidivist offenders who commit
petty crimes. Studies show such programs
reduce these types of cases within the criminal
court system, reduce recidivism, and ultimately
reduce crime in the community.
? Establishing separate vertical prosecution units for
both the Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault
assignments. A division of these units provides
for more specialized Deputy District Attorney case
handling and less trauma to the victim who by
virtue of the vertical prosecution unit will remain
with the same attorney from filing through trial.
? Full staffing of Victim/Witness Division advocates
have allowed for contact with victims of crime
within 72 hours to increase from 81% to 84%
during the First Quarter of FY 2015-16, as well as
provide for a full-time position dedicated to
property crime victims who were previously
attended to intermittently by college interns.
? Successful prosecution and conviction of the first
two human trafficking cases investigated and
prosecuted in San Luis Obispo County. Two
additional human trafficking cases are ongoing
and pending adjudication.
? Expand victim advocacy services and outreach
awareness programs for the
unserved/underserved population to additionally
include victims with disabilities.
? During Crime Victims’ Month (April 2017),
commemorate the 40th anniversary of San Luis
Obispo County’s Victim/Witness Assistance
Division recognizing their help with the problems
that crime victims, witnesses, and their families
experience as a result of victimization.
? Update the Office Policy and Procedures
manual. Void of significant revision or rewriting
since 2010, this living document must be
refreshed and communicated throughout the
department in a documented, organized, and
accessible manner so as to convey clear
guidelines and procedures.
? Develop our Public Integrity Unit responsible for
supervising the investigation of cases involving
corruption of public officials and employees in
their official capacities or in the performance of
their duties. This unit would additionally enforce
the provisions of the Political Reform Act as it
relates to campaign filings and practices and the
Elections Code, as well as issues surrounding
the Brown Act.
? Redesign the department’s website and provide
an interactive way in which to inform and
educate the public and the press. A fresh,
innovative, and ever changing website will allow
the office to be more open and transparent and
provide a vehicle in which to deliver information
to the public quickly and accurately.
? In conjunction with IT, complete development of
department-wide data reports to adequately
measure productivity. Since implementation of
the case management system in November
2013, a variety of measurements have been
unavailable.

Prepare for and hold two extensive, large scale
three-day nuclear power plant emergency
exercises that will take place in fall 2016. This
will involve many local, State and Federal
agencies as well as PG&E working together to
respond to a simulated emergency at Diablo
Canyon. The drill will include the County
coordinating and directing what protective
actions would need to be made for the public,
such as evacuating affected areas, providing
emergency information and instructions, and
coordinating emergency response resources.
These exercises are required by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
FEMA requires the County and other local
agencies to demonstrate that we have workable
emergency plans, training and policies
necessary to ensure that adequate capabilities
exist to prevent, protect against, mitigate the 

logistical and other support during large wildland
fires.
? During 2015 OES and other agencies staffed the
Emergency Operation Center (EOC) to coordinate
and support response efforts for incidents such as
the Cuesta Fire, the Park Hill Fire and the
September tsunami advisory that was received for
our coastline as a result of a large earthquake off
of Chile. For the Cuesta Fire the EOC was used
for five days of response coordination efforts that
included public information and local agency
support for response coordination. OES also
provided extensive field support work for the fires
and other responses including performing damage
assessments and providing logistical support.
effects of and respond to and recover from
incidents involving commercial nuclear power
plants (NPPs).
? Complete a full update of the County’s master
Emergency Operations Plan for approval by the
Board of Supervisors; also update and revise
various other response plans and procedures
such as disaster recovery procedures, tsunami
evacuation plan, and nuclear power plant (NPP)
emergency response procedures such as
emergency public information guidance and
interagency coordination procedures for
responding to NPP emergencies.
? Continue to oversee and coordinate nuclear
power plant emergency preparedness and
planning procedures between State and Federal
agencies and local jurisdictions including cities,
special districts, school districts, Caltrans, CHP,
and other local agencies. This involves ensuring
NPP emergency planning procedures are
compatible and workable between the many
agencies who would need to respond to an NPP
emergency.

Complete construction on the Juvenile Hall
Expansion project. The Project will provide 20
new housing rooms, school classrooms,

Went live with E-Court collections case
management system. This will increase
efficiencies in the collections unit and thus
reduce the cost of Probation’s collections
effort.
? Began development of an in-custody treatment
program in the Juvenile Hall to reduce the
number of minors placed in group homes. The
treatment program is schedule to begin in
January of 2017.
? Began development of a strategic plan to
implement evidence based practices and
services and reduce recidivism among the
offenders under supervision.
counseling rooms and a gymnasium.
? Open a new in custody residential treatment
facility in the East Unit of the existing Juvenile
Hall. The program will provide evidence based
treatment for juvenile offenders and reduce the
need to use costly out of county group homes.
? Based on the new strategic plan, implement new
evidence based strategies aimed at reducing the
recidivism rates of offenders under Probation’s
supervision.
? Explore use of Targeted Case Management to
obtain Federal reimbursement for Probation
Officers providing case management services to
juveniles and their families, and to access
necessary medical, social, educational and other
services.

Complete Phase 1 of Woman’s Jail and move
population from current Women’s Jail to new
housing facility expected to be early in FY 2016-
17.
? Begin Phase II of Woman’s Jail project which
involves destruction of the current Women’s Jail
and construction of a new medical facility and
programing space. The anticipated start date is
to be early in FY 2016-17.
? Establish new inmate programs to include;
Graphic Arts Program and Construction
Program. This will continue our goal of
vocational skills training for inmates to help
reduce recidivism.
? Begin design phase of co-located dispatch
center to be shared with Cal Fire/County
Sheriff’s at same location on Kansas Ave.
? Complete Active Shooter first responder maps
with funding from the Department of Homeland
Security.
? Enhance training opportunities for all law
enforcement agencies in the County by getting
new use of force simulator fully operational with
Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST)
certified and approved training courses.

Continue to implement strategies for Federal
stormwater permit compliance.
? Continue to meet all State and Federal
regulatory requirements related to waste
management.
? Complete the pump and treat facility at the
closed Los Osos Landfill which will improve
groundwater quality under the landfill.
? Implementation of food composting services by
the franchise haulers.

Implement Electronic Health Record in the jail
for continuity of care between physical health
care and psychiatric services by the end of the
fiscal year.
? Develop a Crisis Stabilization Unit on the Health
Campus to serve adults in psychiatric crisis as
an alternative to inpatient care by the end of the
fiscal year.
? Draft an implementation plan for the Drug Medi-
Cal Organized Delivery System of Care for
substance use disorder services.
? Continue collaboration with the Behavioral
Health Integration Project (BHIP) to improve
integration of physical and behavioral health
care by providing medical services on-site to
Behavioral Health clients to reduce chronic
disease among severely mentally ill patients.
? Launch new Mental Health Services Act (MHSA)
innovation programs, including a Trauma
Informed training and support for County
employees in departments regularly serving the
public.
? Develop a countywide protocol for law
enforcement, emergency departments, and the
department for managing psychiatric crises.
This objective is carried over from past year to
allow for new mobile crisis provider to stabilize
services in the county.

Implement the evidence based program, Prime
for Life, which provides standardization in the
information presented to the clients,
incorporates motivational enhancement for the
clients to make lifestyle changes, and provides
efficiency for staff preparation time.
? Develop a process to file documents
electronically with the Superior Court by June
30, 2017.
? Maintain financial viability in light of continued
decline in DUI arrests statewide and locally by
continuing to manage expenditures and seeking
to maximize revenue opportunities.

Continue to pursue legal remedies (e.g.,
contract with California Department of
Corrections & Rehabilitation state prisons or
long term care facilities to house medically
fragile inmates) for alternate placement of
inmates whose medical needs exceed capacity
of the LEMC unit.
? Implement preventive care services onsite for
long-term inmates.
? Revise, improve and implement new Quality
Improvement (QI) protocols to ensure efficiency
and quality of inmate care.
? Continue educating minors on safe sex
practices and continue to encourage testing for
sexually transmitted infections.

Continue to coordinate with the Department of
Social Services to improve processes for
bilateral referral of potential MISP clients and
Medi-Cal eligible persons.
? Utilize Certified Application Entity status to
improve the ability of Health Care Services
Certified Application Counselors to assist MISP
clients (and other targeted uninsured clients) to
enroll in appropriate insurance plans.
? Finalize process for staff to enroll hospitalized
inmates in Medi-Cal when they are not able to
act on their own behalf, relieving the burden of
cost for hospitalizations currently held by the
County.

Make food facility inspection results available on
a mobile application.
? Complete a second FDA Voluntary National
Retail Food Regulatory Standard.
? Participate in FEMA graded exercise for
Ingestion Pathway Radiological Emergency
Response.
? Increase number of emergency medical
dispatchers at public service answering points
throughout the county.
? Increase public participation in hands-only CPR
and early 911 activation through public training
events (e.g., malls, farmer’s markets, service
groups) (baseline = 2,500).
? Increase service at coastal area reproductive
health clinic by 200 visits (baseline = 0).
? Re-test > 95% of clients within six months of
initial positive chlamydia test result.
? Increase rate of kindergarteners receiving all
required immunizations from 87% to 90%.
? Provide oral health screenings and fluoride 

pedestrian safety.
? Drafted an ordinance to regulate land application
of biosolids.
? Completed Food & Drug Administration’s (FDA’s)
Regulatory Food Inspection Program Standard
#3.
? Implemented CPR programs to improve survival
from sudden cardiac arrest.
o Secured outside funding to purchase
equipment and train 550 Emergency Medical
Services (EMS) personnel in “High
Performance” CPR. In first 3 months, saw
50% increase in spontaneous return of
circulation.
? Updated Multiple-Casualty Incident (MCI) Plan,
which included new training material, two table top
drills and a full-scale drill involving all EMS
agencies and hospitals.
? Adopted a countywide Emergency Medical
Dispatch (EMD) program, a systematic program of
handling medical calls for assistance.
treatment for at least 1,200 children.
? Increase social media followers by 30% and
create at least three new video shorts (baseline
= 1,780).
? Develop and implement a comprehensive plan
to improve usability and effectiveness of Public
Health website.
? Initiate implementation phase of electronic
health record system project.
? Implement a comprehensive Performance
Measurement and Management system for all
Public Health programs to include specific goals,
indicators and targets for each.

Coordinate effectively with the County’s Health
Agency in implementing the Continuum of Care
Reform legislation, bringing high-risk foster
children back to the County from their current
placements in Group Homes, by expanding the
scope of intensive therapeutic services at the
community level. By December 31, 2016, at
least 10 children will be moved from Group
Homes to community-based homes. By June
30, 2017, at least 20 children will have been
moved.
? Surpass State averages in at least 75% of
performance measures related to Child Welfare
Services (CWS).
? Achieve and maintain compliance with
processing requirements in the Medi-Cal and In-
Home Supportive Services (IHSS) programs, in
which the County has fallen short in the last two
years.
? Meet all goals in the 50Now and Housing
Support Programs.
? Advocate for passage of AB 2254 which would
make the Atascadero armory available for
temporary shelter for homeless persons from
October 15 through April 15 every year.
? Meet or exceed all Federal requirements under
the Workforce Investment and Opportunity Act
(WIOA).

Continued to collaborate with other County
departments and provided a high level of
support to the Homeless Services Oversight
Council (HSOC).

The department will continue to provide
assistance to the county’s 26,000 veterans in
obtaining benefits and services earned through
their military service. The department will
continue to work and partner with Federal, State,
and local agencies to ensure the veterans of
San Luis Obispo County are adequately
represented and cared for, and will continue to
improve efficiencies in processing the veteran’s
claims in order to obtain their benefits as quickly
as possible.
? As the focal point for community organizations
that assist the veterans and families of San Luis
Obispo County, the department will continue to
communicate and disseminate relevant
information with the veteran community in a
timely and expeditious manner.
? Continue to expand the ongoing veterans
outreach activities that take place throughout the
county and seek ways to better reach the
county’s veterans and dependents. The goal is
to ensure all veterans are aware of the benefits
and services they have earned by serving our
country.
? Conduct the 4th annual Veterans Stand Down
event on July 7th and 8th 2016 for at-risk and
homeless veterans in order to connect them with
more than 40 service providers from the
Federal, State, and local community in a single
location.

Continue to work with existing and new airlines
in effort to increase air service, including
additional destinations.
? Continue to expand revenue opportunities
outside of commercial air service, utilizing
Airport property and facilities.
? Complete and implement goals and objectives
within the Airport Strategic Plan to direct energy
and resources towards common goals.
? Complete construction of new airport terminal
and parking lots by June 2017.
? Remodel existing airport operations and
maintenance facility to enable rental car “quick
turn” operations by fall of 2017.
? Continue to work with Airport Land Use
Commission, the City of San Luis Obispo and
CalTrans on land use compatibility planning.
? Relocate airline, rental car, law enforcement,
TSA and food and beverage concessions to new
terminal upon completion in June 2017.

Seek grants for research and extension
education programs in all our program areas.
Continue to compare County fiscal contributions
with benchmark counties.
? Develop and extend information and resources
on drought strategies including forage
production information for county rangelands,
research on water conservation in vineyards,
rainfall, soil moisture and temperature data
collection in agricultural areas to improve
producer decisions and support the efforts of the
Drought Task Force.
? Increase youth participation in countywide
events through Youth Experience Sessions and
Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics projects. Build youth leadership,
civic engagement, and public speaking skills
through youth-adult partnerships.
? Five MFP food preservation demonstrations will
educate residents on how to maximize their food
budgets and utilize produce received at Food
Bank distribution sites. Eleven volunteers will
graduate from an 11-week training program.
Monthly classes from April-October will provide
knowledge on how to preserve local produce.
? Develop a performance measure for
engagement by the community in our programs
that will provide for continuous improvement and
actionable information.

Complete permitting application development for
the Morro Bay Golf Course irrigation mainline
project by the end of FY 2016-17.
? Determine the long term use of Dairy Creek Golf
Course in light of reduced water availability and
reduced play and revenue; i.e. continue as golf
course or repurpose for alternate uses.
? Manage water resources through the
implementation of drought contingency plans to
reduce use and ensure County golf courses
remain desirable recreational facilities for
residents and visitors.
? Integrate the Golf Americans With Disabilities
Act (ADA) consultant report with the Countywide
ADA Transition Plan to prioritize
accessibility projects.
? Seek grant funding for Monarch Butterfly Trail at
Morro Bay Golf Course and begin environmental
permitting process if grant(s) are attained.
? Expand Zero Waste initiatives to Morro Bay Golf
Course.

Continue developing a robust adult
programming schedule with an average of 17
programs offered monthly throughout the County
that bring in speakers who present on topics of
interest to adult populations (e.g. local history,
adult fiction authors, visual and/or performing
artists, etc.)
? Build stronger ties with our Foundation and
Friends of the Library groups.
? Continue process improvement in the areas of
access to library materials and services in order
to provide patrons with greater access at a lower
cost and to improve customer service.
? Refine customer-service model by updating
policies/procedures and ensuring consistent
best practices are upheld throughout the library
system.
? Monthly use of analytical software to improve
operational efficiencies so as to better respond
to customer needs.
? Increase public awareness of Library services
through social media and targeted marketing to
increase usage of materials, facilities, and
programming.

Begin the process of national accreditation as
per the Commission for Accreditation of Park
and Recreation Agencies (CAPRA) standards,
meeting at least 50 standards by June 2017 and
achieving all 151 standards by 2020.
? Begin the department’s Cost Recovery Plan
project to determine proper cost recovery goals
for the various facilities and services within the
department.
? Seek additional opportunities to increase
recreational activities by concessionaire and
other means thereby increasing revenue by 6%
over last year to the Department of Parks and
Recreation.
? Continue the effort to make Rainbow Trout
plants at Lopez Lake permanent allowing
increased recreational opportunities for the
public and program revenue generation.
? Develop a comprehensive Revenue Policy and a
Donor Sponsorship and Recognition Policy
? Enhance the use of the new Parks and
Recreation Department website for customer
information and interactive use by having at
least 45% of all reservations made online.

Program Coordination
? Continue coordination of a permanent ordinance
relating to the cultivation of medical cannabis
per the Medical Marijuana Regulation and
Safety Act (MMRSA).
Water
? Continue to coordinate the County Drought Task
Force; monitor drought conditions, continue
water use reduction and County preparedness
efforts. Continue to monitor the impacts and aid
in the implementation of the requirements of the
Sustainable Groundwater Management Act
(SGMA) to address groundwater supply and
demand imbalances.
? Continue to coordinate efforts related to use of
desalinated water from Diablo Canyon Power
Plant for South County.
Countywide Project Coordination
? Continue implementation of a new budget
preparation system that will replace the current
system that is over 20 years old. The new
budget preparation system will allow for greater
budgetary analysis and reporting and is
expected to go live in 2016.
? Continue to support efforts of the Airports and
Public Works to finance and complete

to the Board of Supervisors. The County saved
an estimated 4,500 gallons per week, and
reduced water usage for users in the Utility
Manager system and County Operations Center
by 36% compared to December 2013.
? Continued to monitor the impacts and aid in the
implementation of the requirements of the
Sustainable Groundwater Management Act
(SGMA) to address groundwater supply and
demand imbalances.
? Led a subcommittee of County and PG&E
representatives that explored the possibility of
delivering desalinated water from the Diablo
Canyon Power Plant to residents in the Five Cities
area that resulted in the Board of Supervisors
approving a request for $900,000 to fund the
planning phase of the project.
Countywide Project Coordination
? Co-led, with Information Technology, the effort of
acquiring and implementing a new budget
preparation system that will replace the current
system that is over 20 years old. The new budget
preparation system will allow for greater
budgetary analysis and reporting.
? Supported the efforts of various departments on
planning for major capital projects including the
Airport terminal and Animal Services facility.
Communications
? Published the 6th County Annual Report,
continuing to implement new techniques and
technologies increasing the ease of access and
clarity.
? Developed and began implementing a countywide
communication plan to help increase public
awareness of County programs and services and
increase citizen engagement with County
government. Increased number of likes on
County’s Facebook page by 356%, doubled
lifetime number of YouTube video views, and
County Tweets earned an average of 17,841
impressions per month.
construction on a new terminal building.
? Continue to support efforts of the Health Agency
and Public Works to finalize negotiations with
cities relative to financing and constructing a
new animal shelter.
? Coordinate creation of a permanent ordinance
relating to the cultivation of medical cannabis in
San Luis Obispo County.
Communications
? Publish a 7th consecutive County Annual Report
that incorporates feedback on prior reports and
continues to implement new techniques and
technologies that increase ease of access and
clarity.
? Develop and design a new County website to
improve online access to, and increase public
awareness of, County services and program
information.

Complete the parcel map conversion and enter
the maintenance phase of a Countywide GIS
parcel layer to serve all County departments,
partnering cities, and the public we serve. 

Staff dedicated to the PTSMP and many other
staff members, known as subject matter experts,
extensively tested processes and databases
within the converted system.
? Resolved 140 assessment appeals in the first half
of FY 2015-16, and retained $133,171,545 of the
total assessed value at risk on the assessment
roll.
? Upgraded the Attribute Inventory System to
resolve multiple issues and include commercial
property attributes combined with a commercial
sales database.
? Substantially reduced the work backlogs down to
3,314 that resulted from the market downturn in
2006. Some backlogs will still remain at the end of
FY 2015-16.
? Will be heavily involved in the testing of the new
PTSMP after expected “go-live” in April of 2016.
? Engage in succession planning focused on staff
education, training and cross-training, and
procedural documentation especially for critical
tasks.
? Upgrade the Assessment Evaluation Service,
which is used to track appraiser’s workload,
store property photos, and determine property
values based on the property characteristics.
? Eliminate the 3,314 work backlogs, which were
the result of the market downturn in 2006 by the
end of FY 2016-17.

Replace the outdated 15+ year old (DOS)
based Cost Plan Program. The current system
resides on a shared server that is scheduled to
be retired when the BP replacement project is
completed in October 2016. Complete the 

infrastructure used to deliver water to the
communities of Paso Robles, Templeton,
Atascadero, and San Luis Obispo.
? Participated in the second phase of the Budget
Preparation (BP) replacement project. ACTTCPA
staff worked with the project vendor and the
Administrative Office on the design and
implementation during the year. The new system
is scheduled to go live in October 2016 and will be
used to prepare the FY 2017-18 budget.
? Developed two new Enterprise Financial System
(EFS) training courses and presented them to
department users. EFS Support created a new
three part course on SAP reporting using
Business Objects and conducted multiple training
sessions for each one. In addition, ATTCCPA
staff developed a new Project Systems course.
The County uses Project Systems to capture cost
accounting information for construction and
software implementation projects. A total of 286
users attended EFS training courses presented by
our staff during the fiscal year.
? Continued to make progress towards
accomplishing office consolidation objectives
identified in FY 2013-14. Notable
accomplishments in these areas were developing
a single set of office policies, creating career
opportunities by promoting from within, and
supporting staff development by conducting
multiple staff led Word and Excel training sessions
for our employees.
? Completed the migration of the Property Tax
system off the mainframe to a modern technology
platform.
implementation by Fall 2016 and use the new
software to prepare the County’s FY 2017-18
Cost Plan.
? Update the Travel Policy and present it to the
Board of Supervisors for approval before the
end of the year. Staff in the ACTTCPA audits
and pays travel claims in accordance with
provisions of the Travel Policy. Periodically, it
is necessary to review the policy and update it
to reflect the County’s changing needs and any
new legislative requirements.
? Expand the annual patch process to include
application of SAP’s latest enhancement
packs. SAP support packs are applied
annually to maintain existing functionality.
Adding the latest enhancement pack maintains
readiness for new SAP functionality. If feasible
with existing projects, the office plans to install
six of the latest enhancement packs in FY
2016-17.
? Continue working on the consolidation
objectives identified in FY 2013-14. These
included creating an optimal office structure,
promoting an integrated office culture,
maximizing staff resources, and optimizing the
office layout. High priority projects include an
extensive review of all internal controls,
implementation of the new organization chart,
and revising the job specifications for various
positions to reflect the needs of the merged
office.
? Continue the implementation and testing of the
new Property Tax System.

Successfully conduct the Presidential General
Election in November 2016, meeting all
deadlines.
? Implement additional functionality of Democracy
Live (an online ballot access system) with audio
sample ballots and voter information guides for
voters with disabilities, funded by a Federal
HAVA grant.
? Install electronic recording technology to record
and process official records, resulting in a more
expedient, efficient, and convenient process for
customers.
? Replace historical Board of Supervisors index to
provide greater search capabilities and expand
access to other departments and the public.
This will remove the remaining Clerk-Recorder
legacy system from the mainframe. 

All five management and supervisory staff
members attending courses of the Learning and
Development Center’s Leadership Development
Program.
? Replace the voting system used since 2000 with
an upgraded system that takes advantage of
current technology yet still maintains the integrity
of the voting experience expected by San Luis
Obispo County voters.

Obtain Board of Supervisors approval to develop
and implement a system to allow taxpayers who
have prior year unpaid property taxes to enroll in
monthly payment plans. Currently only restrictive
annual payment plans are available. Taxpayers
will benefit by having a much lower threshold to
begin a payment plan, and having lower monthly
payments rather than large annual ones.
? Continue the implementation and testing of the
new Property Tax System.
? Redesign the department’s web site based on
both public and private sector best practices.
The goal is to increase information available on
the site, as well as make it more user friendly.

Faster payment processing for taxpayers at the
public counter, including receipts by email. The
new system enables posting payments on the
same day as received, and automates formerly
manual processes.
? Completed and implemented a major re-write and
modernization of the County Business License
Ordinance. Continued to promote paperless billing
and electronic payment programs, which
increased the total number of tax payments paid
electronically by 4% in the first six (6) months of
the fiscal year, and increased the number of
paperless tax bills by 30%.
? Completed the migration of the Property Tax
system off the mainframe to a modern technology
platform.
? Develop a new system to more easily gather
public feedback so that service levels can be
better measured.
? Continue to increase paperless billing and
electronic payments and processing, by using
billing inserts, press releases, and general
taxpayer correspondence. For FY 2016-17, the
department expects to process over 280,000
payments, with 100,000 of those being
electronic.
? Expand cross-training with the County
Assessor’s office so the two offices can work
together to provide better service to the public.

Achieve $2 million in cost savings by
strategically partnering with County
departments.
? Achieve the National Institute of Governmental
Purchasing award for innovation and
performance measurement.
? Host annual supplier outreach event through the
Central Coast Public Purchasing Alliance that
reaches over 400 suppliers by fostering
collaboration among participating entities to
coordinate purchases and promote cooperation
between all public sector agencies.
? Implement in house disposal model to achieve
$250,000 of increase surplus sales.
? Update County Code and/or policy to comply
with the newly adopted Federal Uniform
Administrative Requirements procurement
standard.
? Improve real property management efficiencies
by obtaining approval on and implementing a
new Resolution aligning the Director’s delegated
lease authority with California Government
Code.
? Promote real property staff development and
expertise by increasing opportunities for
professional training, re-licensure, and
certification, to benefit all County departments
served.

Manage a car sharing program that allows six
underutilized vehicles to be shared between
departments.
? Replace three of the County Sheriff’s Chevrolet
Caprice Canine patrol vehicles with the
Chevrolet Tahoe.
? Replace five mid-size sedans with hybrid models
and two compact sedans with electric vehicles,
which will also include two more electric vehicle
charging stations.

Advise on the implementation of the
Countywide Storm Water Management
Program to facilitate successful
implementation of the plan.
? Advise on new legislation regarding medical
cannabis to assist the Board in establishing a
comprehensive strategy in addressing medical
cannabis.
? Defend Nipomo Community Park Master Plan
through trial and potential appeal.
? Provide review and advice through public
hearings on the Phillips 66 Rail Spur Project
and any subsequent litigation

Complete 5,450 Corrective Maintenance Work
Orders.
? Complete 1,265 Preventive Maintenance Work
Orders.
? Complete 95 Project Work Orders providing
assistance to Architectural Services projects.
? Complete 99% of all scheduled heavy cleaning
and cleaning routes during the first six months of
Fiscal Year 2016-17.
? Continue the Facility Condition Assessment
program to identify deficiencies in County
facilities.
? Complete the Energy Efficiency projects that
will, over time, result in lower expenditures to
County departments and the General Fund.

Establish SAP as the system of record for
position allocation.
? Continue to roll out the Performance
Measurement module of NeoGov, with
emphasis on monitoring first year program
rollout, addressing feedback, and adjusting the
system and the process to optimize use of this
tool.
? Refine internal data collection, analysis and
interpretation to improve data driven decision
making through NeoGov and SAP.
? Augment the Loss Prevention Initiative efforts to
modernize office workstations, including
standing work stations (increase to 300
workstations per year), improve building security
(downtown security guard), and mitigate
wellness related workers’ comp claims.
? Leverage the new internal management and
operations structure in Human Resources to
optimize efficiency.
? Move the County Administrative Officer Action
team forward to implement Leadership Academy
projects.
? Introduce Voluntary Benefits options to
employees such as Life Insurance (for nonmanagement
employees), Short Term and Long Term Disability Insurance, and Critical
Care/Accident Coverage.
? Improve the post-offer, pre-employment
background process for employment candidates
by contracting with an additional preemployment
medical facility and providing
process-improvement training and coaching for
the county department.

Decommission 40-year old mainframe
technology.
? Provide project management to lead the
implementation of a fully functional Permit
Tracking System Project (PTSMP) for the
Planning Department by June 2017.
? Replace custom-built, 20-year-old Budget Prep
application with Budget Formulation and
Management (BFM), a modern, off-the-shelf
product by June 2017.
? Implement new Content Management System
and redesign County home website by June
2017.
? Define business requirements and issue RFPs
to implement Jail Management System (JMS) 

modernization.
? Began building a new communications site at La
Panza.
? Continued working on GIS strategic initiatives
including updating parcel data; acquiring new
aerial imagery; and enhancing the public’s ability
to connect with government services by launching
additional mapping applications including the
development of critical business layers for Parks,
Airports, Public Works, and Sheriff’s Dispatch.
and Security Program by May 2017.
? Implement an electronic health record system
for Public Health clinical programs, Jail Medical,
and Oral Health by October 2017.
? In collaboration with the City of Grover Beach
and Office of Education, coordinate the
installation of high-speed optical fiber to Grover
Beach and Shandon by June 2017.
? Build five-year county radio communication plan
to provide insight into emerging technology and
trends and establish a roadmap for future radio
needs including site locations, alternative
frequency usage, voice over IP, and public
safety communications interoperability.
? Enhance public safety radio coverage by
providing additional overlap, replacing end-of-life
equipment, and minimizing dead-zone and
shadow areas by building a new site at La
Panza and replacing Cuesta Peak
communications tower. Such changes will
benefit Sheriff, CalFire, Emergency Medical
Services, and Public Works operations assigned
to the California Valley.