To further assist producers that export
agricultural commodities, staff will educate
producers in the use of on-line certification
resources. Staff will also explore means to
streamline the certification process through the
use of compliance agreements for qualified
shippers.
• To prepare qualified staff for opportunities to
promote into future vacancies in supervisory and
management positions, staff members will
complete training courses such as the
Management Academy, Supervisor Academy
and S.T.A.R.T. offered through the County’s
Learning and Development Center.
• The department will launch a regionalized
approach for routine weights and measures
inspections. There are approximately 650
business locations in the County that use
weighing and measuring devices that fall into the
routine inspection category, i.e. service station
gas pumps, grocery and deli scales, water
vending machines, and wire and cordage
meters. These devices are inspected using test
standards and equipment secured in fully

weighmaster licenses during the first half of FY
2014-15, all were inspected and found in
compliance with statutory requirements.
Additionally, all timeline and reporting aspects
required of the department by the California
Department of Food and Agriculture were met.
• Program manuals were created for staff and
managers assigned to the Diablo Canyon Nuclear
Power Plant emergency response program and
the Weights and Measures program. Both
manuals serve as training tools and help to
preserve institutional knowledge, resulting in well
trained staff and the continued delivery of high
quality customer service.
equipped vehicles. As an alternative to housing
equipment at a centralized location, inspectors
and equipment staged at each of the three office
locations will provide improved efficiencies and
more responsive service to businesses and
consumers countywide.
• Staff will provide outreach and education for
newly implemented statewide pesticide use
conditions pertaining to soil fumigants containing
chloropicrin. These more stringent conditions
will be added to each user’s pesticide use permit
and applications will be closely monitored for
compliance with these new conditions. This
further ensures the protection of residents,
workers and bystanders in proximity to
chloropicrin fumigant applications.

Complete amendments that improve readability
and understanding of the Land Use Ordinance.
Continue to work with Federal resource agencies
to further the completion of the Habitat
Conservation Plan for the community of Los Osos.
• Education
Conduct outreach to the community for the
emPower energy efficiency financing program.
Support staff training opportunities through the
Learning and Development Center.
• Leadership
Complete a department restructure that balances
resources with service demands.
Develop an annual report that identifies how we
help to build better communities.
• Service
Provide permit processing/inspections for 2,000
sewer connections to Los Osos Wastewater
Treatment Plant.
Deliver full Planning services at the North County
Service Center.


Distribute approximately $3.5 million dollars in
Federal grant funds for affordable housing,
public facilities, public services and economic
development programs to individuals, cities,
unincorporated communities and local non-profit
organizations.
? Use General Fund support to provide shelter
and other services for the homeless persons
and families.
? Provide funding for the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) improvements to Cities of
Morro Bay, Paso Robles, and Atascadero.
? Provide $150,000 to San Lawrence Terrace well
blending pipeline in San Miguel so that the water
supply will meet Federal drinking water
standards.
? Provide $700,000 to acquire 20 affordable rental
housing units on Humbert Ave. in San Luis
Obispo through the Housing Authority of the City
of San Luis Obispo. 10 of the 20 units will serve
homeless veterans.

Complete the Paso Robles Groundwater Basin
Water Management District formation process.
• Continue to coordinate work efforts to meet the
requirements of the newly passed Sustainable
Groundwater Management Act.
• Begin startup and commissioning period for the
Los Osos Wastewater System.
• Continue to meet regularly with advisory
committees, the public, the Board of
Supervisors, and numerous Federal and State
agencies to understand customer needs and be
a valued partner enhancing the quality of life for
our fellow county residents.

Secure bridge funding to cover operations for
approximately six months to a year until
sufficient operating revenues are available
from system users.
? Hire and train staff to operate and maintain
the system.
? Transition from the construction phase to the
startup phase of operations.
? Begin the process of connecting the
approximately 4,700 customers according to
the phased connection plan.
? Identify financial grant assistance available to
low income households for connecting to the
system.
? Develop a low income rate assistance
program for ongoing user charges.

Complete water and sewer master plan updates
for the County Operations Center.
• Design of a water line loop to provide necessary
fire flow to the Juvenile Hall expansion and new
Sheriff Dispatch Center.
• Complete infrastructure improvements required
for the Oak Shores (Lake Nacimiento)
development including road repair.
• Complete the franchise renewal with Phillips 66
Petroleum.
• Work to renew or transfer the San Simeon cable
franchises to a State franchise.

Chip seal or surface treat approximately 60
miles of roadway to improve pavement
preservation.
? Asphalt overlay approximately 12 miles of high
use arterial roadway to improve pavement
preservation.
? Complete Los Osos road rehabilitation.
? Complete construction of San Miguel Gateway.
? Complete Price Canyon Road Widening Phase
II construction.
? Complete Federally funded bridge maintenance
projects on eight bridges throughout the county.

Maintain high customer service satisfaction
ratings (at least 96%).
• Maintain a high live-animal outcome rate (at
least 89% for dogs and 88% for cats).
• Explore and identify feasible options for
improvement of animal sheltering environment;
establish a plan for their implementation.
Establish court orders for child and medical
support for 96.9% of cases, to create a legal
basis for enforcing child and medical support
obligations, so that families are able to be more
self-sufficient.
? Collect 78.9% of all current child support owed,
so that children receive the support that they are
entitled to.
? Collect past due child support for 81.9% of
cases in which past due support is owed.
Collection of past due support can make the
difference between a family living in their own
home or living in a homeless shelter.
? Maintain performance by continued focus on
collection of current and past due support, and
court order establishment.
? Implement a plan to measure customer service
satisfaction and make service improvements
based on the results.

Continue efforts to improve the tracking of
completed commercial building pre-fire plans.
• Complete linking of pre-fire plans to mobile
computers in fire engines.
• Continue to increase county areas covered by
pre-fire and evacuation plans.
• Pursue additional grant funding to offset
operating costs and improve customer service.
• Continue re-directing department resources to
improve efficiency and cost-effectiveness of
operations, based on the Fire Service Level
Analysis.
• Continue to enforce fire ordinances to reduce
fire-related deaths and property losses.
• Utilize Homeland Security Grant funding to
improve technical and operational capabilities of
the department.
• Pursue additional employee development
opportunities.
• Continue rollout and enhancements of CAD to
CAD Mobile Data Computing (MDC) system.
• Began installation of GPS transponders in
emergency vehicles that do not have MDCs.
• Continue site improvements at the new Fire
Training Drill Grounds at Camp San Luis
Obispo.
• Work with the County Sheriff to advance the colocated
Emergency Dispatch Center to begin
site selection and construction.
• Improve inventory management processes
through automation.

Implementation of a Misdemeanor Diversion
Program as a solution to increased caseloads,
jail overcrowding and challenges imposed by
Assembly Bill 109 and Proposition 47. Expected
result is significant cost savings due to reduced
low-level misdemeanor cases, reductions in
recidivism, and positive outcomes for those
convicted of misdemeanor crimes.
• Implement Collaborative Courts, such as a
Transient Court, that addresses addiction,
mental health, and other social service needs.
Referred programs are demonstrated evidence
based and appropriate for the target population.
• Incoming Deputy District Attorney assignment
rotation beginning with Early Disposition
Program (attempts to bring criminal cases to
resolution with the fewest possible court
appearances) and Juvenile caseloads to provide
a general training ground for office practices and
case handling and disposition standards.
• Review current juvenile truancy protocol to
address youth developing poor attendance
patterns and adult responsibility for compliance
with compulsory education laws.

Complete an update of the County’s Earthquake
Plan, as approved by the Board.
• Continue updates and revisions of nuclear power
plant standard operation procedures (SOPs).
• As the lead nuclear power plant emergency
management agency for the County, continue to
coordinate with local agencies and with the State
and FEMA on nuclear emergency readiness. This
includes overseeing and distributing more than
4,900 radiation protection devices countywide to
emergency workers and providing related
readiness training, as well as coordinating drills
with County and locally based state agencies
such as the California Highway Patrol (CHP),
Caltrans, and State Parks.

The Probation Department will produce an
annual statistical report which will measure the
outcomes of Probation’s community correction
services.
? The Probation Department will go live with Ecourt
collections case management system.
This new case management system will
increase efficiencies in the collections unit and
thus reduce the cost of Probation’s collections
effort.
? The Probation Department will begin the
development of an in-custody treatment
program in the Juvenile Hall to reduce the
number of minors placed in group homes.

Project with Phase I projected completion in
December 2015.
• Begin Phase II of Women’s Jail project to begin
construction of new medical facility in January
2016.
• Continue to utilize our resources, personnel and
continue building on our relationships with allied
law enforcement agencies to protect our
coastline from being used as an entry point to
smuggle drugs and aliens.
• Continue developing programs for inmates in the
jail that will change behavior and treat
drug/alcohol dependency to reduce recidivism.
• Continue with planning and building phase of colocated
dispatch center to be shared with Cal
Fire.
• Monitor potential impacts of Prop 47 on jail
population and field patrol activities.
• Develop and coordinate countywide active
shooter response training incorporating fire
services providing medical assistance. Develop
response maps for every school district and
work with school districts to coordinate
consistent training for school employees.

Continue to meet all State and Federal
regulatory requirements.
• Complete the renewal of the franchise
agreement with Paso Robles Country Disposal.
• Obtain permits for the pump and treat facility at
the closed Los Osos Landfill.

Evaluate and begin implementation plans for an
Electronic Health Record for jail services, in
conjunction with Public Health.
? Increase adherence to timeliness and other
standards for intake, assessment, and
documentation, including required services to
Spanish speakers and other underserved
populations.

Continued integration of mental health and
substance use disorder services both clinically
and operationally. Integrated forensic services
under one division. Created additional cooccurring
disorder treatment groups.
? Created a multi-agency group including
Behavioral Health, Child Welfare Services and our
community based organizations, which developed
a structured all-day training on Trauma Informed
Care for all staff.
? Developed an orientation program for all new
staff. Health Agency on-boarding has begun and
has been an extremely successful collaboration
across internal departments.
? Initiated outpatient detoxification program for
opiate and alcohol addictions. Withdrawal
management program has begun and expanded
to provide up to 30 hours a week of opiate
withdrawal services.
? Increased collaboration for children’s services with
Department of Social Services for Katie A “subclass”.
After a slow start, the services for the subclass
defined population are fully implemented
and referrals continue to increase. As of this time
we are serving approximately 93 subclass
children/families in the community.
? Continued successful collaboration with schools
for children who are eligible for public mental
health services. Services ranging from day
treatment to Latino Outreach and therapeutic
classroom strategies are available in 27 schools
countywide.
? Increased early intervention and substance use
disorders treatment services for youth, including
the introduction of Drug Medi-Cal services on five
high school campuses and expansion of contracts
with six new school sites countywide.
? Expanded crisis services to better meet the needs
of the community. An in-house team was
developed to provide a higher level of response to
San Luis Obispo hospital emergency rooms. This
pilot project will be evaluated for efficacy after six
full months of operation.
? Develop a data and performance outcome/quality
assurance team to provide an efficient and
effective data dashboard with standardized
reports and analytics resulting in data driven
decision making and management.
? Develop a system for collaborative care with
physical health care providers for clients.
? Implement use of standardized assessment tools,
CANS – Child and Adolescent Needs and
Strengths; ANSA – Adult Needs and Strengths
Assessment, for level of care and clinical
progress.
? Develop a standardized protocol with emergency
departments and law enforcement agencies for
psychiatric crisis response.
? Integrate successful MHSA “Innovation” pilot
projects into ongoing programming. In FY 2015-
16, programs for veterans outreach and student
wellness will be continued using MHSA funds.
? Develop a college-based prevention and early
intervention program to address growing
behavioral health needs of local students. In FY
2015-16, MHSA funds will be directed towards
implementing awareness, crisis prevention, and
campus wellness initiatives at Cuesta College and
Cal Poly.

In light of decreased enrollments, develop an
improved process to track DUI convictions, area
of residence, and enrollment status in
conjunction with the Superior Court in order to
maintain appropriate staffing levels.
• Develop a process to file documents
electronically with the Superior Court.

Continue to pursue legal remedies (e.g., contract
with California Department of Corrections &
Rehabilitation state prisons or long term care
facilities to house medically fragile inmates) for
alternate placement of inmates whose medical
needs exceed capacity of the LEMC unit.
• Implement optometry care and other preventative
care services onsite for long-term inmates.
• Revise, improve and implement new Quality
Improvement (QI) protocols to ensure efficiency
and quality of inmate care.
• Continue educating minors on safe sex practices;
increase the number tested for sexually
transmitted infections (STI) using new testing
guidelines by 30% or 10 minors.

Continue to coordinate with DSS to improve
processes for bilateral referral of potential MISP
clients and Medi-Cal eligible persons.

Engage in strategic planning - implement PH
Laboratory Strategic Plan; update Oral Health
Strategic Plan.
• Continue to increase reach of social media, from
1,100 to 1,500 persons.
• Further advance website use; e.g., develop PDF
fillable Environmental Health forms and
Geographic Information System (GIS) maps for
the public to locate former HazMat contaminated
sites.
• Increase use of long-acting reversible
contraception (LARC) among Reproductive
Health clients by 40-50.
• Work with at least three municipalities to revise
no-smoking ordinances to include e-cigarettes.
• Provide oral health screenings and fluoride
treatment for at least 1,200 children.
• Install and/or check placement of 400 child
safety seats.
• Provide 10 school assemblies on bicycle and
pedestrian safety reaching more than 3,000
students.
• Implement countywide High Performance CPR
program to improve patient outcomes from
sudden cardiac arrest. Emphasizes hands-only
CPR, early 911 activation, and organized multiagency
response/treatment. (San Luis Obispo
EMS responds to ~275 cardiac arrests a year
with a survival rate of 5%. Communities that
have adopted the program have seen survival
rates improve by as much as 50%).

Community CPR training of 1,750 people in the
first six months of fiscal year (FY 2013-14: 1,250
trained). Extraordinary effort resulted in
Community Service Award from State Emergency
Medical Services (EMS) Authority for one EMS
Division staff member and two local paramedics.
• Completed a full-scale multi-agency CHEM PACK
drill testing the County’s ability to respond to a
multi-casualty incident caused by a hazardous
chemical release.
• Technology advancements in several areas of the
Public Health Department include:
• Lab instituted use of electronic billing clearing
house; progress continues on full e-reporting;
o Environmental Health (EH) implemented
system to accept online credit card payments;
o EH completed electronic data exchange with
CalEPA for tracking HazMat and waste
facilities;
o EMS implemented android-based version of
the smart phone application for Advanced Life
Support (ALS) treatment protocols to make
treatment protocols available real-time to
paramedics in the field, and Mobile Intensive
Care nurses in the base hospitals; and
o Children’s Medical Services attained access
to key hospital portals enabling direct
download of client medical records; also
implemented desktop electronic faxing with
built-in Provider Directory.
• Update Multiple-Casualty Incident Plan to
include new training material, two table top drills
and a full scale drill involving all EMS agencies
and hospitals.
• Evaluate and adopt a countywide Emergency
Medical Dispatch (EMD) program, a systematic
program of handling medical calls for
assistance. (Trained dispatchers, using EMD
Guidecards, can quickly and properly determine
the nature and priority of the call, dispatch the
appropriate response and then give the caller
instructions to help treat the patient until the
responding EMS unit arrives.)

Continue to surpass State averages in at least
75% of performance measures related to Child
Welfare Services.
• The department will meet all of its goals in the
50Now Program, which provides housing and
intensive services to 50 of the most vulnerable
homeless individuals.
• Meet or exceed all Federal requirements under
the Workforce Investment Act.
• Continue to collaborate with other County
departments and provide a high level of support
to the Homeless Services Oversight Council
(HSOC) to address homeless issues within the
community.
• Increase the number of participants in
Subsidized Employment by 81% (from 58 to 105
participants).
• Implement the Structured Decision Making tool
in the Adult Protective Services program, and
assume responsibility for after-hours calls.

The office will continue advocating and assisting
the County’s approximately 26,000 veterans in
obtaining their benefits and services earned
through military service. We will continue to work
with agencies at the Federal, State, and local
level to make sure our county’s veterans are
taken care of. We will be continuing to explore
new and more efficient ways of processing the
veterans’ claims to get them their benefits and
services as quickly as possible.
? The office has become a focal point for our
veteran’s community for all organizations that
assist veterans and their families. We continue
to work with our fellow service providers in the
community to disseminate information through
the veterans community in as timely a manner
as possible.
? We are continuing to grow our veterans
outreach services to returning service members
and local veterans. We will continue to look for
ways to better reach the County’s veterans
where they live, work, and play, and to make
sure all County veterans are aware of all the
benefits and services they have earned by
serving our country. We will be looking to
expand current outreach programs like the
VetSurf program, the SSVF program,
participation in local farmers markets and other
new innovative ways we can reach our local
veterans.
? The office will conduct its third annual 48 hour
Stand Down for at risk and homeless veterans
living in our community. This event is a
collaborative effort with 30+ other agencies from
the Federal, State, and local level.
? Staff will continue to attend training sessions
throughout the year to maintain their state
accreditation and to remain current on the everchanging
laws that effect veterans and their
claims.

Obtain Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
grant and begin new terminal construction to
resolve airport compliance issues related to
proximity of the current terminal and aircraft
parking areas to the runway and taxiways.
• Continue to work with existing and new airlines
in effort to increase air service, including
additional destinations.
• Complete transition to independent department
status following dissolution of County General
Service Agency, while maintaining current
customer service levels.
• Complete and implement goals and objectives
within the Airport Strategic Plan to direct energy
and resources towards common goals.
• Continue to expand revenue opportunities
outside of commercial air service, utilizing
Airport property and facilities.
• Negotiate redevelopment and a long term lease
agreement at the former American Eagle
Maintenance Facility, to improve building
facilities and secure a long term source of lease
revenue income.

Seek grants for research and extension
education programs in all our program areas.
Continue to compare San Luis Obispo County’s
fiscal contributions to our department with
benchmark counties.
• Continue to provide information and resources
on drought strategies for agricultural and urban
clientele, including participation in the County
Drought Task Force, development of forage
production information for county rangelands,
and local applied research on water
conservation in vineyards.
• Increase the San Luis Obispo County 4-H
Master iThrive Program Training Team to reach
the goal of having three pilot iThrive projects in
our county.
• Expand the Master Food Preserver program to
offer low-cost classes throughout the
community; develop local educational
publications and provide education for lowincome
residents on safe food preservation
techniques in order to help residents maximize
their food budgets and utilize large quantities of
produce received at Food Bank distribution
sites.
• Significantly increase the response rate for new
and existing performance measures through the
use of audience response software, and paper
evaluations where needed, that allows us to
demonstrate that UCCE provides “high quality,
results-oriented services that are responsive to
community desires.”

Complete the Morro Bay Golf Course irrigation
mainline project.
• Continue to work with the Golf Course Advisory
Committee and concessionaire partners to
revise and update golf play policies to benefit
golf customers.
• Offer more player development programs to
introduce 200 new players to the game of golf.
• Continue work to develop conceptual plans to
create a Monarch Butterfly interpretive trail
through Morro Bay Golf Course.
• Build and install owl boxes at Chalk Mountain
Golf Course to help reduce rodent population
through non-chemical controls.
• Manage golf course irrigation use to ensure all
of our golf courses remain desirable recreational
facilities for residents and visitors.

Develop a robust adult programming schedule
that brings in speakers who present on topics of
interest to adult populations (e.g. local history,
adult fiction authors, visual and/or performing
artists, etc.)
• Continue process improvement in the areas of
access to library materials and services in order
to provide patrons with greater access at a lower
cost and to improve customer service.
• Build stronger ties with our Foundation and
Friends of the Library groups.
• Monthly use of analytical software to improve
operational efficiencies so as to better respond
to customer needs.
• Increase public awareness of library services to
increase usage.

Implement the recreational class module for the
new reservation system allowing for 24/7
reservations for recreational class sign up.
• Focus efforts on promotion of Camp French for
weddings, camping and corporate events.
Complete Capital Improvement Plan for Camp
French with related improvements.
• Complete Phase II restoration of the Cayucos
Pier Project replacing damaged and missing
piles, replacing decking, stringers, cap beams,
fire lines and electrical lighting by August 2015.
• Seek additional opportunities to partner with
volunteer groups to help in the maintenance of
Parks facilities and infrastructure.
• Seek additional opportunities to increase
revenue at Santa Margarita Lake Recreational
Area.
• Continue the effort to make Rainbow Trout
plants at Lopez Lake permanent allowing
increased recreational opportunities for the
public and program revenue generation.
• Implement new Parks and Recreation
Department website. This site will have a
modern look, be interactive and state of the art.
• Continue to create new and comprehensive
marketing strategies, advertising and promotions
to increase use and revenue opportunities. 

Attended the Mid State Fair for the second year
and doubled the booth size to serve thousands of
fair visitors to continue County Parks and
Recreation’s name branding efforts. Gained over
2,000 email addresses and 1,200 children
participated in the County’s DEER program
through the Fair.
• Continued the trout planting program at Lopez
Lake receiving large plants that broke a five-year
ban on Rainbow Trout planting two years ago. An
excellent working relationship with the Department
of Fish and Wildlife and the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration has been solidified by
Parks and Recreation staff to more than double
the Rainbow Trout plants at Lopez Lake.
• Began the Phase II Cayucos Pier Restoration
Project including replacement of severely
damaged and missing piles on the historic
Cayucos Pier from bent 23 through bent 61 (the
end of the pier), replacing cap beams, stringers
and decking from the abutment (beginning of the
pier) to the end of the pier restoring structural
stability. Additionally, the project is upgrading the
fire lines and electrical lighting. The project is
90% complete.

Continue to coordinate the programs and
services provided by multiple departments to
ensure that the County is able to provide vital
services to residents.
• Acquire and begin implementation of a new
budget preparation system that will replace the
current system that is over 20 years old and
mitigate impacts of the enterprise system
upgrade to County departments.
• Monitor and assess the impacts of AB 109
(Public Safety Realignment) in collaboration with
the Community Corrections Partnership to
develop metrics to track the effectiveness of the
implementation.
• Continue to monitor the impacts and aid in the
implementation of the requirements of the
Pavley-Dickinson Act to address groundwater
supply and demand imbalances.
• Continue to coordinate the County Drought Task
Force; monitor drought conditions, continue
water use reduction and County preparedness
efforts.

Led a team of representatives from the Sheriff,
Social Services and Probation to develop a
process to assist inmates in enrolling in Medi-Cal
or Covered California while still incarcerated to
lower the cost of medical claims to the county.A
total of 952 applications have been completed
over the past 12 months.
• Led the Energy Community of Interest and
Executive Steering committee in the development
of long term strategies to improve energy
efficiency and increase use of renewable
resources in County facilities.
o Developed a master data base with accurate
and complete information on County facilities
including inventory, metering and sub
metering profile, annual energy use/cost since
2006 to improve the ability to track and
evaluate energy usage over time.
o Benchmarked County buildings to compare
energy use with like facilities in other
jurisdictions.
o Contracted with PG&E under the Sustainable
Solutions Turnkey program to audit facilities
with highest energy use and identify efficiency
measures to reduce energy use and cost.
• Directed the reorganization of the General
Services Agency into four independent
departments to enhance customer service and
responsiveness.
• Co-led, with Information Technology, the initial
phases of the effort to replace the County’s
Budget Preparation system.
• Published the 5th County Annual Report, complete
with improved infographics, written narratives and
short videos to inform the public about the
County’s efforts and accomplishments in 2014.
• Led cooperative partnership with the Homeless
Services Oversight Council and Transitions
Mental Health Association to implement the
50Now program which provides housing for 50 of
the County’s most vulnerable and chronically
homeless individuals. To date, 26 individuals have
been housed.
• Received 4th consecutive Government Finance
Officers Association (GFOA) Distinguished
Budget Award for the FY 2014-15 Final Budget
representing a budget document of the very
highest quality and best budget practices.
• Publish a 6th consecutive County Annual report
that incorporates feedback on prior reports and
continues to implement new techniques and
technologies that increase ease of access and
clarity.
• Support efforts of the Health Agency and
General Services to finance and construct a new
animal shelter, including working with the seven
cities to agree on a cost sharing methodology.
• Provide assistance to Homeless Services
Oversight Council and Transitions Mental Health
Association to work toward full implementation
of the 50Now program as well as working to
encourage increased availability of affordable
housing.

Partner with the vendor contracted to convert
assessor parcel map data into Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) data, which will
improve accuracy of map data by providing
quality control during the conversion process.
? Complete PTSM by the end of 2015.
Department staff will continue to be heavily
involved in testing and implementation of the
new system.

Resolved 150 assessment appeals in the first half
of FY 2014-15, and retained $194,504,692 of the
total assessed value at risk on the assessment
roll.
? Migration to Microsoft Office 2013 was
successfully completed and updated training was
provided for all staff.
? The opening of the new North County Service
Center on July 14, 2014 was coordinated with the
Clerk Recorder, Planning and Building, Library
and General Services to ensure no interruptions
to public service.
? Eliminate work backlogs of 8,633 work items by
the end of FY 2015-16, which were the result of
the market downturn in 2006 and which will still
exist at the end of FY 2014-15.
? The succession plan continues to focus on
documentation of critical activities and their
sequence within office processes while also
focusing on staff training and cross-training.
? Upgrade two systems that are critical to the
determination of property value by July 2015.
The systems are the Attribute Inventory that
handles the property characteristics and
Assessment Evaluation Service used to
determine property value based on the stored
characteristic data.

Begin project to replace the County’s DOSbased
Cost Plan Program. The current system
resides on a shared server that is scheduled to
retire when the Budget Preparation (BP)
replacement project is completed.
• Complete the initial training rollout of the SAP
Business Intelligence (BI) system so that all
licenses are assigned to departmental users by
the end of the fiscal year. Continue to enhance
the SAP BI system by creating more standard
reports and adding more data for use by endusers
in writing their own reports. Familiarize
our newly established consultant partner with
our BI system to assist our in-house support
staff to expand the system with more available 

design and implementation is planned to begin.
• Completed the design and implementation of
interfaces from SAP to NEOGOV, the Human
Resources’ new applicant tracking system. The
new interfaces send position and job class
specification master data from SAP to NEOGOV.
This information is used by departments when
they want to open a job requisition to fill a specific
position.
• Made significant progress towards accomplishing
the top four consolidation objectives identified in
FY 2013-14. Notable accomplishments in these
areas were the completion of the office remodel,
the construction of a new public services area, the
creation of new career opportunities for
employees, and the inclusion of all staff members
in the process of designing a dynamic new
department.
data and reports at a more rapid pace.
• Investigate the magnitude of including SAP’s
latest enhancement pack with our annual patch
process. SAP support packs are applied
annually to maintain existing functionality.
Adding the latest enhancement pack maintains
readiness for new SAP functionality. If feasible
with existing projects, the office plans to install
the latest enhancement pack in FY 2015-16.
• Continue working on the top four consolidation
objectives identified in FY 2013-14. These
included creating an optimal office structure,
promoting an integrated office culture,
maximizing human resources, and optimizing
the office layout. High priority projects include
an extensive review of all internal controls, the
creation of a single set of office policies,
implementation of the new organization chart,
and providing training opportunities for all levels
of staff. 

Implement replacement Recording and
Cashiering System selected from the RFP
evaluation process that best serves the office
and the public.
• Implement changes required by Vote Cal, the
statewide voter registration database in
preparation for the Presidential Elections in
2016.
• Replace voting system used since 2000 with
upgraded system that takes advantage of
current technology yet still maintains the integrity
of the voting experience expected by San Luis
Obispo County voters.
• Replace historical Board of Supervisors index to
provide greater search capabilities and expand
access to other departments and the public.
This will remove the remaining Clerk-Recorder
legacy system from the mainframe.
• Selected employees successfully passed the
test to attain the status of Certified Document
Examiner by the end of the 2015. 
Working with other departments and agencies,
such as the Local Agency Formation
Commission (LAFCO) to conduct the various
activities related to formation of the potential
water district the Paso Robles Groundwater
Basin as required.


Obtain Board of Supervisors approval to develop
and implement a system to allow taxpayers who
have prior year unpaid property taxes to enroll in
monthly payment plans. Currently only restrictive
annual payment plans are available.
• Implement redesign of property tax bills to use
new low-cost color printing techniques to 

advantage of best ideas and make bills more
readable.
• Fully implemented new internally written point-ofsale
and tax processing software to allow faster
payment processing for taxpayers at the public
counter, including receipts by email. The new
system allows all tax payments to be processed
on the same day as received, even during peak
times.
• Developed a low-cost informative insert, "Where
Your Property Tax Dollars Go," which was mailed
with all property tax bills.
• Promoted paperless billing and electronic
payment programs, which increased the total
number of tax payments paid electronically by
10% to 52,057 payments in the first 6 months of
FY 2014-15, and doubled the number of e-billing
accounts to 1,800.
improve functionality and readability, at the
same or lower cost than current bills.
• Continue to partner with the Information
Technology and the Assessor departments to
complete the conversion of County's mainframe
property tax system to a modern database
environment. The project is anticipated to be
completed in October 2015.
• Concurrently re-write the "Taxes on the Web"
program to take advantage of the improved
database to enable better information and online
services available to the public.
• Continue to increase paperless billing and
electronic payments and processing, by using
billing inserts, press releases, and general
taxpayer correspondence. For FY 2015-16, the
department expects to process over 100,000
payments electronically.

Advise on the formation of a countywide
tourism marketing district.
• Advise on the on-line construction permit
application process.
• Advise on the implementation of a
countywide, uniform Conflict of Interest Code.
• Advise Public Works on the implementation of
the Sustainable Groundwater Management
Act.
• Advise on the petition for the formation of a
Paso Robles Water District.
• Defend Nipomo Community Park Master Plan
through trial and potential appeal.
• Defend the Board of Supervisors’ and the
Trial Court’s decisions in Mesa Dunes
Mobilehome Estates v. County at the Court of
Appeal.
• Provide review and advice through public
hearings on the Phillips 66 Rail Spur Project
and any subsequent litigation. 

Complete the Cayucos Pier Rehabilitation
construction project and open the pier to the
public during the summer of 2015.
• Complete construction of the housing unit on the
multi-year, AB900-funded, Women’s Jail
Expansion project and begin the final phase of
construction, which will include a medical facility.
• Complete the multi-year construction of the
SB81-funded Juvenile Hall Expansion project
and open the facility in the fall of 2016.
• Sell and close escrow on all four surplus and
sales in Cambria and Atascadero for the Library. 

Negotiated a 20-year, 12,000 square foot build-tosuit
office building lease for the Department of
Social Services in Paso Robles.
• Achieved $1,324,205 in cost savings through
Purchasing by developing negotiating strategies
and procurement initiatives.
• Implemented a new Informal Bidding ordinance,
and amended the Purchasing Agent ordinance
and Contracting for Services policy to better align
with the California Uniform Public Construction
Cost Accounting Act.
• Implemented an easier, simpler, more transparent
process to submit capital project requests
electronically.
• Awarded several key contracts: Master
Agreement for PG&E’s Sustainable Solutions
Turnkey (SST) program, Energy and Water
Manager Services contract, and a Facility
Condition Assessment (FCA) contract.
• Achieve the Excellence in Procurement
accreditation awarded by the National
Procurement Institute.
• Perform Facility Condition Assessment site visits
on 20% of County facilities and complete the
draft reports to identify building deficiencies. 

Implement a car sharing program that allows six
underutilized vehicles to be shared between
multiple departments.
? Complete a customer specific Service Level of
Understanding (SLU) for all supported
departments.
? Convert six of the County Sheriff’s patrol
vehicles from the Chevrolet Caprice to the
Chevrolet Tahoe. 

Complete negotiations with the one remaining
bargaining unit with an open contract from FY
2014-15, and the eleven employee bargaining
units that have open contracts in FY 2015-16, in
compliance with the Board’s Labor Strategy.
• Continue building the Learning and
Development Center through optimization of
existing academies and courses and adding
programs to support the County’s vision and
goals per feedback from employees. For
instance, employees have requested more
information about their benefits. Such courses
will be created and offered to staff in this fiscal
year.
• Engage in the County’s effort to replace the
aging Budget Preparation software, and
integrate a new system into the Human
Resources Information Systems (HRIS).
• Institutionalize the new HRIS by building out
data and reporting structures to automate HR
reports to departments on topics such as
recruitment life cycle, leave management,
turnover, baseline workforce planning and
performance evaluation metrics. 

Replaced dated application technology with a new
(HRIS) for applicant tracking, selection,
onboarding, and managing employee
performance. The new platform (NEOGOV)
supports superior reporting and data-driven
decision making.
• Reduced number of employees who ‘opt out’ of
the County’s medical benefit plans by eliminating
the option for new employees, this was achieved
through changes to all labor contracts represented
by six of the nine employee organizations (plus
unrepresented groups), which cover 2,250 of the
2,500 County employees. This effort is to
increase opportunities for competitiveness in the
healthcare market.
• Achieved Affordable Care Act compliance to date
by confirming all County health plans meet legal
requirements and establishing methods for
Internal Revenue Service notification
requirements.
• Maintain high performance of Risk Management
programs as measured by the ten annual
performance measures reported in the budget.
These measures provided achievable stretch
goals in the areas of safety, workers’
compensation, liability and insurance.
• Issue a Request for Proposal to solicit proposals
from Third Party Workers Compensation
Administrators per the County’s procurement
policy.
• Focus on further required employment-related
compliance with the Affordable Care Act,
including measuring temporary employee work
hours to determine qualifying health plan
enrollment and submitting required reports to the
IRS. 

Complete the migration of the County Property
Tax system off the mainframe to a modern
technology platform.
? Implement a new Sheriff Warrants management
system that will improve efficiencies within the
Sheriff’s Office and further reduce the reliance
on the County’s mainframe.
? Decommission the 40-year old mainframe
technology.
? Provide project manager support for the
replacement of the existing Budget Preparation
system with a flexible, modern, browser-based
product.
? Provide project manager support for the
implementation of a new permitting system for
the Planning and Building Department.
? Complete GIS parcel data project; develop and
maintain critical business layers for Parks,
Airports, General Services, and Sheriff’s
Dispatch.
? Manage RFP process and consulting services to
build a Countywide Security Program Strategic
Plan.
? Migrate the County email and calendaring
system to a new platform strategically aligned
with the County’s goals of providing enhanced
mobility, collaboration, and system resiliency.
? Complete the replacement of the County’s core
network system to guarantee reliable, adaptable,
and cost effective communication services to all
County facilities.
? Complete Board Chambers equipment
modernization. 