During these difficult economic times, the Office is increasingly facing additional changes and challenges in the coming
year. In FY2012-13, the Office expects to increasingly feel the effects of the AB 109 State Prisoner Re-alignment. The
Maple Street Complex and the Maguire Correctional Facility were never built for multi-year incarceration, major
programming, or accommodating those needing longer term services. It is also necessary to manage the facility
security and operations and take into consideration the more sophisticated inmate profile due to State Re-alignment.
Despite these challenges, the Office will continue to seek creative solutions to ensure there is space available to offer
the programming and partnership staff review in preparation for those inmates who will be facing re-entry. In addition,
the Office continues to effectively manage the much-needed replacement jail project to ensure it is a successful facility
that reduces recidivism of the San Mateo County inmates, while promoting public safety. The Sheriff’s Office and public
safety agencies have also established a Re-alignment Public Safety Operations Plan-Collaborative Partnership to
include the staffing of a Crime Analyst to support data gathering, tracking, operations, and multi-disciplinary teams in
conjunction with the Probation Department.
The Office will continue to strive to maintain high levels of service despite the continued loss of Federal and State
funding, such as the potential loss of $1.1 Million in State Criminal Alien Assistance Program (SCAAP) funding in the
coming year and will continue to aggressively seek grant funding to support many of our programs such as in our
Forensic Laboratory, Office of Emergency Services, and Sheriff’s Community Programs. In an effort to meet the
challenge of reducing the Forensic Lab DNA case backlog, grant-funded robotic DNA technology will be purchased in
order to automate several steps in the DNA analysis process, which will free up valuable staff time to process more
cases. The reduction in available Department of Homeland Security grant funds will be a major challenge in FY 2012-
13, as those grant funds are used to train, equip, and prepare San Mateo County for all types of hazards. In the
absence of grant funds, OES will seek ways to maintain services by moving from external contracts to utilizing internal
resources.
Due to the loss of staffing from budget reductions in recent years, the Office expects to continue to face some staffing
challenges in the coming year. These staffing shortages have created an increase in the reliance on overtime to
maintain the minimum mandated staffing levels required in our many of the core divisions. The Office will continue to
monitor the use of overtime and, whenever possible, Bureaus use flexible staffing plans and share resources in an
effort to reduce the reliance on overtime and save valuable county dollars.
The merging of police departments into the Sheriff’s Office has created a challenge with the increased traffic on the
Sheriff’s radio channel. This increase has forced a realignment of the Bureau’s radio traffic to allow for a safe
environment for staff and the best use of the limited channels available.
The Office will continue to review spending patterns, manage staff vacancies, and monitor and control overtime usage
while continuing to seek shared service solutions and cost-saving efficiencies to become more fiscally responsible

Probation will continue to face many challenges and demands in FY 2012-13. Recent reforms, including the State AB
109 realignment, the proposed Department of Juvenile Justice (DJJ) realignment, and the County re-entry initiatives,
will continue to have significant impacts on both juvenile and adult community corrections. The influx of the realignment
population will add significantly to the workload of the Department. The increasing demand of the EBP calls for a
significant paradigm shift in the public safety communities to seek a change from an incarceration model to the one
that seeks to divert and rehabilitate offenders and return them to be productive members of the community. The
growing data reporting requirements to track probation program outcomes and performance pose a pressing need to
explore a new probation case management system with good reporting functions. All of these, combined with staffing
and budget constraints, present major challenges for the Department in the coming year. Major projects are underway to address the above challenges. The expansion of EBP is being explored throughout
adult and juvenile programs, including the plan to provide the evidence-based training to more staff as well as
community-based treatment organizations and partners. The Department will increase the number of Cognitive
Behavioral Therapy classes and curriculum to more probationers and implement Aggression Replacement Therapy
(ART) for youthful offenders housed at the juvenile facilities. The ART is an evidence-based model designed to alter
the behavior of chronically aggressive adolescents in order to improve social skills competence, anger control, and
moral reasoning so that youth will have the necessary tools to deal with difficult situations. Additionally, the Department
is collaborating with public and private agencies to seek innovative ways to supervise and manage the realignment
population. In order to protect public safety and improve successful reentry, the Department will expand capacity as a
participant in the County’s re-entry projects and priorities. Finally, the Department is working closely with the
Information Services Department to acquire an integrated and comprehensive probation case management system to
produce efficiencies and provide ongoing outcome measurement of probation programs.
With the continuing efforts to implement and enhance effective solutions to the challenges and demands, it is
anticipated that the ability to make performance-informed decisions will be improved and the value that Probation
brings to the citizens, customers, and stakeholders can be clearly communicated. Ultimately, more positive outcomes
will be achieved. Within each program area, several specific measurements have been determined to help evaluate
Probation’s performance. They are highlighted in full in the program summaries.

The development and implementation of a case management system will be a challenging project in the coming years.
However, the need for a case management system is paramount in order to properly manage the thousands of cases
flowing through the Office and to properly allocate limited resources. The Office continues to work with ISD and the
County Manager’s Office to develop and finance this essential tool.
There will be ongoing legal and practical issues as the realignment process evolves in the coming months and years.
There will undoubtedly be dozens of court decisions interpreting the realignment statutes and it will be incumbent on
the Office to develop training and implementation plans to train internal staff and law enforcement agencies in the legal
mandates established by the court.
The Office successfully launched the SMC Saves scanning project in early 2012 and is currently ahead of schedule.
The purpose of the Project is to convert hard copy felony case files into electronic documents in order to reduce
storage costs and improve staff access to files. To ensure that the current pace of the project is sustained, the Office
will set monthly milestones, ensure that proper document quality control guidelines are being followed, and develop
practical procedures to expand the scope of the project to integrate with our case management system project.
If the initiative on the November ballot passes, the Three Strikes Law will be significantly changed. The Office policies
and procedures for handling three strikes cases will have to be reviewed and updated, which will require training staff
on the changes. Additionally, the initiative requires a review of all prior Three Strikes life sentences and a return to
court for a portion of those cases that involved non-serious and non-violent commitment offenses. This will involve a
substantial expenditure of resources to comply with the new law, assuming California voters pass it.

In FY 2012-13, the Coroner’s Office has established a three year plan for organizational changes and cost savings to
provide mandated services and reduce the Department’s structural deficit. The Department’s initiatives for FY 2012-13
will be to implement year one of the plan which will require a change in schedule in order to have additional Deputy
Coroner’s available during peak hours and on-call during the evening to reduce overtime due to gaps in schedules.
Employees will also be trained to conduct work currently being handled by contractors. Safety and Technology
equipment will be purchased to allow employees to serve the public in an efficient manner. It is anticipated that these
changes will be reflected in the customer service satisfaction surveys completed by family members.
Additionally, the Coroner’s Office will highlight Jane and John Doe cases in the newspaper in order to develop leads
and potentially increase the number of cold cases that will be solved.
Another initiative will be to increase number of participants in the Save-A-Life and Every 15 Minute programs by
offering them to high school students in San Mateo County. These programs are designed to expose youth to reckless
behavior and try to prevent accidental deaths, which can help young adult’s make better decisions. The department will
measure success by increasing the number of participants and the potential decrease in reckless actions that could
lead to criminal behavior.

In the next fiscal year, the Department anticipates major change and challenges considering the potential for relocation
of the Department to the new Circle Star complex. Moving the 911 Center is a highly technical and strategic process.
Planning is paramount in order to move the center while maintaining a continuity of service to the public and public
safety agencies we serve. The Department will be exploring different ways to manage the project in order to maintain
service levels in all divisions of the organization.
Relevant to the relocation is our continued work with the County and City Managers Association on Shared Services.
The Department continues to study the feasibility of countywide or regional consolidation of law enforcement
communications. Realized savings, efficiencies, and / or service improvements from consolidation and building out the
new Dispatch Center to accommodate growth will be incorporated into the new Center’s space plan. The challenge
here is the ability to conduct this highly analytical work while planning relocation with the limited administrative staff in
the Department.
Relevant to consolidation is cost recovery. The Department is prepared to develop an equitable fee schedule in order
to secure long-term service agreements between the cities and county. This is not only important for new contracts but
in revisiting existing agreements to ensure equity between services and fees. The obvious challenge is to determine a
fair and equitable balance between the county and cities we serve considering the existing state of the local economy.

Ensuring a resident-centered, timely, and cost-effective end to the lease for Burlingame Long Term Care. In February
2012, the Health System recommended, and the Board of Supervisors approved, a decision not to renew the lease for
Burlingame Long Term Care when it expires on June 30, 2013. During FY 2012-13, the Health System will need to exit
the facility by June 30, 2013, place 190 BLTC residents in other appropriate placements, reduce approximately 200
positions, and remain within the transition budget.
Driving quality ever higher and costs lower. Starting January 2014, federal health reform will have two major effects:
many uninsured residents will get coverage and thus have more choice among providers, and the supplemental
payments the Health System receives from the state/federal governments for serving a disproportionately high number
of uninsured and Medi-Cal patients will begin to decrease. Since 20,000 residents will not benefit from this expansion
of coverage and will remain the County responsibility, the Health System must simultaneously drive quality higher and
costs lower to be able to continue to provide care to these residents. To that end, the Medical Center is focusing
relentlessly on cost and quality, implementing a complete electronic health record and using the LEAN process
improvement program to improve the cost and effectiveness of patient care. The Health System is also considering
how to expand the LEAN process improvement program to other divisions. The success of these efforts will be
measured by whether the Health System meets its budget and the milestones for the federal Delivery System Reform
Incentive Program.
Providing access to healthcare with an increasing number of ACE patients and static County contribution. Over the last
three years, the number of people who qualify for the County's program of health coverage, called the ACE program,
has nearly doubled, while the County contribution to the Medical Center that funds the care for ACE patients has
declined. Consequences include a long waiting list for primary care access and an increased number of visits to the
Emergency Department. This year the Health System will continue work to increase the number of patients seen with
existing resources, implement staffing ratio changes to increase efficiency, and seek financial support from local
healthcare districts for care to their residents.
Responding to criminal justice realignment. A major initiative of the Health System will be to continue to work with the
Courts, the Sheriff's Office, the Human Services Agency, and the Probation Department to connect clients leaving the
criminal justice system with supportive services to ensure a successful re-entry into the community. Successful
program development by the Health System and other partner agencies will result in the establishment of a re-entry
process and Memorandum of Understanding that reflect San Mateo's Local Implementation Plan. Once the re-entry
program is up and running, success will be measured through reductions in recidivism.
Integrating physical and mental health/substance use services. People with multiple chronic conditions, particularly
those with mental illness or substance use disorders, need services that are easier for them to access and that treat
the whole person, not just a single disease. Accordingly, the Health System is pushing forward with better integrating
physical health and behavioral health services, both in primary care clinics and in specialty behavioral health clinics. A
successful integration of physical and mental health/substance use services will allow the Health System to meet the
objectives for its federal grant including provision of a "total wellness" integrated approach for 400 clients by June
2013.
Managing the transition with school districts for mental health services for special education students. A change in
state law now provides local school districts the option to significantly change the provision of mental health services 

for students for FY 2012-13 through selection of new providers. The outcomes of local school decisions will have an
impact on the children and families historically served by Behavioral Health and Recovery Services (BHRS). District by
district negotiations are underway and should reach conclusion by the end of June. Regardless of the outcome, BHRS
will work closely with schools to facilitate a smooth transition for children and families. BHRS expects to make
September changes to the FY 2012-13 budget once the outcome of these negotiations is known. A successful
transition with school districts for special education students will result in Health System agreements with 50% or more
of the school districts to continue using BHRS mental health services.
Implementing the Duals Pilot in partnership with the Health Plan of San Mateo. The Health System will be working
closely with the Health Plan of San Mateo (HPSM), the State, and the other three pilot counties to address the many
questions that will have to be answered in order to implement the Duals Pilot program by January 2013. Some of the
other counties face even greater implementation challenges because they have less experience working with their
health plans and would like to delay the start of the program. In addition, other counties have concerns about how the
In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Program will be impacted by closer association with health plans. The Health
System and HPSM believe the long term sustainability of IHSS and the other home and community based services will
be enhanced by this pilot which will demonstrate their utility in reducing more expensive institutional care such as
hospital admissions and nursing home stays. The Health System will be working energetically at the State level to
prevent delay. A successful launch of the Duals Pilot and IHSS sustainability project will be measured by whether the
Health System and program partners are fully prepared to implement by the date the State starts the program
(currently set for January 1, 2013).
Managing the County's contribution to the IHSS program. The Duals Pilot will support the long term financial
sustainability of IHSS but the benefits will not be immediate and may be delayed due to the State's reluctance to allow
for flexibility in how counties use the program. The Duals Pilot will not change the requirement that the County provide
17% of the cost of the IHSS program to draw down 83% of the funding from the state and federal governments. The
expected county cost of the program for FY 2012-13 is $11,658,548. The County's General Fund contribution remains
at $3,702,306 with the balance coming from Realignment funds. The County match will draw in $54.8 million in state
and federal IHSS funding to San Mateo County. At the current funding level, the IHSS program, which is an entitlement
program, will exhaust all of its Reserves by March 2014. Therefore, to meet its legal obligation, it is projected the
County will need to contribute an additional $1.2 million in FY 2013-14 and an additional $5.4 million in FY 2014-15.
The Health System will continue to manage utilization of the program and advocate with the State and other counties
for more local flexibility in use of the program to support financial sustainability.
Continuing to advocate for improvements to make the environment healthier for people and for the planet. The Health
System will expand and enforce the polystyrene ban and spearhead a regional ban on the retail use of single use bags
that will require the completion of an EIR and approval by the County and many cities. Other work on upstream
prevention includes continued advocacy for regional/county/city investments in active transportation such as
convenient and reliable public transit, and improvements in the streetscapes to encourage biking and walking for every
day travel, not merely for recreation. If successful, the upstream prevention work will result in the County and 50% of
cities participating in the EIR adopting a single use bag ban.
Ensuring the appropriate administration of all Public Administrator estates. Hundreds of Public Administrator estates
that were transferred to the Health System from the District Attorney's Office will be reviewed and resolved. By the end
of FY 2012-13, the Health System will appropriately administer and resolve 50% of the transferred estates. 

First 5 San Mateo County's budget for FY 2012-13 includes a 5% reduction in tobacco tax revenue in addition to a 7%
reduction in total appropriations compared to the FY 2011-12 budget. The shortfall between anticipated revenue and
appropriations, amounting to $4 million, will be addressed by spending down the Commission's fund balance. In FY
2011-12 $5.6 million in reserves is projected to offset the shortfall.
The main challenge F5SMC faces is maintaining a level of funding for grants while tobacco tax revenue continues to
decline. In addition, many programs for young children countywide will experience drastic cuts based on the
Governor's budget which impacts not only current First 5 grantees but children's services in general.
F5SMC will continue to partner with local, county and state leaders to explore collaborative opportunities that can be
implemented to ensure that the infrastructure for children's services is sustained. F5SMC will continue to utilize
reserves to sustain current grantees as outlined in its six-year financial plan.
Through F5SMC's comprehensive evaluation, F5SMC will be able to analyze the collected data to ensure that the
investments in the community are meeting the goals and objectives of the First 5 San Mateo County Strategic Plan and
the community needs. 

The coming year presents a number of changes and challenges in which a growing number of county residents will
turn to HSA for a wide array of services that meet their needs and aspirations.
To ensure that the agency maintains its current level of excellent programming and administrative standards, HSA is
pursuing re-accreditation through both the Council on Accreditation (COA) and the Commission on Accreditation of 

Rehabilitation Facilities (CARF). As a result of this rigorous process, twelve program areas will implement new
evidence-based standards, ensuring that HSA's programs and services meet evolving best practices. HSA's VRS
division is accredited by CARF; the rest of the agency is accredited by COA, an effort that was initiated as part of a
response to a 2003 Civil Grand Jury recommendation. Since achieving accreditation, HSA's quality improvement
practices, training, case management, cultural competency and administrative practices have all improved, to the
direct benefit of over 90,000 county residents.
In anticipation of the Affordable Care Act, HSA is preparing for the rapid influx of upwards of 60,000 new customers
seeking health insurance eligibility services. In order to meet this demand, HSA is redesigning its service delivery
system to increase capacity and engage customers. This initiative will include developing multiple service access
channels, improving back-office operations and ensuring the efficient processing of applications and renewals. HSA is
also upgrading its lobbies to improve accessibility and increase self-help options. In all of these efforts, technology is
being leveraged to scale operations and improve service quality. Successful redesign will contribute to an increase in
the number of county residents receiving health insurance and CalFresh.
SMC Works Employment Services will launch a tripartite business engagement strategy consisting of: a process
improvement team to address sector hiring needs, new marketing and communications campaigns including a
specialized toolkit for employers, and greater alignment with the Workforce Investment Board and its strategic plan.
This initiative will position SMC Works as a premiere provider of workforce solutions in San Mateo County. As a result
of this effort, the business community will receive tailored staffing services while jobseekers from CalWORKs,
Vocational Rehabilitation Services and WIA will receive collaborative job development services. The success of this
initiative will be demonstrated by an increase in the number of client placements and business job orders.
In its second year of implementation, Service Connect, the collaboration between the Probation Department, Health
System and Human Services Agency, will serve approximately 340 formerly incarcerated individuals and will focus on
critical areas that contribute to long-term reintegration such as employment, vocational training, housing stability, family
reunification, mental health, alcohol and drug treatment and health services. These holistic services will build a
foundation of self-sufficiency which will help to reduce recidivism in San Mateo County.
The Governor's proposed budget contains major cuts to the CalWORKs program which, after several years of
reductions, would have a significant cumulative impact to low-income families. These reductions include significant
cuts to the grant amounts and time allowed on assistance. Approximately 500 county families would be at risk of being
converted to "child-only" cases, which would reduce the average grant for a family of three from $680 a month to $300.
In addition, current child-only grants will decrease by 27 percent, leaving $300 a month to raise a child. The $1 million
reduction to the county's allocation would significantly affect HSA's ability to provide supportive services such as child
care to working families and would likely reduce staff support. To meet this challenge, HSA will continue to work with
both the County Welfare Directors Association and California State Association of Counties to address and mitigate
any reductions in services to low-income families. 

Child Support Services is highly automated and in 2007 converted to a statewide system. To address the challenges
associated with flat funding the department will continue to leverage Business Process Redesign in targeted areas to
uncover areas for improvement which would provide both cost efficiencies and better customer service. Next year
DCSS will work on two IT initiatives to achieve this goal:
• Evaluate the effectiveness of an electronic workflow mail system which should allow the Department to scan and
upload incoming mail into the child support system immediately. 
The Department has begun implementing the process improvements identified through the Business Process
Redesign event. Current Planning staff continue to implement and identify permit processing efficiency measures in
the coming year. The implementation should be completed by January 2013 and result in reducing processing time by
up to 28%. Success of this project will be measured by an increase in the percentage of projects that receive notice
that the project is complete within 30 days of their initial submittal.
Concurrently with the business process improvements, the Department’s automated permit processing and tracking
system will be upgraded. The new system will enable customers to submit plans on-line. Both the Department and its
customers will experience reduced costs from paper and reduced staff time required to complete the review process.
Success of this project will be measured by successfully implementing and testing of the permit processing and
tracking system.
Major projects for the next fiscal year include revising and updating the County’s General Plan Policies that are
identified in the Department’s Energy Efficiency Climate Action Plan, and completing new zoning regulations for the
Stanford Weekend Acres area. These efforts will be completed when the Board of Supervisors adopts the applicable
regulations.



Library revenues are less than expenses. To balance the FY 2012-13 budget and through direction provided by the
Library JPA Governing Board, the Library will eliminate four vacant positions and use reserves and excess ERAF to
maintain current levels of service and fund one-time projects. An emphasis will be placed on facilitating school
readiness and cultivating young readers between ages of 0-10 by providing services and resources that develop the
love of reading, learning and libraries. The Library will also promote self-sufficiency, discovery and overall satisfaction
by arranging and presenting easily accessible library collections. Finally, the organization will strive to improve
employee engagement by establishing improved best practices and recognition of service contributions in order to
optimize organizational performance.

The Department of Housing faces ongoing challenges as a result of Federal funding reductions. Community
Development Block Grant funds and HOME funds from U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development have
been reduced by $1.4 Million or 28%, and housing rental program administration funds have been reduced by
$600,000 or 15% in 2011-12. The Department will identify solutions to close this structural deficit such as improving
operational efficiency, restructuring departmental operations and service delivery, assessing fees for services for
revenue enhancements, and reducing services. Throughout this process the Department of Housing will continue to
focus on maintaining core services and minimizing the impact to the community. 

Parks
Parks continues to struggle with reduced funding, increased public demand for services and facilities, aging
infrastructure, a backlog of deferred maintenance, increased fire fuel load, vegetation management and habitat
restoration needs. Since FY 2008-09 the Program has reduced costs, increased funding and used available resources
to expand the volunteer program, enhance relationships with community funding sources including the Parks
Foundation, restructure field operations, implement an on-line reservation system, increase fees, improve marketing,
and merged with the Department of Public Works to reduce administrative overhead expenses. Despite these efforts,
the Program remains underfunded compared to organizations with similar service requirements. Parks is responsible
for a growing number of visitors, miles of trails, and total acres within the park system. Lack of adequate funding to
safely or properly operate all facilities has led to 18 facility closures, including the Homestead Youth Camp at Memorial
Park, the Werder Fishing Pier at Coyote Point Park, and a variety of recreational facilities at Flood Park.
In FY 2012-13, Parks will provide recreational opportunities to over 1,600,000 visitors, manage 15,000 acres of public
land, keep 178 miles of trails clear and accessible and continue habitat restoration and endangered species
reintroductions efforts. Parks is delivering most services, but at a very low service level with minimal facility closures.
However, at current funding levels, Parks will not be able to keep up with fire fuel load reduction efforts, habitat and
facility maintenance, interpretation and educational programs, or absorb more acreage or facilities. New revenue will
be needed or services will have to be reduced in selected areas.
For example, as part of the Highway 1 Devils Slide Tunnel Bypass project, the County accepted the responsibility to
convert the abandoned section of Highway 1 to a non-motorized recreational trail and operate and maintain the facility. 

Parks estimates that the start-up costs will be $1.9 million and the annual operating costs will be $695,480. Parks has
applied for various grants to support some elements of the project. The Department is working on a timeline for the
construction of the trail.
Coastside
Parks is being called upon to play a larger role in the Mid-Coast area. This area receives funding through development
fees and grants for park and recreation improvements, but no operational funding has been provided for the Division's
expanding role. Recent projects include Mirada Surf East, Mirada Surf West, the California Coastal Trail within Mirada
Surf, Quarry Park and Quarry Park Playground, and Pillar Point Bluffs with associated trails and facilities. Anticipated
additions or improvements in the near future include additional sections of the California Coastal Trail, Green Valley
Trail, Fitzgerald Marine Reserve Interpretative Center, Pillar Point contiguous parcel(s), and Mirada Surf/Surfers Beach
and Pillar Point Marsh Parking lot restrooms. To meet these needs absent additional revenue, the Department will
draw resources from other areas in Parks. This will increase response times and decrease services levels for fire fuel
load management, trail management, habitat restoration in other areas of the Parks system.
Facilities
To maintain funding for services to the community, internal service charges have been held flat for the past three years.
To cover increasing costs of operation, primarily related to energy consumption, the Facilities budget receives
$1,189,000 in General Fund contributions and has also adjusted service levels. In FY 2012-13, Facilities plans to
reduce the General Fund contribution through a variety of initiatives including energy efficiency improvements at the
San Mateo Medical Center and temperature adjustments at all county facilities. These projects are expected to provide
on-going cost savings. Furthermore, the Department will begin implementing recommendations from the Facilities and
the Energy Master plans resulting in optimal use of county facilities. The Division will develop countywide water use/
savings strategies and explore funding/rebate opportunities to finance the projects that have a high return on the
County’s investment.
Construction Services
Construction Services continues to struggle with a decreased demand for service. Since FY 2007-08, the Program has
made progress to adapt to fewer requests through staffing and spending reductions, increased marketing to internal
and external customers, revamped organizational and business processes and consolidation with the Capital Projects
Unit to reduce administrative overhead expenses. Despite receiving a consistent level of service requests from
departments and an increase in workload related to capital projects and the Circle Star renovation, the Program still
required $577,000 in General Fund support in FY 2011-12. In FY 2012-13, the Program will transfer staff positions to
other vacant positions in the Department in an effort to increase revenue and decrease on-going expenses. The benefit
of transferring these positions is that the program will continue to have access to skilled and experienced staff on an
as-needed basis. If successful, Construction Services will become a smaller, more flexible work unit that can provide
much needed services to the County in a cost-effective way.
Fleet Services
Fiscal Year 2012-13 will be the third consecutive year that fleet rates have not increased. Rising prices for fuel and
maintenance supplies are offsetting the savings the Fleet staff achieved through more effective management of the
fleet, adjusting the frequency of maintenance and holding positions vacant. In FY 2012-13, Fleet Services will use a
$950,000 SMC Saves grant to solicit proposals to reduce fleet costs, which may include a vehicle reservation system
and/or in-car GPS tracking.

A major challenge will be meeting workload demands while consolidating services with other County departments and
the loss of the institutional knowledge of a new retiree of the Division. Real Property staff is confident that they can
maintain service quality and continue meeting deadlines in the short-term as the current transition takes place. The
Division hopes to meet its challenges in the next year by sharing staffing resources across the Community Services
Departments and specifically in the Department of Public Works.

The Department intends to maintain the current level of service for daily agricultural inspections despite a proposed
reduction in state reimbursement for agricultural inspections. State funding reductions are anticipated in the High Risk
Pest Exclusion program which will be partially offset by an increase in other state revenue and a proposed fee increase
for phytosanitary certification inspections. The additional revenue and expenditure reductions will allow the Department
to maintain the current level of services.
Implementation of ongoing technology projects should increase efficiency, reduce staff time spent on administrative
and support functions, and allow for redirection of staff time to agricultural inspection services. To achieve greater
efficiency, staff will be trained on new procedures for both electronic payments for all phytosanitary inspection fees and
the new web-based daily activity reporting system. Expansion of online pesticide use reporting by agricultural
operations and pest control businesses will require additional staff time devoted to training and outreach as well.
However, online use reporting by industry will eliminate the need for department staff to enter the pesticide use reports
into the database.
Success will be measured by tracking performance measures, reviewing customer surveys, successful interceptions
and exclusion of exotic pests from the County and positive performance evaluation reports from state oversight
agencies, such as the California Department of Food and Agriculture and the California Department of Pesticide
Regulation.

Over the course of the last five years the County has eliminated a net of 766 positions or about one- sixth of its
workforce. Although the County is experiencing some improvement in the local economy and stabilizing of revenues, it
still faces many financial challenges in the coming years. The County will be challenged to restructure its organization
and its services using fewer employees, and performing different tasks, in a different way.
During FY 2012-13 the CMO leadership will engage the unions and our employees in meaningful and ongoing
discussions about the future nature of the County’s work and how the County should organize to accomplish it.
Ultimately, some of these changes would require voter approval or a charter amendment.

An increase in the number of decline in value applications and assessment appeals continue to be a source of
increased workload in Appraisal Services. This trend has resulted in delays in enrollment of assessments and a
growing backlog of complex appraisal workload. In order to mitigate the unprecedented backlog of Assessment Appeal
filings, the department dedicated a team of six appraisers and a supervisor to deal solely with routine Assessment
Appeal cases. This team has developed standardized case preparation and presentation templates, realizing process
efficiencies. The Assessor and the County Manager’s Office will work together over the next few months to identify the
appropriate level of staffing needs to address the increase of Decline in Value applications and assessment appeals. In
order to track progress, the Assessor, County Manager’s Office (CMO) and Assessment Appeals Board (AAB) will
work together to focus on increasing the number of assessment appeals resolved by June 30 each year.
The nationwide Presidential General Election is scheduled for November 6, 2012 and will require a significant amount
of resources because new voter registration and voter turn out is typically much higher during a Presidential race. The
addition of an Elections Specialist III last fiscal year will help the Elections staff operate smoothly. Other new processes
and systems such as new voter management software, state of the art scanning and imaging equipment, and geocoding,
as well as the anticipated statewide online voter registration system will enhance the program’s ability to
handle the increase in registered voters and voter turnout.
Finally, the Department will select a contractor for the third and final phase of the Social Security Number Truncation
Program that protects private information by redacting social security numbers from documents in the Clerk-Recorder’s
office. This final phase entails converting microfilm records dating from 1980 to 1996 into digital documents so that the
first five digits of Social Security Numbers can be redacted. This project will last two to three years and will be funded
by the Social Security Number Truncation Program Trust Fund.

Redevelopment Agency Dissolutions: In addition to our annual Property Tax computations, apportionment and
reporting, the Controller's Office must also implement the new law (AB 26) for the dissolution of Redevelopment
Development Agencies (RDAs). AB 26 has aggressive deadlines, legal complexities and limited State guidance. We
have reprioritized our work to allow our Audit and Property Tax teams to respond to this challenge. Success with the
RDA dissolution work will be achieved if the County’s property taxes are correctly and timely calculated and distributed.
We will undergo a slight departmental reorganization for additional Property Tax Division support. This will result in a
decrease in Net County Cost for the Controller’s Office.
Focused Strategy Management Initiative: Operational audits, studies, and consultant reports generate numerous
recommendations for cost saving and process improvements in County departments. The Controller's Office plans to
move its operational audits to the next level; to assist in implementation of complex, high value recommendations and
measure the results. Measures of success will include actual budget savings and improved customer service
efficiencies.
Reducing Countywide Financial Accounting Risk: As the County resizes its workforce, the risk of a breakdown in
internal financial accounting controls increases. This can result in errors and irregularities that have negative financial
and public perception impact. To address this issue, we are changing the focus of one third of our Internal Audit
Division toward performing risk based internal control procedures. We will perform risk analyses, perform Countywide
training and review controls over fungible assets (e.g., cash) and utilize other best practices (e.g., continuous
automated monitoring). Success will be measured by the number of completed internal control audits, trainings, and
other new reports (e.g., enhanced reporting of Special District financial statements). It is difficult to measure savings
associated with the resulting Countywide increase in awareness of the importance of internal accounting controls
(much like paying for an insurance policy) but we hope to also perform some audits (e.g., Transient Occupancy Tax
audits) that may increase County revenues.
Implementation of ATKS 24x7 Timekeeping: Our Payroll will be implementing, with Human Resources and ISD,
ATKS’s 24x7 timekeeping capabilities at the Medical Center. Success will be measured by successful implementation
and budget savings associated with “right sizing” the workforce to our needs (e.g., patient acuity).
Selection and Planning for Implementation of a New Human Resource/Payroll IS: As part of the County’s five year
Information Management Project Committee, the Board approved replacing our current Payroll system, which is at
end-of-life. This multi-year project requires significant effort of our Payroll Division, in conjunction with Human
Resources and ISD. In FY 2012-13, we will select a vendor and develop a project plan for replacement of our current
system.
Implementation of Automated Accounts Payable Transaction Information: In conjunction with accounting system users
and ISD, we will conduct a pilot for centrally scanning vendor invoices, electronically routing them to users for approval,
and input of accounts payable information to our accounting system. If the pilot is successful we will implement
Countywide. We will measure the increase in discounts received from efficient processing and payment of invoices.
Upgrade of Financial Accounting System (IFAS): Since IFAS was implemented at the County in FY 1995-96, we have
regularly performed upgrades. Relative to other counties our size, the cost of ownership of IFAS is exceedingly low and
we have increased efficiencies with continuous upgrades (e.g., electronic payments). Success will be measured by the
completion of the upgrade in FY 2013-14.

The reality is that maintaining earnings in the County Pool at FY 2011-12 levels is unlikely. The potential impacts of the
European economic issues are unknown at this time. Improvement in the domestic economy is also uncertain. As the
Department continues to focus on preservation of principal, an earnings rate in the range of 5/8ths percent is
anticipated for the County Pool.
Acquiring system requirements to conduct a Request for Proposal for a new property tax system is an initiative for FY
2012-13. It is anticipated that once knowledge transfer of our current system to ISD staff is completed in September,
ISD may be better able to assist with documenting these new requirements. The new property tax system will be
shared by the Treasurer-Tax Collector, Controller, and Assessor-County Clerk-Recorder. Improvements to the current
Property Tax System are frozen until September or on hold pending a new system. The inability to have minor

improvements programmed into the system until after September will impact minor plans to improve processes.
Additionally, major improvements to processes must be placed on hold until a new system replaces the current
outdated system.
Space at the Sheriff’s sub-station on Kelly St. was approved as an alternative location to collect property taxes in Half
Moon Bay. Staff is already designated to work there November 10th through December 10th and March 10th through
April 10th each year. Reduced foot traffic in Redwood City is anticipated along with reduced wait time and fuel costs for
taxpayers on the Coastside. Installing the correct signage and providing clear notification of business hours and days
of operation to residents is imperative to avoid confusion and making sure that Sheriff sub-station staff are not
burdened by residents trying to pay their taxes during the off-season.
Although Revenue Services has met their goals for FY 2011-12, the current economic situation continues to impede
their ability to collect debt. More and more individuals are out of work and/or living on the streets where it is difficult to
locate them. Debtors are having difficulty meeting even the minimum required payments. We continue to investigate
debtors through every means available and also conduct research on new and improved processes to locate debtors.
At the end of the year the department will measure success by determining which goals were met and which goals
were not met. Leadership will review which methods of improvement were developed and implemented, whether or not
they had a positive impact on the organization as a whole, and the overall cost of the improvements. Finally, the
Department will evaluate whether it was able to stay within the approved budget, whether it was successful with less
staff, and whether customers were satisfied with the level of service provided.

Like all County departments, the County Counsel’s Office faces the challenge of continuing to provide top-rate services
in a declining economy. The challenges to the County Counsel’s Office are compounded, however, by circumstances
unique to county legal advisors. For example, challenges are presented not only by complex matters like jail
construction and financing issues, but state legislation concerning such matters as realignment of services and the
unprecedented dissolution of redevelopment agencies place our office at the forefront and require the unanticipated
commitment of significant legal resources for legal research and analysis in a fast-evolving setting. Additionally, as a
department that provides a special and unique service, we find that the financial and resource constraints faced by
other County departments impact this office as clients increasingly turn to us for additional assistance. Further, in
FY2012-13 the County Counsel’s Office will increase the scope of services it provides by assuming responsibility for
handling medical malpractice litigation for County agencies.
Our approach to dealing with the challenges facing the office has several facets. First, we will continue to improve our
office’s systems and procedures in order to maximize our resources. These efforts include reducing document storage
and archiving costs through the digitalization of records, reducing legal research expenses through renegotiation of our
electronic legal research services contract and the selective reduction of law library publications, and updating our
case management system. In the area of medical malpractice defense, we are implementing procedures to both
leverage the experience of our attorneys in this area and to cross-train new attorneys in order to guarantee a high level
of service in the most cost effective way possible.
Our office’s first priority is our clients. Success, therefore, is defined largely by our clients’ satisfaction with the legal
services we provide. We seek feedback and evaluation from our clients every two years and have consistently
obtained client satisfaction rates of “very good” or “excellent” exceeding 95%. We will measure the success of our
efforts by the results of our next client survey, currently scheduled for the fall of 2013.

Recognizing the fiscal challenge facing the County and departments, the Human Resources Department continues to
serve as a strategic partner to identify service efficiencies including expanding shared services (primarily in the area of
administrative support), providing organizational consulting services to departments, expanding membership of the
Regional Training Consortium, and renegotiating risk management insurance policies at reduced rates.
The Human Resources Department continues to focus on building organizational and employee capacity through
development and expansion of the County’s Collaborative Performance Management System (CPMS) and
Supervisory Academy. In an effort to maximize technology that result in efficiencies, the Department is partnering with
the Controller’s Office and Information Services Department to implement a new Human Resources/Payroll
Information System.
The Department will measure success by: 1) providing excellent services as indicated by high customer survey ratings;
2) expanding the number of employees with performance plans that align with workgroup, department and County
goals; 3) increasing employee engagement results; 4) maintaining high employee retention rates; 5) resolving claims
prior to formal process (Workers Compensation, Equal Employment Opportunity, Employee Relations); 6) maintaining
high promotion rates; 7) sustaining high satisfaction with new hires; and 8) generating Countywide structural savings
through new labor agreements.

Major changes for FY 2012-13 include the reduction of twelve positions, nine of which are filled. These position
reductions are a result of consolidation of internal support systems, decreased work opportunities and service-level
reductions. These position reductions are also part of our two year plan to eliminate our structural department deficit as 

a result of continued decline in demand for IT related projects. With fewer staff we will be less able to respond to
customer requests for work that has not been planned and budgeted. Maintaining high availability of IT systems,
currently at 99.8%, while implementing technology changes such as conversion of PC’s to VDI and expanding our
wireless infrastructure will also pose challenges.
Moving forward we will continue to develop strategies of doing more with less. These strategies include additional
cross training of ISD staff. We will collaborate with our partners to prioritize and plan IT initiatives and major business
system replacements (Criminal Justice, Human Resources/Payroll, and Property Tax System) to ensure the resources
necessary will be available to complete high priority projects on schedule. We will work closely with departments to
assess where we can take advantage of technologies such as VDI and mobile computing to better provide service and
lower IT support costs. Finally, a plan is being developed by a cross departmental committee to create a countywide
Core IT team.
Our success will be measured by how well we overcome our challenges and achieve the goals we set as a
department, from administrative services to new innovation initiatives. We will increase the number of County offices
supporting a mobile workforce from 3 to 15, we will increase the number of VDI devices in use from 225 to 1,000, while
maintaining IT system availability at 99.8% and we will complete 90% of medium and large IT project on time and on
budget.