The Office is increasingly facing additional changes and challenges in the coming year. In FY2015-17, the Office
expects to increasingly feel the effects of the AB-109 State Prisoner Re-alignment, as well as the effects of Proposition
47. The Program Services Bureau within Corrections will continually review its programming curricula to ensure that
inmates who might receive shorter sentences as a result of Proposition 47 can benefit from in-custody programs and
services regardless of the inmates length of stay. As part of the continuum of care re-entry model, the Corrections
Division will continue to collaborate with multi-disciplinary partners to prepare approximately 200 inmates for reentryinto
the community through the County's Unified Re-Entry Program. Despite these challenges, the Office will
continue to seek creative solutions to ensure there is space available to offer the programming and partnership staff
review in preparation for those inmates who will be facing re-entry. In the coming years, NCHIDTA/NCRIC is continuing
to develop a cyber-threat analysis program to assist in the identification, mitigation, deterrence and prevention of cyber
threats, which will improve information sharing regarding cyber threats to protect government and critical infrastructure
throughout Northern California and the Nation. Over the next two years, the Sheriff’s Forensic Laboratory anticipates
the added challenge of increased Federal mandates in the area of DNA analysis requiring an increase of seven new

genetic markers; going from 13 genetic markers to 20 genetic markers, which will require new instrumentation, reagent
sets, and a lengthy validation study. A significant amount of personnel time will be necessary to validate these
additional seven genetic markers necessary for CODIS entry, which poses challenges to maintaining the same level of
service in processing cases and turnaround times.
The Office will continue to strive to maintain high levels of service despite the continued loss of Federal and State
funding, and will continue to aggressively seek grant funding to support many of the Office’s programs, such as in the
Forensic Laboratory, Office of Emergency Services, and Sheriff’s Community Programs. Assigned personnel will
continue to be asked to perform at a high level and assume responsibilities beyond that of traditional patrol. Despite
these funding and staffing challenges, in the coming year, the Office is committed to increasing Emergency
Preparedness Training on the Coastside, as well as continuing to work closely with local schools to ensure the safety
and security of students and school staff. The Office will continue to review spending patterns, manage staff vacancies,
and monitor and control overtime usage while continuing to seek shared service solutions and cost-saving efficiencies
to remain fiscally responsible.

Building support for policies that build healthy communities so that all residents can live long and happy lives
regardless of where they live in the County or income level.
• Making people understand and embrace actions to make climate change less of a threat to the health and
environment and to prepare for the now inevitable impacts so that these impacts aren’t as damaging to people’s
health.
• Reducing the Health System’s contribution to climate change.
• Dealing with the effects of the current drought and working with others to find ways to conserve and manage water
use in the County.
• Continuing to improve quality and patient, client and stakeholder satisfaction while holding costs down.
• Dealing with the effects of the rising cost of housing on patients, clients, and staff members.
• Finding sufficient places for people with mental health issues to live given the increasing cost of housing.
• Matching patients’ and clients’ data across numerous electronic health records to provide the best quality care no
matter where a patient or client seeks services.
• Continuing to align with the Health Plan of San Mateo in assuring that low-income clients with the most complex
health issues get the support needed to achieve health.
• Responding to the increasing frequency and complexity of communicable disease outbreaks including previously
rare diseases that are becoming more common such as measles.
• Decreasing the number of people with mental illness that end up in the criminal justice system instead of in
treatment.
• Ensuring sufficient access to mental health treatment for people on Medi-Cal that have moderate mental illnesses.
• Spreading the practice throughout the Health System of using medications to assist in the treatment and recovery
of people struggling with substance use disorders.
• Getting people on Medi-Cal access to substance use treatment by implementing the Drug Medi-Cal Organized
Delivery System Waiver.
• Preventing the loss of residential treatment facilities and board and care facilities in the County.
• Identifying options for older adults with disabilities to remain in a community of choice.
• Meet the continuous need for home and community-based services from the growing population of seniors and
people with disabilities.

This summer, the Agency will complete the first phase of the five-year strategic plan, which will align HSA’s work with
the County’s goals, create a clear line of sight across its programs, and provide unified direction with which to achieve
its goals. Division-level plans will be developed following the completion of this process.
The Agency’s focus for the upcoming budget cycle is in raising the standards for the delivery of core services, including
a critical evaluation of the efficacy of the task-based eligibility system currently in place, and enhancing the Agencywide
training and development offerings and metrics. This includes establishing a Quality Assurance Unit agency-wide.
In addition, the Agency will be laser-focused on several key community outcomes and County goals, including
minimizing homelessness, deepening veterans’ services, and enriching program offerings towards family stabilization.
The Agency will continue to track and develop offerings for improving the Continuum of Care for foster youth, including
foster family recruitment and transition services for former foster youth, particularly in education and employment.
Finally, the Agency is exploring services for immigrant residents, through building partnerships with external agencies,
identifying and coordinating with existing County resources, and understanding the landscape of offerings and
potential gaps in services.

The Department will initiate a number of efforts to improve its systems, procedures, and organization so that it can
effectively manage an increasing workload and improve levels of service. The Department will improve its permit
database to simplify intake and application procedures, increase tracking abilities, enhance public accessibility to
information, and expand the number of permits that can be obtained online. In conjunction with these improvements,
the Department will provide its building inspectors and code compliance officers with the tools and training they need to
enter inspection results, and complete other essential business tasks, while in the field. In addition, Code Compliance
procedures will be studied and refined to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of enforcement actions, as well as
responsiveness to the public.
Completing the transition to the Collaborative Performance Management System is another initiative that will be
undertaken to improve levels of service. Increasing the frequency and extent of collaborative interactions and
constructive feedback amongst staff and management will increase understanding of, and agreement on, the

Department’s priorities, procedures, and expectations, in a manner that carries out Shared Vision 2025, the
Department’s mission statement, and the professional goals of individual employees.
With regard to long range planning, the Department will process amendments to the County’s zoning and subdivision
regulations necessary to carry out the North Fair Oaks Community Plan, Housing Element, and other housing
initiatives. These amendments will be accomplished in conjunction with comprehensive updates to the zoning,
subdivision, tree removal, and grading regulations that address current issues and create clear and effective
standards, as well as efficient procedures.
The review and approval of Plan Princeton will be completed by the Planning Commission and the Board of
Supervisors at the end of the 2016 calendar year, and result in the submittal of a Local Coastal Program (LCP)
amendment to the California Coastal Commission. Anticipated benefits of this project include improved policies and
regulations to address airport safety and compatibility, allowable land uses and development intensities, coastal
access and recreation improvements, sensitive habitat and water quality protections, and sea level rise and shoreline
erosion issues.
A number of important transportation projects will also be completed, including the construction of new Highway One
turn lanes and pedestrian crossings conceptualized by the Midcoast Safety and Mobility Studies, the installation of an
erosion protection device and coastal access stairway at Surfer’s Beach, and the adoption of Connect the Coastside.
These projects are expected to lead to improved circulation, enhanced public transit, and expanded and safer bicycle
and pedestrian routes.

The new Strategic Plan, currently under development, will be finalized in Fall 2015. The plan will provide the
organization and its stakeholders with a visionary, conceptual management tool designed to produce decisions and
actions that shape and guide what SMCL is, what it does, and why it does it with a focus on the future.
In addition to goals outlined in the new Strategic Plan, the system will continue working on current library initiatives in
order to remain a relevant, vital community resource. Priorities include:
• Supporting the mobile and digital needs of library users
• Promoting partnerships and building awareness of the Library's resources
• Creating welcoming and well equipped facilities

Focusing on decisions with measurable results and outcomes
• Summer learning activities
The library contributes to the County goal of increasing third grade reading proficiency by advancing literacy and
academic performance through reading and enrichment activities, and increasing library use.

Establish an agreement with the University of California Cooperative Extension Service to expand services for the
San Mateo County agricultural industry and residents
• Oversee weed control project to reduce presence of Jubata grass, an invasive weed, on County Department of
Public Works property in Pescadero
• Revise Device Registration fees to conform with current statewide fee schedule and increase cost recovery for
device inspection program
Key Initiatives
• Collaborate with the Department of Public Works, Motor Vehicles Division to install and begin shared use of a new
in-ground vehicle dynamometer at the Grant Corporation yard. Weights and Measures staff uses a dynamometer to
test taxi meters and the current equipment in use by the Department needs to be upgraded.
• Purchase new truck mounted gasoline testing equipment to increase efficiency and improve ergonomics for these
Weights and Measures inspections.
• Review and implement in-process State Direct Marketing regulations in response to legislation

PSC continues to move forward in preparing for the transition to the new building, slated for occupancy in October
2017 by:
• Overhauling of the Department's Policy and Procedures. By reviewing content, like agency policy and meeting
expectations of all PSC employees, this overhaul, facilitated by a new hosted software solution will provide staff
with the basis of performance, conduct and culture expectations for now and into the future.
• Replacing two of four specialized response vehicles that are used when deployed to assist the fire service during
greater alarm or large scale incidents, and when staffing a tactical command post during a SWAT or major law
enforcement incident. Existing vehicles are no longer road worthy but were put to good use during incidents such as
the San Bruno pipeline explosion, apartment complex fires in Redwood City, High Risk Search Warrant Services,
SWAT situations and other high profile events.
• Completed the RFP for consulting services in order to conduct a Gap Analysis Study for the Computer Aided
Dispatch System (CAD). The current CAD hardware will be upgraded this summer in order to keep it in reliable
working order. The Gap Analysis Study will identify current features and compare them to features that may or may
not exist with CAD's in the current market. Outcomes of this study will provide the basis for next steps for the CAD
replacement project.
• Continuing a recruitment drive to hire qualified lateral candidates is set for summer in FY 2015-16. PSC will hire
another group of entry-level call-takers in July.
• The creation of a Co-Manager position to oversee day-to-day operations as the current Manager has been
assigned to the building project and the implementation of the new CAD.

The extremely low vacancy rate coupled with discrimination against voucher holders has led to a near inability for
voucher holders to secure rental housing in the county. The Housing Authority is in the process of implementing its
Leasing Success Program to provide landlord incentives, provide security deposit assistance and pay for the
assistance of housing locator services for voucher holders. 

Pre-development activities are taking place at two housing opportunity sites owned by the County or Housing
Authority – Midway Village in Daly City (redevelopment and expansion of the existing 150-unit, 7 acre site) and
2700 Middlefield Road in Redwood City (change of use and redevelopment of a 3.2 acre site).
• Working closely with the Human Services Agency, implement strategies to achieve the County’s goal of eliminating
homelessness by 2020.
• Investing an additional $12 million of Affordable Housing Funds with competitive project selections emphasizing
maximum leverage of County funds from local city partnerships and the creation of placement opportunities for
County clients.

The Board set three goals to address income inequality and promote more broadly shared prosperity in the county. By
2020, the County will:
• End homelessness
• Ensure that all foster children graduate from high school or its equivalent and complete two years of college or
vocational training; and
• Improve school reading scores so that 80% of 3rd graders are reading at grade level.
In addition to these goals, the Board is also studying issues of Affordable Housing and Minimum Wage. Any
subsequent actions taken will only affect the unincorporated areas of the county. It will be important to include the cities
among a broad cross-section of stakeholders in these discussions so that future policy actions can be undertaken
jointly by the County and cities. Investments will continue for prevention and early intervention for youth, especially
youth involved in the foster care system, mental health services, as well as The Big Lift and other initiatives to improve
3rd grade reading proficiency and high school graduation rates.

Working with departments and community partners to achieve the County’s 2020 goals to:
• End homelessness
• Ensure all foster children graduate from high school or its equivalent and complete two years of college or
vocational training; and
• Improve school reading scores so that 80% of 3rd graders are reading at grade level
• Continue to lead Countywide and cross-departmental initiatives that contribute to achieving the County’s Shared
Vision 2025 goals toward a healthy and safe, prosperous, livable, environmentally conscious and collaborative
community FY 2015-16 Budget Overview

The tremendous increase in new commercial developments over the next two years will generate a corresponding
workload increase for the Appraisal Services Division. Additional resources are needed to meet the Assessor’s
constitutional and statutory mandates during this cyclical surge. The Appraisal Services Division has seen aggressive,
sophisticated and significant appeals and litigation which will continue to increase in areas such as aircraft legislation,
real property, commercial and business tax valuations. This division plans to institute a pilot program for the electronic
submittal of building plans in conjunction with building departments in order to lessen some of the burden and staff time
to obtain records and plans. In the next few years of the ATS project, we will undertake the monumental tasks of “data
cleanup” and conversion of historical data into the ATS system.
The Registration and Elections Division will conduct the first All-Mail Ballot Election under the provisions of AB2028.
San Mateo County and Yolo County are participating as AB2028 pilots. A comprehensive report to the Legislature and
Secretary of State on the potential statewide effects of AB2028 will be produced. San Mateo County currently has a
manual campaign finance filing system that is time consuming, labor intensive, costly and inefficient. The Department
plans to move to an electronic campaign filing system will improve efficiency, increased transparency, ensure precision
and reduce costs.
In FY 2015-16, the Clerk-Recorder Division will complete the pilot project for the preservation of historical records
dating back to 1846. This division will convert paper vital records from 1846 to 1965 into digital records and microfilm.
The division will also convert paper land records and other legal instruments from 1846 to 1979 into digital records.
Both of these conversion projects are expected to last three years.

New Commercial Development Activities: Efficiently administer the increased workload of complex appraisal
functions generated by new countywide commercial development activities;
• Comprehensive Classification and Compensation Plan for Senior and Professional level appraisal classifications:
Development of a Comprehensive Classification and Compensation Plan for Senior and Professional level
appraisal classifications to address structural recruitment and retention challenges of experienced appraisal
services staff ;
• Geographical Information Services (GIS): Implement a new Geographical Information System that will improve
cadastral data, technology and customer support services;
• Resolution of Assessment Appeals backlog.

Implement our ACRE Strategic Plan 2020. “People First” is the fundamental principle and foundation of our ACRE
Strategic Plan 2020. Over 38 strategic initiatives improving customer service, employee engagement, technology,
recruitment, staffing, retention and innovation have been identified as departmental priorities during this budget
cycle and beyond;
• Assessment Property Tax System (ATS) - Prepare Request for Proposal (RFP) and evaluate potential vendors for a
new Assessment Property Tax System;
• Assessor-County Clerk- Recorder “VOIP” Telephone System - Design and implementation of a new Voice Over
Internet Protocol (VOIP) Telephone System to replace an aging and outdated telephone system in the Assessor-
County Clerk- Recorder Redwood City facility;
• Workspace Improvements for Tower Road and 555 County Center - workspace modifications to improve the
efficiency and layout of existing work areas and common spaces.

AB2028 All Mail Ballot Pilot Project, November 2015 and November 2017 UDEL Elections;
• June 2016 Presidential Primary and November 2016 Presidential Elections;
• Expanded Voter Outreach and Education Program;
• Enhanced Web Presence;
• Evaluation and analysis to Replace Current Voting System in 2018/19.

Digital Document Conversion - Archive, index and digitally convert documents dating back to 1846;
• Historical Preservation of Documents - Restore, repair and preserve the physical integrity of paper documents
relating to land transactions, vital records and legal instruments dating back to 1846;
• VM WARE Disk Storage Equipment - Replace and increase disk storage equipment and capacity of the division’s
records.

In the next two years, the Controller’s Office will be working on three significant technology initiatives. The Controller’s
Office will implement a major upgrade to the County’s financial accounting system (IFAS) that will allow the County to
continue to receive software support and provide the necessary basis to implement a business intelligence dashboard.
The upgrade is expected to be completed in September 2015. The County’s property tax system will be transferred to
a cloud based hosted environment in early FY 2015-16. Finally, in FY 2015-16, the Controller’s Office also plans to
issue an RFP with the Assessor and Tax Collector’s Offices for an integrated assessment and property tax system,
determine the future system solution, and then begin the implementation process shortly thereafter.

significant challenge for the County Counsel’s Office is to continue providing responsive, timely, and top-rate legal
services given the ever-increasing volume and complexity of legal work. Several initiatives are underway to improve
client services and office efficiency, including the continued implementation of a new legal case management system
and the establishment of several practice teams and committees in order to share knowledge and increase
collaboration. Furthermore, there is a trend in County Counsel offices throughout the state towards more practice
specialization and the Office has focused recent hiring activities on identifying candidates who bring skill sets that will
address specific client needs.

In FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17, Human Resources will focus on several initiatives to promote excellent customer
service, high employee retention rates, resolution of claims prior to formal process, increase number of employees with
performance plans, high promotion rates, high satisfaction with new hires, and increase employee engagement results:
• Expand Agile Organization – Several initiatives to the County’s Agile Organization initiative will be deployed. The
County’s fellowship program will be expanded by developing additional partnerships with local universities. The
program provides opportunities for recent graduates (primarily Masters in Public Administration and Public Policy)
to participate in 2-year projects in various departments and provides a valuable talent pipeline for the County. The
Department will also expand internship programs, including offering the Supported Training and Employment
Program (STEP) year-round rather than solely during the summer. This program is offered to emancipated foster
youth and provides participants with valuable on-the-job training and development. The Department will also
continue to expand and evaluate the effectiveness of additional work delivery models including term, self-help and
volunteers.
• Maximize HR Technology – The Human Resources Department will continue to support Workday and promote the
full utilization of system features. In the upcoming year, Benefits will conduct open enrollment using Workday and
the County will begin to use the system for performance evaluations and development goals. Resources will be

deployed to provide training and resources to departments. Other technology endeavors will include the marketing
and deployment of the Employee Relations and Labor Mobile App, new employment/recruitment web portal, and
the design and implementation of a Countywide Procurement Contract Management System.
• Deploy Strategic Talent Management/Succession Planning Initiatives – Based on the priorities established by the
County’s Succession Planning Committee, the Human Resources Department will deploy various initiatives to
further develop employee competencies. An Executive Leadership Academy (ELA) will be launched for staff
interested in promoting into department head/assistant/deputy level positions. The ELA will feature a competency
skills assessment, skills development (training), and a rotational assignment (where participants gain “hands on”
experience). Assessment tools for both the selection and development of supervisors and managers will also be
offered. An assessment center will be offered to Management Analysts to identify skills, build competencies, and
prepare them for development/professional opportunities. The County will also continue to expand the number of
employees with performance and development plans through the Collaborative Performance Management System
(CPMS) and offer the Essential Supervisory Skills Academy, Management Talent Exchange Program (MTEP),
Internships, Management Development Program (MDP), training and development programs, including various
programs through the Regional Training Consortium for Public Agencies. Additionally, in partnership with labor
organizations, Human Resources will revitalize the Career Opportunities Program so that current employees
continue to have opportunities to promote, transfer and/or change careers.
• Promote Employee Engagement – In an effort to increase employee engagement that sustains high levels of
productivity and retention, the Human Resources Department will launch the annual survey in October of 2015 and
2016. As with prior surveys, the feedback received from employees will be used to enhance services and support.
Some of the efforts that have been undertaken have included the creation of the Essential Supervisory Skills
Academy to strengthen supervisor and manager’s personnel management skills and the promotion of Telework,
through the creation of various resources (e.g., guides, checklists, training). The next phase of the survey will
involve an action-planning component that helps supervisors target specific areas of engagement improvement.

In the upcoming year, staff will continue to leverage Workday to ensure full utilization, conduct the 5th annual Employee
Engagement Survey, and launch the Management Talent Exchange Program (MTEP), which provides emerging
leaders from local public-sector agencies the opportunity to participate in a 3-month assignment at another agency. In
addition, beginning in FY 2015-16, several administrative functions (accounting, budget development/monitoring,
personnel/payroll) that were performed by HR for other departments (County Manager’s Office/Board, Public Safety
Communications, and Coroner’s Office) will be transferred to the County Manager’s Office or respective department.
HR will work with these departments to minimize disruption of services.

Program staff continue to focus on enhancing customer service by expanding health care plan options and technology,
including implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), business process re-engineering and expansion of benefit
education/communications to employees. During the year, staff: enhanced benefits communication by offering benefits
orientations to all new hires: met the ACA employer mandate by offering almost 400 extra-help employees who work
more than 30 hours per week into an affordable health insurance plan (over 200 have enrolled so far); provided
Workday support relating to the design, testing and implementation of the Benefits module; and created and supported
a new labor-management Benefits Committee to evaluate mutually-agreeable improvements to the County’s benefits
programs. In the current fiscal year, staff brought benefits administration back in-house with the launch of Workday.
Open enrollment will be offered through Workday and resources have been added to provide system support. Other
initiatives in the upcoming year include implementing recommendations identified by the Benefits Committee.