Customer Service: Continue implementing an extensive restructuring of the County’s culture
to make customer service a major focus of County government including the continued
implementation of the Leadership Program for County executives and managers to promote
enhanced accountability and performance.
? Pension Reform: Continue to work with County employees to implement select recommendations
of the County Retirement Program Alternatives Advisory Commission.
? Public Safety: Continue working with the Sheriff Department to focus front line law enforcement
services to address community concerns. Continue to develop community
partnerships and increased disaster preparedness planning countywide, including the continuation
of Community Emergency Response Team (C.E.R.T.) training. Continue work with
multiple jurisdictions and community stakeholders to address youth violence issues in our
communities through service on the South Coast Gang Task Force.
? Truancy: Implement the recommendations of the Truancy Subcommittee regarding
reestablishing a countywide truancy program in order to keep children in school and reduce
youth violence.
? Youth Jobs Initiative: Work to bring certification to the Santa Barbara County Youth
Corps and secure long-term sustainable funding for this program. Participate with community
stakeholders to develop a business plan and strategic plan to meet the needs of County
youth.
? Addressing Regional Transportation Issues: Continue to work with all stakeholders regionally
to address our transportation challenges by continuing to work to implement
Measure A and fund the 101 In Motion recommendations of “a lane and a train.” Complete
construction on the first phase of Highway 101 widening and continue construction of phase
two. Work to secure additional state and federal funding for the final phases of the widening
and partner on finalizing design and conducting public outreach for the project. Continue to
work with Metrolink and Union Pacific to establish commuter rail service between Ventura
and Santa Barbara Counties while moving forward with siding improvements to the rail corridor.
Continue to support Transportation Demand Management (TDM) efforts.
? Transportation Projects: Continue to work with SBCAG, Caltrans, First District municipalities
and residents to advance the planning and implementation of transportation projects
that address road and highway safety, congestion and infrastructure needs and concerns.
? Summerland Parking and Circulation Plan: Complete construction on the final phase of
improvements.
? Road Maintenance: Continue implementation of corrective and preventive road
maintenance program on First District roads.
? Santa Claus Lane Beach Access and Business District Improvements: Work with stakeholders
to finalize the design and begin the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) permitting
process for a railroad crossing and related improvements to facilitate safe and convenient
beach access in the Santa Claus Lane area and continue to work to secure funding to construct
the project. Continue to partner with business owners to finalize design and identify
funding for parking, circulation, and streetscape improvements.
? Franklin Trail: Work with stakeholders to complete the first segment of the Franklin Trail
and open it for public use.
? Safe Routes to School: Continue partnerships between County government, schools in unincorporated
First District communities (Montecito Union, Cold Springs, Summerland,
Cuyama), area residents and parents to work to ensure safe access for children walking to
school in our community. Complete construction of shoulder and drainage enhancements to
improve the walking path at the corner of Cold Springs Road and Highway 192, on Eucalyptus
Hill Road just south of Sycamore Canyon Road, and along Paso Robles Drive near Cold
Springs School. Work with schools to identify needed enhancements and potential new projects.
? Children’s Health Initiative: Maintain the current level of funding for the multi-year effort
to provide health insurance to uninsured children in Santa Barbara County.
? Poverty: Work to implement recommendations from the Poverty Initiative. Collaborate
with other government agencies, the non-profit community and other stakeholders to enhance
service delivery, efficiency and coordination of programs and efforts that are provided
to vulnerable residents.
? First 5, Children and Families Commission: As a Commissioner, continue to implement
and update the First Five Strategic Plan focusing on the comprehensive needs of children 0-
5 years of age and their families in targeted communities.
? Senior Issues: Continue serving as co-chair of the County Adult Aging Network. Collaborate
with community stakeholders to finalize and implement the “Everyone Matters” media
campaign to bring attention to the needs of seniors and offer volunteer opportunities and
strategies for addressing them.
? Fire Fuels Management: Partner with the Fire Department and community groups to enhance
vegetation management policies and efforts and secure additional funding for
balanced brush clearance efforts that incorporate best practices including continued implementation
of the Mission Canyon Community Wildfire Protection Plan.
? Promoting Sustainability: Continue working with multiple stakeholders to promote alternative
energy efforts and climate adaptation planning. Monitor any federal changes to Project Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) regulations that may enable enhanced local opportunities
to promote further investment in solar and other energy efficiency improvements for
homeowners and businesses. Centralize and improve coordination of County Sustainability
Team efforts.
? Solid Waste: As a member of the Multi-Jurisdictional Solid Waste Task Force and the Conversion
Technology Study Group, continue to pursue environmentally sustainable waste
management practices for the entire County. Continue environmental review on the proposed
conversion technology facility. Continue our partnerships with all cities within the
County to reduce carbon emissions from our community through our recycling efforts and
improved solid waste and waste water management practices.
? Flood Control Improvements: Continue work to secure additional funding for construction
of the Lower Mission Creek Flood Control Project. Continue annual flood control facility
maintenance efforts.
? Water Quality/Watershed Planning: Continue working to implement the County Storm
Water Management Plan. Collaborate with community stakeholders to identify and implement
responses to changes in state and/or federal law that are expected to occur. Advocate
for continued funding for water quality testing at local beaches. Serve another year as cochair
of the Santa Barbara County Task Force of the Southern California Wetlands Recovery
Task Force. Continue to explore the concept of a plastic bag ban.
? Pesticide/Herbicide Reduction: Continue leadership of the Integrated Pest Management
(IPM) Working Group as it works with stakeholders to identify ways that we can further reduce
the use of pesticides and herbicides in County Parks, Roads, and Flood Control
facilities and the South Coast as a whole. Continue to expand public outreach to share information
on IPM programs with the broader community. Work to enhance educational
support for implementation of IPM efforts within County departments and partner agencies.
? Enhancement of County Services Provided in Carpinteria Community: Continue weekly
office hours at the satellite First District Carpinteria office. Work with the School District
and other agencies to promote the programs and enhance County services located at the
Children’s Project at Main. Work with the City of Carpinteria to enhance collaboration on
issues of mutual interest. Continue to support Fun in the Sun programming at Girls Inc. of
Carpinteria.
? Cuyama Valley: Continue monthly satellite office hours in the New Cuyama and Ventucopa
communities. Collaborate with state, federal and intergovernmental agencies to increase
public safety and address community concerns. Work with County departments, School
District, local non-profit organizations, service clubs and local businesses to maintain and
enhance essential services to the community. Support special districts with information, ongoing
communication and partnership opportunities. Support building of Cuyama
Community Center and collaborate with private and public partners to enhance broadband
access in order to improve communication, enhance public safety and give Valley residents
greater access to information technology.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Department Summary (cont'd)
? Underrepresented Communities: Encourage civic engagement within underrepresented
communities and foster open dialogue for accessible, responsive and effective constituent
service delivery by the County.
? Mission Canyon Community Plan Update: Consider final adoption of the Community
Plan Update and Residential Parking Strategy and begin implementation of the recommendations
contained therein.
? Summerland Community Plan Update: Consider final adoption of the Community Plan
update and Residential and Commercial Design Guidelines.
? Promote Regional Planning and Collaboration: Partner with elected officials from cities
within the County to focus on regional planning and enhance communication and collaboration
on a range of projects of mutual interest. Collaborate with Santa Barbara City, school
districts and local community stakeholders to ensure access to local government representation
and effective delivery of public services in the Eastside and Westside neighborhoods of
the City.
? Homeless Services: Continue efforts to secure federal resources to support local efforts and
plans for supportive housing, transitional shelters, warming centers and other essential services.
? Housing: Continue to advocate for local control of land use decisions. Continue serving on
the South Coast Affordable Housing Task Force and collaborate on multijurisdictional efforts
to address housing needs in our region. Partner with other agencies, community
organizations and other stakeholders to identity and advocate for funding sources to replace
loss of Redevelopment Agency funding.
? Blue Ribbon Budget Task Force: Continue to work to implement select recommendations
of the Blue Ribbon Budget Task Force.
? Local Business and Jobs: Continue to work to implement programs that provide a preference
for local businesses and workers in contracting with the County to provide goods and
services.
? Agriculture: Continue to explore opportunities to maintain agricultural viability throughout
the County including support for agriculture in the Carpinteria and Cuyama Valleys.
? Gaviota Coast: Continue to support initiatives to secure the preservation of open space and
agriculture on the Gaviota Coast including planning for the California Coastal Trail segments
through the region.
? National Association of Counties (NACo) and Legislative Advocacy: Continue to represent
Santa Barbara County’s interests in federal policy issues through service as the
County’s NACo representative, Chair of the NACo Environment, Energy, and Land Use
Committee, NACo Board member and member of the NACo Green Government Advisory
Board. Continue service on the Legislative Program Committee to enhance our County’s
legislative platform and priorities. Continue to work with the County’s federal and state advocates
to support County legislative priorities in Washington and Sacramento.
EPA Local Government Advisory Board (LGAC): As the appointed LGAC member and
Chair of LGAC’s Air, Climate & Energy Workgroup, advise US EPA Administrator on
streamlining federal policy making for more efficient and practical local government implementation
strategies.
? EPA Government Advisory Board (GAC): As an appointed member of the GAC, serve as
a representative on the national board which focuses on environmental interests and other issues
related to the North American Agreement on Environmental Cooperation. Advise EPA
Administrator and Environmental Ministers on effective strategies for local implementation
of environmental protection policies throughout the United States, Canada and Mexico.
Continue to monitor the progress of the Eastern Goleta Valley Community Plan as it moves
into the environmental review phase.
? Work to enhance existing and to establish new partnerships for disaster preparedness planning
among public agencies and within the community, including the expansion of
Community Emergency Response Team (C.E.R.T.) training.
? Work with Public Works staff and neighborhood groups to secure funding and landscape
expertise to improve appearance of medians and other public spaces within the unincorporated
Second District.
? Continue to monitor the progress of the San Marcos Foothills Park Management Plan.
? Support public-private partnership programs such as emPowerSBC, designed to bring green
jobs while providing home and business owners with finance tools to retrofit their homes
and businesses.
? Work closely with the Parks Department and the Goleta Beach ad hoc “GB2” committee to
present a proposal to the Board of Supervisors (BOS), and ultimately to the Coastal Commission,
to address erosion issues while also enhancing recreational opportunities at Goleta
Beach.
? Continue to promote prevention strategies to encourage women’s heart health.
? Continue to support outreach and efficiency efforts within Animal Services, including lowcost
spay/neuter efforts and adoption outreach to decrease numbers of animals in shelters.
? Meet and encourage partnerships with, and among, individuals and organizations (public,
private and educational) committed to expanding and enhancing recreational, cultural and
educational opportunities for youth and adolescents.
? Continue displaying school student art in the Second District Student Art Gallery.
? Monitor progress on the State Street /Hollister Avenue Corridor Improvement Plan.
? Continue to advocate for the rights of our County’s most vulnerable constituents.
? Consider new and innovative constituent outreach efforts.
Develop truancy program with local school districts
? Hold first ever Stand Down in Santa Barbara County, allowing veterans who are homeless
or down on their luck to access benefits
? Implement E-Verify for County employees
? Obtain further employee salary and benefit concessions
? Encourage other hotels to take advantage of incentive program
The County Executive Officer (CEO) exercises overall responsibility for sound and effective
management of County government pursuant to Board policy and the adopted budget. While the
entirety of the Board of Supervisors’ Strategic Plan drives the CEO’s programs, the CEO’s strategic
actions align primarily with the following adopted General Goals and Principles:
Goal 1: Efficient and Responsive Government: An Efficient Professionally Managed Government
Able to Anticipate and to Effectively Respond to the Needs of the
Community; and
Goal 5: Citizen Involvement: A County Government that is Accessible, Open, and Citizen
Friendly.
Among the eight Strategic Plan’s Critical Issues, the issues of “Financial Stability of the County”
and “Service Delivery” will continue to be the CEO’s priorities for FY 2012-14.
Executive Management:
? Update the County’s strategic plan
? Identify significant issues facing the County in the coming years
? Provide leadership to the ongoing dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency (RDA)
Budget and Research:
? Improve the Capital Plan
? Develop a five year forecast to be used in the budget process
? Support the development of a Strategic Plan
? Create a long term plan to achieve a structurally balanced budget
Legislative:
? Continue efforts to understand proposed legislative changes and communicate the anticipated
impact on the County of Santa Barbara
? Identify areas impacting the County that require legislative change and communicate to the
appropriate State or Federal agencies
County of Santa Barbara Television (CSBTV):
? Increase production of videos that educate the public on the County’s business with an emphasis
on transparency and public participation. (CSBTV is currently working on videos
about the budget process, public participation during Board of Supervisors hearings, and a
weekly five-minute County news series.)
Office of Emergency Management (OEM):
? A County organization that can maintain critical services during a disaster by having realistic
and thorough continuity of operation plans (COOP).
? Maintain a well-trained Emergency Operations Center (EOC) staff through regular practice
drills.
? Sustain communications systems within the county that facilitates communications between
jurisdictions and is operationally ready at all times.
HR’s strategic actions align primarily with the following County strategic goals:
Goal 1: Efficient and Responsive Government: An efficient, professionally managed government
able to anticipate and effectively respond to the needs of the community; and
Goal 5: Citizen Involvement: A County government that is Accessible, Open and Citizen-
Friendly.
? Bargain for concessions with all Safety unions (law enforcement, probation, and fire) to
further manage salary and benefits costs for the organization. Concession discussions
will include the potential for implementing a new retirement tier for all safety employees
in order to control pension costs into the future.
? Implement a change in focus for the Employee Benefits unit with a move toward
“Wellness and Benefits,” and implement Countywide programs designed to manage the
rising cost of healthcare for the County and its workforce.
? Implement various technologies such as Employee and Manager Self-Service, Document
Management, and Automated Candidate Assessments to ensure accountability,
quality customer service, and operational efficiencies with limited human resources
staff.
Maintain close legal support relationships with County departments, the County Planning
Commissions and the Board of Supervisors, for early identification of legal risks, “problem
prevention,” consistent advice, and practical solutions.
? Continue to support improvements in the defensibility of the County’s contracts.
? Provide high quality litigation representation:
-Defend County’s land use actions, enforce County’s requirements and defend against appeals
of administrative fines imposed by the County.
-Continue to minimize County’s litigation costs by defending in-house as much General Liability
Fund litigation as possible.
-Continue to defend against State’s denial of County charges for mental health services.
-Represent the County Assessor. This will include complex appellate litigation involving
the fractionally owned aircraft industry, where the potential impact on the County is $1.2
million in back taxes and about $350K per year thereafter.
-Continue to reduce Workers’ Compensation costs by supporting Risk Management’s efforts
to transition the program to an outside contractor.
? Continue legal support for the County’s roles in the wind down and dissolution of the former
redevelopment agencies in Santa Barbara County, including the former County Redevelopment
Agency.
? Research and draft new ordinances within Planning & Development’s work plan, including:
Inclusionary Housing Ordinance and Winery Ordinance.
The Court Special Services Budget strategic actions align primarily with the following County’s
adopted Strategic Goals and Principals:
Goal I: An efficient professionally managed government able to anticipate and respond
effectively to the needs of the Community; and
Goal II: Safe and healthy communities in which to live, work, and visit.
Santa Barbara County Court-Special Services in accordance with the Santa Barbara Superior
Court mission statement to resolve disputes arising under the law in a fair, accessible, effective,
timely and efficient manner, to interpret and apple the law consistently, impartially, and independently,
and to protect the rights and liberties guaranteed by the Constitutions of California and
the United State, provides defense of indigent defendants when the Public Defender has determined
there is a conflict of interest, distributes criminal fees and fines according to statute and
collects court ordered debt.
The County continues to be responsible for providing suitable facilities for certain Superior Court
programs not subject to or not yet transferred to the State. Proposed projects that further overall
court related goals by providing facilities that are safe and accessible to the public and provide
service efficiently and effectively are outlined in the County’s Capital Improvement Program
(CIP) under Court-Special Services.
The District Attorney objectives are primarily aligned with the following adopted County Strategic
Goals:
Goal 1: Efficient and Responsive Government – An efficiently professionally managed government
able to anticipate and to effectively respond to the needs of the community;
Goal 2: Health and Safety – Safe and healthy communities in which to live, work, and visit;
Goal 4: Quality of Life – A high quality of life for all residents; and
Goal 6: Families and Children – A community that fosters the safety and well-being of families
and children.
? Truancy Program: Continue to collaborate with the Board of Supervisors Sub-
Committee on Truancy as well as local stakeholders, including school districts, law enforcement,
and community partners to create a sustainable county-wide truancy
program. This program will provide local schools more autonomy to design and operate
their own systems that are more tailored to that district's truancy problem. This
potential program is pending Board action in May 2012. If the program is approved, a
separate funding decision would be required.
? Misdemeanor Diversion: The department plans to implement a misdemeanor diversion
program that will provide therapeutic justice to those charged with lesser misdemeanors.
This program will allow first-time and low level misdemeanor offenders an
opportunity to avoid criminal prosecution provided they complete a rehabilitative program
tailored to address that individual’s criminogenic needs. Offenders will have to
pay their own way for the program and provide complete restitution to victims in order
to avoid prosecution. This new diversion program should have a dramatic budgetary
ripple effect resulting in savings for the Public Defender, Courts and Probation while
helping to alleviate jail overcrowding.
? Restitution Enforcement/Collection: Collaborate with the Superior Court and Probation
to initiate a new system for enforcement and collection of victim restitution orders in
cases where defendants are sentenced pursuant to the new criteria established under
AB109.
DISTRICT ATTORNEY
Department Summary (cont'd)
? Gang Crimes: Work with the Santa Barbara Police Department and the Santa Barbara
City Attorney to obtain and enforce a Gang Injunction if the Court deems it appropriate.
Perform outreach at the local elementary, middle and high schools by educating
young people about the negative consequences inherent in gang association. Continue
to participate in the quarterly countywide Gang Task Force meetings to improve communication
with partner agencies in order to successfully prosecute gang cases.
? Juvenile Offender Accountability: Develop new strategies for rehabilitation, while
holding juvenile offenders accountable for their actions. This includes offering diversion
programs to the appropriate offenders so they have an opportunity to rehabilitate
themselves. Participate in outreach programs such as Teen Court, Fighting Back, Career
Day, and Juvenile Drug Court.
? Investigations: Continue to provide significant support to the prosecution team for
gang-related crimes, in particular homicides and assaults with deadly weapons committed
by gang members. Due to an anticipated reduction in the number of investigators
available for litigation support, the focus will be on serious violent felonies as well as a
shift in using non-sworn staff to support misdemeanor litigation.
? Welfare Fraud: Obtain a reduction, withdrawal, or denial of aid in 30% of the approximately
800 welfare cases investigated at the welfare application. The department will
protect the welfare funds available to needy families in our community through enforcement
actions against those who commit fraud against the County’s public
assistance programs.
? Electronic Discovery: Expand transfer of electronic discovery to the Public Defender
and private defense attorneys.
? State Street Mile: Coordinate the 13th Annual State Street Mile to raise awareness of
Victim Witness Assistance Services and sustain crime victim emergency funds.
The Law Office of the Public Defender’s strategic actions are primarily aligned with the following
adopted County Strategic Goals:
Goal 1: Efficient and Responsive Government: An Efficient, Professionally Managed
Government Able to Anticipate and to Effectively Respond to the Needs of the
Community.
Goal 2: Health and Safety: Safe and Healthy Community in Which to Live, Work and Visit.
Goal 6: Families and Children: A Community that Fosters the Safety and Well-Being of
Families and Children.
Collaboration with Other County Departments
? Participate in the Veteran’s Stand Down to be held in Santa Maria in October 2012, in
addition to continuing our efforts to make the Veteran’s Treatment Court more widely
available to our veterans.
? Continue to proactively analyze both the anticipated and unanticipated consequences of
the Public Safety Realignment Act with all the agencies that are being affected by the
Act.
Information Technology
? Continue upgrading our case management system to permit us to store file data electronically
in a way that is easily accessible either over our network or electronically
through the internet.
Financial
? Continue to increase the number of cases in which Public Defender fees are assessed
and collected.
The Fire Department’s strategic actions are aligned with the following County and Departmental
Strategic Goals:
County Goal 1: An Efficient, Professionally Managed Government Able to Anticipate and to
Effectively Respond to the Needs of the Community.
County Goal 2: A Safe and Healthy Community in Which to Live, Work and Visit.
Department Goal 1: Invest in the potential of people through their development to maximize
departmental effectiveness.
Department Goal 3: Ensure the overall fiscal stability of the Department through resource management
and revenue maximization.
The Fire Department’s management strategy includes programs and projects that improve service
delivery and are linked to the Department’s mission. This is accomplished by focusing on quality
improvement of our services and training our personnel to perform at their best. The programs
and projects generally span multiple years and are detailed below:
Career Development:
? Our personnel will utilize the career development guide to enhance their emergency
skills as well as prepare those who choose to become our leaders of the future.
? In working with the Santa Barbara County Area Fire Chiefs, provide the California
State Fire Marshal Fire Officer and Chief Officer suite of classes to qualified personnel.
? Assist interested personnel in obtaining their Associates, Bachelors, or Masters degrees
through on-line and regional higher education programs.
Emergency Operations:
? Review and update all current automatic aid agreements to enhance coordination of
emergency response.
? Assist the Sheriff’s office in the development of a unified aviation unit.
? Finalize the county-wide communications plan.
Finance:
? Enhance fiscal stability, further explore internal efficiencies and develop external short
term and long term revenue enhancement strategies.
? Streamline internal department expenditure processes while maintaining appropriate
County controls.
? Prepare quarterly 5 year fiscal forecasts.
Fire Prevention:
? Develop and recommend a new Hazardous Materials Unit organization that fulfills the
State and County missions and maintains a fee structure that ensures full cost recovery.
? Through the Defensible Space Program, ensure 100% of all inspectable properties are
compliant.
? Review and update the Santa Barbara County Fire Code to reflect national and state
standards and consider the unique composition of Santa Barbara County.
Santa Barbara County Goal: FAMILIES AND CHILDREN: A Community that Fosters the
Safety and Well-Being of Families and Children.
Focus Area: Providing Evidenced Based and Effective Programs and Services for Juvenile
Offenders and Their Families
? Increase public safety and reduce crime by ensuring that at least 85% of estimated 425 juvenile
probationers will exit probation without a new sustained felony while on probation
? Identify supervision strategies and funding sources to maintain and improve upon current
successes pending further reduction in staffing
Focus Area: Operating Quality Juvenile Treatment and Detention Facilities and Programs
? Increase rehabilitation of approximately 156 juvenile probationers committed to Los Prietos
Boys Camp and Academy by ensuring that 90% will graduate from the program
? All Juvenile Institutions personnel will complete the Federal Prison Rape Elimination Act
(PREA) training
Santa Barbara County Goal: HEALTH AND SAFETY: A Safe and Healthy Community in
Which to Live and Work
Focus Area: Providing Evidenced Based and Effective Programs and Services for Adult
Offenders
? Increase public safety and reduce crime by ensuring that at least 98% of estimated 2,400
adult probationers will exit probation without being convicted of a new felony while on probation
? Implement the latest version of the Correctional Offender Management for Profiling Alternative
Sanctions (COMPAS) 8 which will provide enhanced features and specialized risk
assessments for the effective management of offenders
Santa Barbara County Goal: EFFICIENT AND RESPONSIVE GOVERNMENT: An Efficient,
Professionally Managed Government Able to Anticipate and to Effectively Respond to the
Needs of the Community
Focus Area: Providing Quality Information and Technology Systems Support for Departmental
Operations
? Implement the RevQ collections software from Columbia Ultimate (CU) Incorporated and
facilitate the transfer of data from Probation Department’s Interim Collection System which
allows for the continued collection of fines, fees, penalties, and restitution while increasing
management reporting capabilities
Focus Area: Providing Quality Support Services and Financing for Departmental Operations
? Increase the annual collection of restitution, fines, and fees by 10% utilizing evidence based
collection strategies
Focus Area: Providing Quality Staffing for Departmental Operations
? All sworn personnel will complete the basic, intermediate, and advanced training in Motivational
Interviewing which is a critical component of Probation's evidence based system and
will lead to improved outcomes for offenders and improved public safety
? Analyze results of May 2012 Staff survey and develop action plan to respond to identified
Departmental needs
Receive, and make operational, “Guardian 3”, a multi-mission capable UH-1H helicopter
funded through private donations.
? Establish and make operational the Santa Barbara County Air Support Unit, a combined
aviation program comprised of personnel and equipment from the County Fire
Department and the Sheriff’s Office. Through the use of combined resources and managed
by the Sheriff’s Office, the Air Support Unit will respond to Fire, Rescue, and
Law Enforcement calls for service in an expedient and efficient manner.
? Replace and upgrade the In-Car Video System on all patrol vehicles assigned to the Patrol
Operations Divisions. Continuation of this resource is of paramount importance for
evidence collection and liability protection.
? Upgrade to Windows 7 and MS Office 2010. These computer system upgrades are
necessary to promote efficiency and maintain a stable environment for our technological
resources.
? Contract with a private vendor for food services in Custody Operations. Through the
use of privatization, we can continue to meet and exceed food quality standards and realize
substantial cost savings. Sheriff food service staff will work with the vendor, but
will remain county employees.
? Complete a sewer upgrade and kitchen remodel project in the Main Jail. Through a
partnership with County General Services, the upgraded jail sewer system and kitchen
remodel will improve the infrastructure of these vital services in the custody facility.
? Complete necessary upgrades to the security control systems of the Main Jail, Inmate
Reception Center and the Medium Security Facility.
The County Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services objectives align primarily with the following
County’s adopted Strategic Goals and Principles:
Goal 1: An Efficient, Professionally Managed Government Able to Anticipate and Effectively
Respond to the Needs of the Community; and
Goal 2: Health and Safety: A Safe and Healthy Community in Which to Live, Work and Visit.
The ADMHS management strategy is to successfully deliver a system of care for persons who
fall within ADMHS’ mandate. The Department will focus on the objectives listed to achieve
high quality services, fiscal and program efficiencies and optimal use of the Department’s available
mental health, alcohol and drug, Mental Health Services Act and County General Fund
funding sources.
Mental Health Services Act
? Develop a process consistent with the newly developed MHSA three year Integrated Plan
that identifies achievement of performance and outcomes.
? Conduct specialized mental health training for interpreters.
? Continue to improve service access for underserved communities, particularly members of
the Latino community and the development of affordable housing for persons with mental
illness with funding from the MHSA Housing Program.
? Train approximately 35 consumer and family peers through the Workforce Education Training
(WET) Peer Specialist Training annually and place at least eight graduates in
internships at ADMHS service sites countywide each year.
Administration/QA/Compliance
? Implement a revenue management team in the Fiscal Division consisting of staff assigned to
manage all aspects of the Department’s billing, collection, and revenue monitoring systems.
? Expand automated reporting on service levels, revenues and expenses to cover all ADMHS
inpatient and outpatient clinics and programs.
? Implement policies regarding level of services for uninsured clients, clients with private
insurance and collection of past due payments.
Inpatient Services
? Facilitate the discharge of County clients from Institutions for Mental Disease (IMDs)
located outside the County to less restrictive/less expensive local community programs.
? Develop a “floating pool” of Psychiatric Health Facility (PHF) staff available to work, as
needed, to match the changing needs of the inpatient service.
Adult and Children's Mental Health Programs
? Use revised assessment tool to direct Adult clinical treatment planning centered on evidence-
based practices.
? Participate in a statewide project to develop outcome data that will be compared with
other Children’s Systems of Care throughout the State.
? Integrate empirically supported treatment guidelines into Children’s outpatient clinical
practices, such as the incorporation of CBO contracted Rehabilitation Specialists into
clinical treatment plans.
? Develop Santa Barbara County service programming for Katie A. settlement agreement
mandates and carry out project work in partnership with the Deparment of Social Services.
The Katie A. class action lawsuit, filed on behalf of foster children, requires that
foster children and children at risk of entering the foster care system, promptly receive
necessary individualized mental health services in their own homes; receive care and services
needed to prevent removal from their families to facilitate reunification and to meet
their needs for safety, permanence and stability to be afforded in their placements.
Alcohol and Drug Program
? Implement scorecard system and quarterly reviews for Alchohol and Drug Program providers.
? Transition ADP providers to electronic health records, providing better management of the
treatment of substance abuse disorders.
? Complete the relocation of the South County social detoxification program to a new facility
in partnership with the Santa Barbara City Housing Authority and Council on
Alcoholism and Drug Abuse.
The Department of Child Support Services is responsible for the establishment and enforcement
of child and medical support orders. This mission is accomplished through a variety of case
management services that include locating non-custodial parents, establishing parentage, and
establishing, enforcing, and modifying orders for both child and medical support. The enforcement
of child support orders encompasses the collection and distribution of payments and the
maintenance of accurate accounting records. As part of this process, funds are distributed to
federal and state governments for reimbursement of public assistance moneys expended. Providing
these services is in line with County Strategic Plan Critical Issue 7: Health Care and Social
Service Delivery.
The Department’s activities align with the following adopted County Strategic Goals:
Goal 1 – Efficient and Responsive Government: An efficient, Professionally Managed
Government Able to Anticipate and to Effectively Respond to the Needs of the Community;
and
Goal 2 – Families and Children: A Community that Fosters the Safety and Well-Being
of Families and Children.
Objectives:
? Continue to improve in Federal Performance Measures by meeting and/or exceeding
goals set by the State in paternity establishment, order establishment, current support,
collections on cases with arrears, and total dollars distributed to families and to Federal
and State Governments to reimburse expenditures for public assistance grants. This
will be accomplished by analyzing impediments to performance and prioritizing efforts
on Federal Performance Measures where the greatest impact can be achieved; and by
assessing annual State goals and set higher internal goals when feasible.
? Create a framework for evaluating current business processes with the goal of becoming
more effective and efficient. The Department will more fully utilize recently
developed cross-functional Process Improvement Team to identify tasks, processes and
procedures that can be done more efficiently, conduct analyses, and recommend solutions.
Input will be solicited from the organization to facilitate open communication
and flow of ideas, and to ensure that different perspectives are presented.
? Identify emerging trends in technology developments and work organization and assess
how these changes can be employed to improve the organization’s performance.
? Develop a well-trained workforce that understands child support regulations and possesses
the technical skills needed to achieve customer service goals. This will be done
by expanding access to information resources through improved indexing, expanding
the identification of Subject Matter Experts (SME) and creating structures that allow
the SME’s to promote helpful ideas. In addition, research and obtain access to additional
casework tools, including social media networks such as Facebook to locate noncustodial
parents and/or obtain relevant information.to assist in managing cases.
? Promote effective and timely communication by expanding use of outbound dialing activities
to notify non-custodial parents of payments due, collect and use customer cell
phone information, and utilize text messaging to remind customers about court dates.
Additionally, review methods that have been successfully implemented at other local
child support agencies, and incorporate as appropriate for our organization.
? Improve customer service by working with customers at the front-end of the process to
help them understand child support business practices, teach them how to utilize selfservice
tools that are available, such as Customer Connect; and determine how customers
prefer to receive and share information. Also, develop information about how
customers can access parenting resources, and conduct outreach presentations at a variety
of locations, such as schools, jails, homeless shelters and veteran affairs events.
2010-2015 Strategic Plan, First 5 is focusing on providing Results-Based programs through an
integrated strategy that includes County-Wide services and targeted services known as
THRIVE Community Collaboratives targeting selected high need neighborhoods. The end
result leverages the best First 5 experiences to date, while accommodating the financial reality
of declining resources.
In order to fulfill the goals for both individual communities and Santa Barbara County as a
whole, First 5 continues its commitment to making progress in four focus areas:
? Children’s Health and Safety
? Early Childhood Development and Education
? Family Strengthening
? Systems Improvement.
Since the beginning, partnership has been central to First 5’s approach. First 5 has expanded
their engagement with other funders, worked closely with organizations throughout the community
and increasingly drawn on the talents and strength of parents and other community
members in all aspects of planning and implementation.
To achieve its goals, First 5 will:
? Maximize the percentage of dollars going to direct services and effectively fund
community programs to deliver those services for maximum impact.
? Utilize Commission funds to leverage additional local, state and federal resources to
support program enhancement and sustainability.
? Develop and maintain a system of equitable countywide funding consistent with the
Commission’s strategic goals.
? Define desired results for children and families and document the progress toward
achieving them to ensure accountability and effectiveness.
? Encourage and support the development of each agency and community’s capacity to
provide and sustain integrated services.
? Support access to services for all families in an environment of support and respect.
Funding and Leveraging
? Build a strong infrastructure to expand and sustain the public-private partnership
known as Thrive that focuses on school readiness and success in high need communities.
Evaluation and Accountability
? Work collaboratively with school districts to better integrate data systems in order to
track long-term outcomes for children beginning at birth.
? Assure greater public accountability by communicating results, will publish an electronic
newsletter focused on evaluation results and outcomes.
? Provide greater access to interested parties, by publishing data, results and outcomes in
an ongoing basis on the Commission’s website.
Technical Assistance and Training
? To increase First 5 staff knowledge, strategies, and skills in meeting funded scopes of
work as well as overall program and agency performance, staff will participate in trainings
on the following topics: digesting data, using evaluation within contracts and use
of our Contract Monitoring Guide.
? Increase First 5 funded agency knowledge, strategies, and skills in meeting funded
scopes of work as well as overall program and agency performance funded partners
through technical assistance & training.
Convener and Partner
? Will oversee and facilitate a consortia of early care and education providers in establishing
a Quality Rating System funded through the federal grant Race to the Top in
order to improve the access to quality early care and education especially in high need
communities.
The Public Health Department vision is "Healthier communities through leadership, partnership,
and science." The Department's strategic actions are primarily aligned with the following adopted
County Strategic Goals:
Goal 1: Efficient and Responsive Government: An Efficient, Professionally Managed
Government Able to Anticipate and to Effectively Respond to the Needs of the
Community;
Goal 2: Health and Safety: A Safe and Healthy Community in Which to Live, Work and
Visit;
Goal 4: Quality of Life: A High Quality of Life for All Residents; and
Goal 6: Families and Children: A Community that Fosters the Safety and Well-Being of
Families and Children.
Among the eight Strategic Plan Critical Issue Areas, Issue 7: Health Care and Social Service
Delivery continues to be the Public Health Department priority for Fiscal Year 2012-14.
Key Projects:
? Explore the expansion of services to evenings and/or weekends in the Health Care Centers
to increase the ability to reach the patients who are employed, to increase
participation in CenCal Health’s incentive program, for consistency with Patient Centered
Medical Home (PCMH) standards, and for improvement in access to care.
? Assess the potential for adding a geriatric specialty clinic in the Santa Maria area where
a growing number of low income seniors are currently residing and who will benefit
greatly from coordinated care and who typically have dual coverage through Medicare
and Medi-Cal. The possibility of a pediatric program will also be evaluated also for
Santa Maria. The addition of programs for children and adolescents would improve the
continuity of care for families and better meet the needs of the changing population.
? Implement a Fitness Promotion and Obesity Prevention plan for Santa Barbara County
to improve the health status of the community. Working with community partners, the
Public Health Department has developed a Fitness Promotion and Obesity Prevention
plan. A project team will implement identified strategies both within the Public Health
department and the community as a whole to promote healthy eating and physical activity
and reduce the health impacts of obesity-related illness.
? Explore viability of making new Public Health Lab test services available by contract
to community health care partners to expand and improve services in the community.
The Public Health Laboratory performs testing for conditions that impact the health and
safety of the community through the use of state of the art testing methods and equipand accurate test results that inform decisions about how to best intervene and treat patients.
Assessing the viability of expansion will consider fiscal and legal considerations
in addition to clinical and operational factors.
? Implement State Water Quality Control Board policy requirements for a countywide
on-site waste water and septage management plan to protect the health of the community.
The State is making changes that will affect permitting of on-site waste water
treatment systems (septic systems) and will require development of a countywide onsite
waste water management plan including a septage management program. This will
require revising local ordinances with input from stakeholders and a technical advisory
group as well as education and outreach to property owners.
? Collaborate with community partners to develop a "toolkit" for working with mothers
who have or are at risk for gestational diabetes to improve the health of mothers. Women
who have diabetes during pregnancy are at greater risk of health complications for
themselves and their children. A toolkit for working with mothers at risk will enable
service providers through a number of community providers to effectively support the
health of women by minimizing the occurrence and impact of gestational diabetes.
? Conduct a countywide earthquake exercise to test disaster plans for public health and
partner agencies. Open and activate department operations center and communicate status
and operational activity to Emergency Operations Center. Activate Emergency
Medical Services providers and Medical Reserve Corps to implement field treatment
site operations during exercise, provide victims to hospital emergency rooms, and deploy
medical surge assets from warehouses to the field.
? Complete the renovation of the Lompoc Animal Shelter to improve access for clients,
volunteers, and staff. The renovation will better utilize limited space, meet requirements
under the American’s With Disabilities Act (ADA) for individuals with special
needs, and provide bathroom facilities for shelter customers. The current shelter facility
is outdated and unable to meet the needs of staff and animals. Funding has been secured,
architectural drawings are complete, construction will be complete and the
remodeled, expanded, accessible facility is expected to be open for service by December
2012.
? Continue development of the Electronic Health Record by implementing a patient portal,
digital imaging, remote access and participation in a Health Information Exchange
program to provide patient access to records and exchange health information among
providers. Stage Two of Meaningful Use mandates these technology improvements in
order to receive Medi-Cal financial incentives and avoid Medicare payment adjustments.
Ensure financial sustainability of the Electronic Health Record in order to
support the system long-term and achieve a break-even scenario for the new costs in-
PUBLIC HEALTH
Department Summary (cont'd)
curred as a result of this large automation project.
? Continue to participate in the Centers for Medicaid Services (CMS) Patient Centered
Medical Home Demonstration (PCMH) Project at the two selected sites and evaluate
the possibility of implementing it in the other four Health Care Centers to improve and
coordinate the delivery of healthcare. The goal of PCMH is to improve healthcare by
coordinating the delivery of primary care and transforming the organization. The medical
home model encompasses comprehensive care, is patient-centered, coordinates
care, improves access to services, and improves quality and safety.
? Implement on-line nutrition classes and mailing vouchers for many Women, Infants,
and Children (WIC) participants to improve customer service and promote nutrition.
WIC offers vouchers for healthy foods, and education on nutrition and breastfeeding.
Implementing on-line nutrition classes and providing vouchers by mail makes it possible
for more clients to obtain services without additional travel. This will expand access
to healthy food and nutrition information to our participants.
? Complete fee methodology study for Animal Services contracts with cities to ensure
fair distribution of costs and proper reimbursement for services provided. Ensuring that
costs are equitable and reasonable is vital to the continued success of the County's municipal
contracting model.
? Complete fee methodology study for risk-based food inspections to better distribute the
costs of providing services based on an activity-based costing mechanism. This will
ensure that more attention is available to those businesses that may need it to better protect
the health of the community.
? Increase patient cash collections at the time of service for both medical visits and
pharmaceuticals because the patient will understand the importance/value of their medical
visit and have an investment in their medical care. Increasing cash collections at
registration will reduce the cost associated with mailing statements and follow-up letters
and using outside recovery services. Cash flow will increase, and bad-debt and
staff expense will decline.
? Evaluate the financial considerations and opportunities of federal health care reform to
ensure the Department can respond quickly and appropriately to new opportunities to
better meet the needs of our patients.
The Department of Social Services’ strategic actions and priorities align primarily with the following
County-adopted Strategic Goals and Principles:
Goal 1: An Efficient, Professionally Managed Government Able to Anticipate and to Effectively
Respond to the Needs of the Community.
Goal 2: A Safe and Healthy Community in Which to Live, Work and Visit.
Goal 5: A County Government that is Accessible, Open and Citizen Friendly.
Goal 6: A Community that Fosters the Safety and Well-Being of Families and Children.
In commitment to the above goals and the County’s Critical Issue 7, “Health & Social Service
Delivery,” the Department of Social Services’ management strategy is to ensure core service
mandates are met, develop and enhance business processes which increase efficiencies, utilize
technology to its fullest, and improve communication and education on critical issues affecting
our clients and the goals of the Department. Department projects will support both County and
Department goals as well as Federal and State mandates.
The focus of the department is the continued delivery of basic services. Each of the Department’s
divisions will undertake projects that specifically support the County’s Strategic Plan by:
? Continuing responsive, cost-effective services for residents of Santa Barbara County and the
agricultural industry in the areas of pest prevention, pesticide enforcement and resource protection;
? Continuing to ensure consumer protection and equity in the marketplace through weights
and measures enforcement programs; and
? Providing research and educational programs for residents of Santa Barbara County that improve
the quality of life and maintain viable and working agriculture through Cooperative
Extension programs.
The Agricultural Commissioner’s Office strategic priorities are primarily aligned with these
Board-Adopted County goals:
Goal 1: Efficient and Responsive Government – An Efficient Professionally Managed Government
Able to Anticipate and to Effectively Respond to the Needs of the Community
Proposed Strategic Actions:
? Continue to develop efficiencies as proposed by departmental task forces.
? Utilize technology to provide self-access training modules for growers.
? Staff two branch offices on an as-needed basis to more closely tailor staffing levels to demand
for services.
? Identify and track individual employee’s training needs with a focus on succession planning
and skill building.
? Implement new timesheet database program to capture all hours from department staff and
use that information to compile state monthly reports and complete contract invoices.
? Utilize the statewide pesticide use permit system to increase industry’s online use report capability.
? Continue sharing department resources (IT specialist, entomologist, and plant pathologist)
with other departments and agencies.
? Expand the working partnership with San Luis Obispo County to address mutual inspection
and certification issues.
? Continue to use department staff as a labor source for Weed Management Area projects to
generate new revenue.
Goal 2: Community Health and Safety – A Safe and Healthy Community in Which to Live,
Work, and Visit
Proposed Strategic Actions:
? Continue to complete investigations into pesticide-related illnesses and public complaints in
a timely and accurate fashion and take appropriate enforcement action.
? Continue to provide outreach and training to growers, licensees, and the public to ensure the
dissemination of accurate information regarding pesticide use.
? Increase pesticide use enforcement staff time in the field while increasing pesticide application
inspections to ensure that those applications are done correctly, field workers and
applicators are protected, and records are kept as required.
? Through the collaborative Weed Management Area program, continue to control invasive
and noxious weeds that pose a threat to the infrastructure of the community.
Goal 3: Economic Vitality – A Community that is Economically Vital and Sustainable
Proposed Strategic Actions:
? Develop Light Brown Apple Moth regulatory program with USDA and CDFA to eradicate
this insect pest from Santa Barbara County and facilitate continued certification of fruit and
vegetable exports to Canada and Mexico.
? Expand use of technology to encourage successful exporting of agricultural products.
? Install a water meter test bench to enable the department to test the accuracy of water utility
meters in mobile home parks.
? Continue to provide assistance in land use issues through partnering with the Planning &
Development Department, providing support for the Agriculture Advisory Committee, and
chairing the Ag Preserve Advisory Committee.
? Continue to support UC Cooperative Extension in providing research on new fruit and vegetable
varieties and new growing technologies for agriculture.
Goal 4: Quality of Life – A High Quality of Life for All Residents
Proposed Strategic Actions:
? Conduct inspections of incoming plant material and commercial nurseries in order to protect
California agriculture and the environment and facilitate the safe and legal movement of
plants, locally and internationally.
? Expand opportunities for providing educational forums on agricultural, environmental, and
consumer programs to residents of Santa Barbara County.
? Continue our leadership in the Weed Management Area to obtain funding for projects that
control or eliminate non-native weeds in Santa Barbara County.
? Play an active role in the County’s Integrated Pest Management efforts.
Goal 5: Families and Children – A Community that Fosters the Safety and Well-Being of
Families and Children
Proposed Strategic Actions:
? Continue to provide funding for UC Cooperative Extension to ensure their continued presence
in Santa Barbara County and their ability to run nutrition education, agricultural
research, and 4-H programs.
Expand contact with schools to develop new and enhance existing Integrated Pest Management
programs.
The Community Services Department envisions an innovative, inclusive, and collaborative approach
to providing a comprehensive approach to enhance the quality of life through parks and open space,
recreation services, arts and culture, library services, quality housing opportunities, human services
and environmental stewardship, all integral to a vibrant community. The Department’s strategic
actions are primarily aligned with the following adopted County Strategic Goals:
Goal 1: EFFICIENT AND RESPONSIVE GOVERNMENT: An efficient professionally managed
government able to anticipate and to effectively respond to the needs of the community;
Goal 2: HEALTH AND SAFETY: safe and healthy communities in which to live, work, and visit;
Goal 3: ECONOMIC VITALITY: A community that is economically vital & sustainable;
Goal 4: QUALITY OF LIFE: A high quality of life for all residents;
Goal 6: FAMILIES AND CHILDREN: A community that fosters the safety and well-being of families
and children.
Key Projects:
? Implement countywide safety inspection program for all County parks and open spaces to
ensure health and safety of park visitors.
? Explore the feasibility to expand recreational programming in Cuyama and other County
locations.
? Develop marketing and promotional programs to increase park visitorship and enhance
appreciation of the County park system. Continue to seek efficiencies and opportunities to
reduce on-going operational costs in the park system.
? Distribute and promote results of the Americans for the Arts 'Arts and Economic Prosperity
IV Study' that will provide details on the economic impact of nonprofit arts and cultural
organizations and their audiences in Santa Barbara County.
? Convert all Arts and Cultural grant applications and requests for proposals (RFP’s) to
online submittal and review process.
? Conduct at least four public events, including Brown Bag Arts Lunches and Annual Arts
Symposium to provide opportunities for community dialogue on arts issues.
? Continue to enhance the availability of current reading materials in a variety of formats
that meet the needs and interests of the community.
? Implement new countywide homeless management information system software to facilitate
data collection and evaluation of homeless assistance and homelessness prevention
program beneficiaries.
? Continue to collect data regarding homeless needs and services that will benefit the Continuum
of Care Program; this will include conducting the biennial homeless count.
? Facilitate increase in homeowner use of emPowerSBC loans and create program continuance
plan.
? Inspect and monitor housing projects twice a year to ensure programmatic and regulatory
compliance.
? Continue to conduct public notices of funding available and submit required Action Plan
to Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and begin development of the next Five Year
Consolidated Plan to ensure timely expenditures of grant funds.
In the upcoming two fiscal years, Planning and Development will focus on the following: Continuous
Improvement, Technology Enhancements, and General and Community Planning.
The Planning and Development key projects are primarily aligned with the following adopted
County Strategic Goals: Goal 1: An Efficient Government Able to Anticipate and Respond Effectively
to the Needs of the Community; Goal 2: A Safe and Healthy Community in Which to
Live, Work and Visit; Goal 4: A Community that is Economically Vital and Sustainable; Goal 5:
A High Quality of Life for All Residents, and Goal 6: A County Government that is Accessible,
Open and Citizen Friendly.
Continuous Improvement – Key Projects
? Continue to update the County’s Land Use and Development Codes and Coastal Zoning
Ordinances to ensure they are current and responsive to issues; updates are planned
to address temporary uses and special events, previously processed amendments to Article
II (in the form of Land Use and Development Code) minor corrections to storage
of vehicles, and a comprehensive update of sign regulations.
Update the County’s enforcement tools including the Administrative Fine Ordinance
and the enforcement provisions of the zoning ordinances to improve resolution of code
complaints.
? Complete the regulatory audit of the oversight of the County’s onshore petroleum operations
and address any gaps or overlaps in regulations through ordinance amendments
or process changes.
? Work on improving interdepartmental coordination in the permit process, including developing
an issue resolution process.
? Work on processes, tools and oversight to improve the effectiveness of the permit compliance
program.
Technology Enhancements – Key Projects
? Expand public access to scanned permit images via Accela Permit Tracking System
web portal, reducing trips to county offices to retrieve permit information.
? Develop infrastructure for expanded library of digital images for internal and public
use.
? Complete integration of permit billing within Accela Permit Tracking System.
? Continue expansion of mobile office applications, enhancing staff productivity and reducing
travel.
? Provide comprehensive workload and management information tools for planning and
telecommunications permit compliance activities.
General Planning – Key Projects
? Complete 2009-14 Housing Element Implementation items. This project includes developing
the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance to replace and update policies in the
current Housing Element and incorporating a reasonable accommodation procedure into
the County’s zoning ordinance to accommodate the needs of persons with disabilities
and their families.
? Begin working on the 2015-23 Housing Element Update to accommodate Regional
Housing Needs Allocation requirements, pursuant to State law.
? Complete the County’s Climate Action Planning, including the Climate Action Strategy
and the Climate Change Adaptation Plan.
? Update the Winery Ordinance provisions to address community and business interests.
? Amend the Comprehensive Plan and Land Use and Development Code to achieve consistency
with the Airport Land Use Plan.
? Complete the Agricultural Production and Processing ordinance amendments, including
developing standards to support limited expansion of agricultural processing, production,
and sales activities on agricultural lands which are compatible with surrounding
land uses.
Community Planning – Key Projects
? Complete the master planning for Santa Claus Lane, including environmental review
and permitting, and develop construction funding options to implement beach access,
parking and street improvement designs.
? Complete adoption of the Summerland Community Plan Update, including Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors adoption hearings, and the Coastal Commission
certification process.
? Resubmit the Isla Vista Master Plan for Coastal Commission certification process, including
local adoption of the ordinance provisions and Master Plan revisions to reflect
changes from the Land Use and Development Code language; and, processing of a
coastal development permit for a Parking Program for Isla Vista.
? Complete adoption of the Mission Canyon Community Plan, including recirculation of
portions of the Environmental Impact Report (EIR), and Planning Commission, Board
of Supervisors and Santa Barbara City Council adoption hearings.
? Complete environmental review and ordinance development of the Eastern Goleta Valley
Community Plan.
? Complete environmental review and ordinance development for the Gaviota Coast
Plan.
The Public Works Department’s strategic actions are primarily aligned with the following adopted
general goals and principles:
Goal 1: An efficient government able to anticipate and respond effectively to the needs of
the community.
Goal 2: A safe and healthy community in which to live, work and visit.
Goal 3: A strong professionally managed County organization.
Water Resources Division:
? Complete 2012 Annual Maintenance Plan as approved by the Board.
? Negotiate a new 5 year Non Point Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
Stormwater Permit.
? Construct Phase 2B of the Lower Mission Creek Box Culvert through the City
Railroad Depot.
? Initiate final design of the Las Vegas / San Pedro Creeks Project in the Goleta
area in cooperation with the Cities of Goleta, Santa Barbara, and Caltrans.
? Lead Integrated Regional Water Management Plan (IRWMP) update progress
with partnering agencies.
? Continue Community Rating System (CRS) Flood Insurance Rating of Class 6.
? Secure new long term (5 year) maintenance permits from the Corp of Engineers
and Regional Water Quality Control Board.
Resource Recovery & Utilities Division:
? Complete the Tajiguas Landfill Phase 3A Liner Project.
? Continued development of Resource Recovery Park Conversion Technology
(CT) to include: initiation of environmental review and preparation of draft
Joint Powers Authority.
? Fully implement regenerating water softener exchange program.
? Track the effectiveness of the Laguna Solar Project and market renewable energy
credits.
Transportation Division:
? Develop long-term budget to maintain levels of service by balancing annual
costs with reliable ongoing funding.
? Update RdMAP based on new district boundaries and revisit funding distribution
formulas; provide information and recommendations on changes.
? Deliver the Goleta Transportation Improvement Plan update in calendar year
2012, commence the Orcutt Transportation Improvement Plan update.
? Update disaster response procedures based on new policies from Federal Emergency
Management Agency and Federal Highway Administration.
Administration Division:
? Implement revised Public Works policies and procedures and monitor performance.
? Achieve full cost recovery in all Public Works fees charged.
? Provide Public Works financial information to meet new budget format.
? Assist in the closeout of the Redevelopment Development Agency and complete
Indirect Cost Rate Proposal for Caltrans.
? Resolve the organizational issues associated with the disaster recovery vacancy.
County Surveyor’s Division:
? Maintain core level of services and implement upcoming personnel changes.
? Complete Flood Control and Transportation Right of Way Applications.
? Complete map books and implement new Local Agency Formation Commission
Coordination Process.
The County Auditor-Controller’s strategic actions align primarily with the following the County’s
adopted Strategic Goals and Principles:
Goal 1: An Efficient, Professionally Managed Government Able to Anticipate and Effectively
Respond to the Needs of the Community; and
Goal 5: A County Government that is Accessible, Open, and Citizen Friendly.
The Auditor-Controller’s management strategy includes programs and projects that improve service
delivery, are linked to the goals stated above and the department’s mission statement. This is
achieved by focusing on continuous improvement, customer service, the use of technology to
improve work processes and to make information more available to the community that enhances
the financial accountability and integrity of County government. These programs and projects
generally span multiple years and are discussed below:
Application Development:
? The project team plans to add functionality to Financial Information Network (FIN Web) for
travel claim data capture and processing, budget revision request processing, vendor claims
initiation, and enhanced data search capabilities. This can result in implementation of additional
efficiencies and outcomes to access data for travel analysis for availability by
management and executives, automated budget revision processing, and enhance availability
of financial data for policy makers, executives and management.
? The continuation of additional online transaction processing in FIN Web will gain other
efficiencies and outcomes that include: faster transaction processing of claims payments,
processing with fewer error corrections, control of disbursements resulting in potential interest
earnings, and reduction of paper document retrieval and storage.
? The development of a new process in FIN Web for loading and analyzing budgetary information
during the budget development process to better integrate budget development data
with actual financial data. This initiative will also replace the fourteen year old budget development
and the budget adjustment applications upgrading them to modern web-based
technology.
Systems and Property Tax:
? The Auditor-Controller will continue to participate in all areas of the property tax project,
including data conversion, system interfaces, reporting, functional design, and user testing.
The Department will also work on development of related in-house systems to further support
the necessary processes. This project will also need to integrate to the new Property Tax
Assessment System being installed by the Clerk-Recorder-Assessor. The new vendor property
system is not scheduled to be initially implemented until FY 2013-14 and will require a
significantly longer period for full system implementation to maximize the efficiencies and
outcomes of a new system.
? The Systems team plans to migrate all workstations to the Windows 7 operating system.
Other projects include upgrading Web and Structured Query Language (SQL) Servers to
newer versions of the software and further enhancements to the overall backup and disaster
recovery strategies.
Payroll:
? Additional automation of manual payroll processes by utilizing database management and
development of enhancements to existing automated systems will enhance information
available to the policy makers and our employees.
? The division will develop a new web-based time-capture system to replace an outdated time
card application. The new system will create better controls within each department, allow
for automation of complex regulatory compliance issues, provide a simpler user interface
and add enhanced reporting capabilities.
? Implement enhancements to the County’s internally developed payroll system. These improvements
will allow the over 4,000 employees, who currently access the system regularly,
easier access to their own payroll information and departmental payroll staff to better access
their departmental information. The Payroll Division will continue to seek out improved efficiencies
and controls in all remaining manual processes to accelerate and automate the
payroll processing cycle.
Internal Audit:
? The division utilizes a risk based approach to determine where to deploy resources depending
on availability. The division is focusing on disseminating information and increasing its
audit presence to reduce risks at departments.
? The division will undergo a peer review that will provide recommendations for improvements
to the County audit process.
? Internal Audit will continue to document and report compliance for departmental reviews
and audits by other agencies, complete Board of Supervisors requests for audits and participate
in the completion of the agreed upon procedures engagements for the seven RDA
dissolutions. These audits and reviews can assist the County in avoiding negative audit settlements
and will assist the taxing agencies in receiving money as a result of the dissolution
of RDA’s.
AUDITOR-CONTROLLER
Department Summary (cont'd)
Financial Reporting and Specialty Accounting:
? The division will provide timely and accurate financial documents that include the County’s
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, County Budget, Cost Allocation Plan and a variety
of compliance and financial reporting documents to State Agencies. The prompt and
accurate completion of these reports upholds the transparency and accountability in the use
of public funds. Timely data provides the Board of Supervisors, County Executive Officer
and management with the financial information necessary to provide service to the community.
? In conjunction with the County Executive Officer, the division will complete the Budget
Clarity Project that will transform the current budget process away from a single year budget
to a multi-year focus incorporating a financial planning cycle that includes a long term strategic
plan, a five year financial forecast, a two year operational plan and a single year legally
required adopted budget.
The Clerk, Recorder, and Assessor’s strategic actions primarily align with the following County
adopted Strategic Goals and Principles:
Goal 1: Efficient and Responsive Government – Santa Barbara County will be an efficient
and professionally managed organization that is able to anticipate and effectively respond
to the needs of the community 5: Citizen Involvement – Santa Barbara County will be a
governmental organization that is accessible, open, and citizen-friendly.
The emphasis of the Fiscal Year 2012-13 Clerk-Recorder-Assessor Department Budget and the
following strategic actions are to minimize the Department’s service level impacts and absorb
workload with decreasing resources by continuously improving the Department’s business systems
through cooperation, partnerships and technology.
Assessor:
? Avoid any further Assessor staffing reductions in 2013-14, to minimize any negative
impact on the roll value.
? Complete 90 percent of all secured and unsecured assessment work items by close of
the annual tax roll (July 1), compared to 95 percent the previous year, to create the assessment
roll which is the basis for property tax revenue collected to fund public
services.
? Continue to maintain the reduction in the number of days to process a supplemental assessment
event to an average of 200 days, compared to a historical high of over 300
days.
? Complete 75 percent of the business property audits required by the State.
? Work towards timely resolution of assessment appeals within the statutory timeframe,
with the goal of adequately defending the roll value at risk.
? Complete 100 percent of Section 51 reviews, which require property values to be enrolled
at the lesser of factored base value or market value as of the lien date, by June
30th as part of the assessment roll.
? Exceed or maintain the previous year rate of Business Property Statements (BPS) electronically
filed through the BPS E-File System by continuously modernizing,
improving the process, technology, and the public interface.
? Implement providing the annual secured property value notices on-line, eliminating the
need to print and mail approximately 35,000 value notices.
? With any staffing reductions in 2013-14 below the 2012-13 level, minimize the negative
impact on the Assessor’s ability to preserve critical assessment service levels
required to complete an accurate assessment roll which becomes the basis for property
taxes collected to fund County public services.
? Continue the phases of the server consolidation project by eliminating physical servers,
reorganizing file structures within various servers, and completing a strategic plan of
various options for business continuity.
? Continue the project to scan all documents in commercial and residential property files
with a goal to complete scanning 50 percent of the physical files in the Lompoc Office
and integrating the digitally scanned documents with the new assessment system by
June 30, 2013.
? Upgrade various departmental software programs to current versions, such as Microsoft
Office2010, Visual Studio 2010, Active Reports 6.0.
? Continue with the conversion of data and implementation of the new vendor developed
property assessment and valuation system known as Realware, with the goal of implementing
by the end of 2012-13.
Clerk-Recorder:
? Continue towards expanding the number of electronic recording customers that submit
documents for recording through the electronic recording delivery system known as
SECURE.
? Transition recording of liens and releases from the Tax Collector (comprises 4% of total
recordings) to electronic recording.
? Develop and implement a process to allow on-line payment for marriage ceremony reservations
to create greater operating efficiencies and increase service level to
customers.
? Develop and implement a process to allow couples applying for a marriage license the
ability to pre-order marriage certificate copies, increasing customer service levels by
avoiding the need for customers to return and order a copy after the marriage license is
recorded. This process also creates greater operating efficiencies for the Clerk-Recorder
by streamlining the process and reducing the number of customers that come into the
office.
? Continue to restore archival maps or birth certificate books from the 1800’s, as part of
the mandate to store and preserve photographically reproducible records.
Elections:
? Successfully conduct the November 2012 General and June 2014 Primary Elections
and timely complete the election canvass and certification of the election results by the
28th day after each election, and materially maintain or increase the voter turnout rate in
the last comparable election.
? Continue to review certified vote tabulation and vote by mail processing systems in early
2013 with the goal of acquiring and implementing new systems commencing with
the June 2014 election.
? Expand information available on the Elections website to better serve the voters and
customers of the County.
? Process Fair Political Practice Campaign Statements, Campaign Financial Disclosure
Filings and Statements of Economic Interest Filings within 2 business days from the
day they are received in our office.
? Review staff job descriptions and look at redistributing work and cross training to utilize
staff more effectively.
? Continue to expand participation in the option of access to the sample ballot on-line rather
than through mail delivery, saving the County thousands of dollars in the cost of
printing and mailing. Voters who opt not to receive or access the sample ballot electronically
will have the option to continue receiving the sample ballot by mail.
? Continue to review and update the Election Policy Book for changes in law, Secretary
of State Directives, County Counsel legal opinions, and California Association of
Clerks and Elections Officials guidelines.
CLERK-RECORDER-ASSESSOR
Department Summary (cont'd)
? Review and document division business procedures to ensure staff compliance with operational
and safety procedures.
adopted Strategic Goals and Principles:
Goal 1: An Efficient, Professionally Managed Government Able to Anticipate and Effectively
Respond to the Needs of the Community; and
Goal 5: A County Government that is Accessible, Open, and Citizen Friendly.
The Department’s management strategy is coordinated with Department’s focus on providing
Excellent Customer Service and the Department’s Mission and Vision that support this ideal. To
that end, the objectives for the next two years focus on projects and programs that improve service
delivery through the use of technology and improved communication, improve processes
through the emphasis on staff training and enrichment, and improve space through the notion that
employee safety, moral and productivity is a function of quality work spaces. The programs and
projects generally span multiple years and are discussed below:
Facilities Management:
? Apply Southern California Edison grant award to identify, manage and reduce the County’s
energy consumption, and strengthen and improve the implementation of the
County’s sustainability action plan.
? Implement multiyear project to replace the heating and air conditioning system in the
Historic Courthouse.
Risk Management:
? Transfer the worker compensation “tail claims” (all open claims on the books that occurred
prior to July 1, 2010) to an insurance carrier thereby limiting the County's
liability for these older claims.
? The Risk Management and Human Resources Divisions will jointly develop, design and
implement an Employees Wellness program in order to increase the health, moral and
productivity of employees.
? Implement a web-based self-evaluation program on ergonomics for utilization by all
Departments.
Information Technology:
? Complete the Countywide IT Strategic Plan to clearly link County business objectives
with IT enablement.
? Develop a plan to provide adequate internet connectivity Countywide.
? Provide a secure Mobile Device Management solution to support a growing variety and
number of portable devices.
Communications:
? Begin a phased upgrade process for the phone system Private Branch Exchange (PBX)
to convert to Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) technologies introducing Unified
Communications and Collaboration services where appropriate.
? Complete the transition of mobile, portable and base station radios to the narrow banding
technology by December 2012 to comply with the Federal Commutation
Commission (FCC) mandate.
? Pilot a point to point microwave installation to improve communication connectivity and
reduce costs for remote locations.
Fleet Management:
? Complete new Vehicle Policy in order to reduce the number of vehicles in the fleet by
5% and reduce the gallons of fuel used by 10%.
? Complete the conversion of the automated fuel access system used by all County vehicles
at the 3 major County owned fueling sites, to an upgraded and more reliable system.
Real Estate Services:
? Complete a ground lease of the Garden Street Parking lot and sale of a portion of the
Probation property to the Administrative Office of the Courts for their new court complex
and parking structure.
? Acquire the necessary property and easements for the completion of the Union Valley
Parkway in the Santa Maria area.
? Acquire the Tognazzini property and complete the land project for the Point Sal Preserve.
Capital Projects:
? Complete the revised Space Policy and Update the 2006-2011 Space Utilization Study
with the goal of completing the 2012-1017 versions by the end of 2012. The revised
document will include a new section on County leases in document and a goal to reduce
leased space by 10% and County-owned buildings by 5%.
? Establish a Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) requirement (i.e. a
minimum level of sustainability features that are incorporated into the design) for new
County buildings and remodels of County space over a certain size.
? Assist Sheriff's Department with initial design of the new North County Jail to be funded
with AB 900 Grant.
The County Treasurer-Tax Collector-Public Administrator’s strategic actions align primarily with
the following adopted County Strategic Goals:
Goal 1: Efficient and Responsive Government: An Efficient, Professionally Managed
Government Able to Anticipate and to Effectively Respond to the Needs of the
Community; and
Goal 3: Economic Vitality: A Community that is Economically Vital and Sustainable.
Each division provides certain core services reflected in the performance measures. The Treasurer-
Tax Collector-Public Administrator’s management strategy includes projects to improve
service delivery, while curtailing costs. This will be achieved by concentrating on three main
focus areas: Enhancement of Finance and Treasury Functions; Improving Property Tax and Collection
Systems Policies and Procedures; and Administering and Facilitating Public Assistance
Programs.
Administration:
? The Information Technology team plans to upgrade several database and software systems
for Collections, Transient Occupancy Tax and Committee for Reciprocal Tax
Accounting in California (CORTAC) payments. This will gain efficiencies and outcomes
that include: faster processing of tax payments, processing with fewer errors,
improved reporting and reduced staff time.
Property Tax:
? In FY 2012-13, the Treasurer-Tax Collector will continue to participate in all areas of
the property tax project, including data conversion, systems interfaces, functional design,
and user testing. This project will also need to integrate to the new Property Tax
Assessment System to be installed by the Clerk-Recorder-Assessor. Efficiencies and
Outcomes in FY 2012-13 will include use of a database warehouse, storing all historical
mainframe data used by interfacing systems that will be upgraded this year. The
total new system will initially be implemented early in FY 2013-14 and will require a
significantly longer period for full system implementation to maximize the efficiencies
and outcomes of a new system.
? In FY 2012-13, the Treasurer-Tax Collector will hold property tax auctions for the
eleven remaining defaulted parcels. It is anticipated that the tax auctions will result in
the collection of $177,223 in taxes and late penalties.
Continue to fund the north county jail operational set-aside; an additional $2 million is included
in FY 2012-13.
? Establish the necessary budget to fund costs associated with the dissolution of the former
Redevelopment Agency (RDA) and the Successor Agency to the Isla Vista RDA.
? Fund necessary capital/infrastructure projects based on identified needs, priorities and available
resources.
? Retain a portion of FY 2011-12 concession savings for anticipated FY 2013-14 funding
needs.
? Continue to build the County’s Strategic Reserve.
Prepare additional ROPS for each six month period beginning July 1, 2012.
? Complete redevelopment projects in progress or contracted for as of February 1, 2012,
along with any additional projects approved by the Oversight Board.
? Dispose of assets and properties of the former RDA or transfer them to a local government
as directed by the Oversight Board.
? Provide administrative support to the Oversight Board.
