Resolving assessment appeals from 2015 will be a priority for the appraisal staff. Appeals require an appraiser to make an independent analysis of the market value of each property and attend the Assessment Appeals Board at a hearing if not resolved with the property owner. All pending appeals are expected to be resolved by December 2016.

In 2016-17, the Assessor will continue working with the Auditor-Controller-Treasurer-Tax Collector and Information Services on refinements to the new property tax system. The new system enables staff to produce the assessment roll sooner by computerizing processes previously done manually.

Recorder staff will continue to expand the use of e-Recording by increasing our network of
document submitters. These customers are approved by the Department of Justice to submit
documents for recording electronically. The department will also resume the restoration of old
official record books having them restored, filmed and archived for future public use. Finally, the Recorder will begin digitizing old vital record books allowing for more efficient access to this
important information. The department will continue to focus on refinement of the new One Solution financial system to
take advantage of many new features expected to improve efficiency, as well as to continue to
provide training and in-person support to system users. Phase II of the One Solution software will
be implemented, including the budgeting and grant management modules. The goals for FY 2016-17 include a continuation of the business retention/expansion assistance, new project facilitation sited above as well as commencing the disposition of the two former RDA sites and the implementation of the CEMEX reuse plan. In addition, staff intends to work with the Planning Department to assess and support standard development fees and processes, expand high speed fiber and the Monterey Bay Community Power Program (Community Choice Aggregation). In 2016-17, Purchasing anticipates processing approximately 5,000 requisitions and purchase orders for county-wide expenditures of approximately $22 million. The focus of the division continues to be on management of processes and procedures including strategic purchasing to increase leverage in the County’s purchasing power, “Green Procurement” of environmentally friendly and energy-reducing products, and pursuing collaborative strategies to achieve more efficient and effective purchasing operations with both risk management and cost savings as top priorities.

The Purchasing division will continue to work with the Auditor-Controller-Treasurer-Tax Collector’s office and the Information Services Department to ensure the successful implementation of ONESolution, the County’s new fully-integrated financial management and procurement system. In conjunction with this implementation, the division will continue to evaluate and revise purchasing procedures and provide training to County departments to maximize efficiencies within ONESolution. The Office of Emergency Services is responsible for emergency planning, response, recovery,
and mitigation. These include:
• Developing hazard analyses and plans for response to various county-wide emergency
incidents in conjunction with other County agencies and jurisdictions, neighboring counties,
and State and federal agencies;
• Coordinating emergency incidents in the County's Operational Area Coordinator's role within
the State's Standardized Emergency Management System;
• Serving as the local liaison to State and federal agencies to ensure the County's access to
critical information regarding public safety and emergency preparedness as well as grant
funding opportunities that are available to implement related programs;
• Providing staff support to the Emergency Management Council, the County Fire Department
Advisory Commission and the Santa Cruz County Anti-Terrorism Approval Authority, which is
mandated by the State Office of Homeland Security;
• Administering the County's Emergency Response Fee, paid by subscribers to telephone
service in the unincorporated area of the County for the purpose of financing improvements
to, and operation of, the 911 communication system; and
18-10 75
• Oversight of the California Emergency Management Agency (Cal EMA) Flood Mitigation
Assistance program, an annually renewed grant program which provides matching funds for
homeowners to elevate and retrofit their homes located in the Felton Grove area of Santa
Cruz County.
The Office of Emergency Services serves as the lead county agency for coordination of Homeland
Security-related activities in collaboration with the County Administrative Office, the Sheriff's
Office, the Health Services Agency, County Fire and Emergency Medical Services. In 2015-16,
the Emergency Services Manager and General Services Department support staff were
responsible for managing grant programs totaling approximately $900,000. In 2016-17, the
Emergency Services Manager will continue coordination of countywide Urban Areas Security
Initiative (UASI) grant projects for law, fire and Emergency Medical Services equipment, planning,
training and exercises.
Relocation of the Office of Emergency Services and the Emergency Operations Center from the
current location at the Santa Cruz Regional 9-1-1 Center to the new Center for Public Safety
located in Live Oak is complete. The new facility is equipped with the latest technology and
equipment, and co-location with the Sheriff's Office is anticipated to enhance disaster response
and communications. We are currently working to identify an alternate site in the extreme case
of a loss of the center in a disaster.

The following are identified as strategic direction and goals for FY 2016-17:
• Support countywide implementation of Senate Bill 75 to transition undocumented youth
under age 19 into full scope Medi-Cal benefits.
• Collaborate with the Central California Alliance for Health to implement the Whole Child
Model for California Children's Services program youth.
• Complete the Request for Proposal (RFP) process for ambulance services and bring a
recommendation to the board.
• Negotiate a contract with the State Department of Healthcare Services to fund the
expansion of Drug Medi-Cal Services in Santa Cruz County under the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) approved 1115 Waiver.
• Successful implementation of the Netsmart Avatar Electronic Health Record for Mental
Health and Substance Use Disorder services in Santa Cruz County.
Develop a data dashboard for contracted behavioral health services outcomes measures
and upcoming data from standardized assessment tools such as the Child and Adolescent
Needs and Strengths Assessment (CANS) and the Adult Needs and Strengths
Assessment (ANSA) for program monitoring and evaluation.
• In order to meet current demand for services, timely access for services, and meet State
requirements under the Department of Health Care Services, ensure that direct services
positions which are revenue generating, are fully staffed at 90% of capacity for the next
fiscal year.
• Leveraging future funding opportunities through the Central Alliance for Health,
anticipated funding from the Department of Housing and Urban Development, other grant
opportunities, and identify opportunities for implementing the recommendations of the
Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Strategic Plans.
• Continue to evaluate and redesign mental health services in collaboration with
stakeholders and based on the approved strategic plan document.
• Continue strong partnerships with the local providers, departments of Human Services,
Probation, Sheriff's and other County departments to coordinate timely and appropriate
services for shared clients.
• Continue to refine the performance outcomes matrices for each program/division within
HSA.
• Continue to convene and champion the interdepartmental Wellness Committee which is
comprised of representatives from the County Administrative Office, Personnel
Department, General Services Department, Health Services Agency, Parks, Open
Spaces, and Cultural Services, and members of interested employee groups. The
Committee is developing, implementing, and assessing the sustainability and
effectiveness of a pilot program.
• Continue to collaborate with County Personnel to develop innovative approaches to recruit
and retain more physicians and other difficult-to-fill positions.
• Collaborate with State and local stakeholders to explore opportunities to implement the
"Medi-Cal 2020" Whole Person Care and Health Home pilot projects.
• Expand clinic hours to increase primary care access for low income clients.
• Complete the three required prerequisites and submit a statement of intent to officially
apply for National Public Health Accreditation.
• Process placarding and food facility grading ordinance and begin implementation.
• Facilitate development of an HSA five year strategic plan.

Upgrade all lSD supported desktops to Windows 10 operating system to take advantage
of Microsoft's free upgrade
• Build upon citizen outreach efforts with mobile friendly internet sites and increased Citizen
Connect functionality
• Provide E-signature for contracts and other parts of the automated Agenda Management
System
• Configure automated Agenda Management solution for the Planning Commission
• Create richer Electronic Plan Submission workflow to automate more of the plan review
process
• Implement an electronic email archive solution to streamline and simplify the County's ability
to respond more quickly and cost-effectively to public record requests.
• Expand mobile friendly and real time result tracking for 2016 Presidential Election
• Established in the Government Continuity data center, real-time cutover capability for
Property Tax, Payroll and Financials applications at the new Office of Emergency Services
on the Center for Public Safety campus.

Complete a countywide simulcast radio system technology upgrade.
• Increase coverage for Radio Receiver infrastructure.
• Install communications equipment in 21 new Sheriff and District Attorney vehicles

Assist the City of Watsonville with continued deployment of its Public Safety Mesh WiFi
System.
• Continue support of Santa Cruz Regional 911 Dispatch Console.
Continuing to focus on leveraging resources and developing partnerships will be a priority over
the next year. Last year all five Parks Divisions came together with the Animal Services Agency
and several non-profit partners, including Friends of Santa Cruz County Parks, in planning and
implementing the first annual Parks fundraiser, and this year's event promises to be even more
successful.


The Planning Department plans to make substantial progress or complete a number of policy efforts
initiated in prior years, including:
• Complete CEQA review of Sustainability Policy and Regulatory Amendments, which
includes a Code Modernization as well as implementation of recommendations from the
Sustainable Santa Cruz County (SSCC) Plan. Carry out Planning Commission and Board
_of Supervisor public hearings, and submit County-adopted amendments to the California
Coastal Commission for consideration.
• Complete amendments to regulations for Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs}, mixed use
development projects, and permanent room housing projects.

Each division of the Probation Department has individual challenges and opportunities. For 2016-
17, these include:
• Maximizing existing resources and enhancing staffing levels to provide appropriate
caseload management for adult and juvenile probation supervision.
• Utilizing the Pew/MacArthur Foundation Results First Initiative's cosUbenefit analysis and
consumer report to: 1) Expand services to the criminal justice population utilizing effective
programming; 2) Target funds at evidence-based and promising programs; 3) Invest in
monitoring and evaluation; 4) Determine and select programming for the Rountree
Rehabilitation and Reentry Facility; and 5) Expand the Results First model into other areas.
• The release of a request for Letters of lntenURequest for Qualifications with the potential to
procure a new cycle of AB 1 09 treatment and interventions services based on risk, needs
and responsivity and matching the local Results First Program Inventory.
• Continued implementation of the Risk-Needs-Responsivity Simulation Tool, in collaboration
with Dr. Faye Taxman and the Center for Advancing Correctional Excellence at George
Mason University. This will guide continuous improvement among service providers working
with the criminal justice population including the match of resources to the criminogenic
needs of offenders.
• Continued implementation of the new generation pretrial risk assessment tool (Public Safety
Assessment-Court) through the patronage of the Laura and John Arnold Foundation.
• Maintaining mandated staffing at the Juvenile Hall facility (one staff per eight youth).
• The construction of an enclosed recreation facility at Juvenile Hall, which was approved for
SB 81 Round 1 grant funding by the State.
• Planning work for the initial phases of the Juvenile Hall "Seed to Table" renovation being
financed by SB 81 Round 2 grant funding.
• Increasing Medi-Cal enrollment for eligible families of youth, adult inmates and adult
offenders on supervision.
• Expanding the Vivitrol project with criminal justice offender volunteers who struggle with
opiate dependence. Vivitrol is an extended release injection form of the opiate antagonist
Naltrexone that has been shown effective in reducing craving and increasing treatment
engagement and success. The project provides extensive counseling along with the first
injection while the individuals are still in custody, with follow-up injections administered by
the County Health Clinic or Janus Community Clinic.
• The addition of an Administrative Analyst and an Accountant to assist with increased
workload associated with new grant revenues.
• Filling vacancies in all three divisions, primarily due to reinstated positions, retirements and
staff turnover.