Continue to make customer service the primary focus of County government while working to enhance
responsiveness, efficiency, and accountability including efforts to promote diversity, expand outreach, and
partnerships.
? Work to maintain the long-term fiscal health and sustainability of our County.
? Maintain and enhance services provided to the most vulnerable residents of our County including continued
funding of the Children’s Health Initiative and continued implementation of recommendations from the Poverty
Study and Child Welfare Safety Net Task Force.
? Promote the public safety of our County through maintaining and enhancing front line law enforcement services
and fire fuels reduction and response including initiation of construction of the new North County Jail.
? Continue to invest in maintaining and improving our County roads and other infrastructure.
? Work to protect our open spaces and enhance recreational opportunities including securing funding for
construction of Santa Claus Lane Beach Access Improvements and regional bikeway improvements from Rincon
Park to Carpinteria Avenue and Carpinteria Avenue to Santa Claus Lane.
? Partner to establish on-line resources to promote bike tourism in our region.
? Complete the final phase of the Franklin Trail project to enhance recreational opportunities in the Carpinteria
Valley.
? Continue to work on the planning and implementation of both regional and local transportation enhancements
including the Highway 101 HOV Widening Project, parallel infrastructure improvements in the Montecito
community and establishment of Commuter Rail service from Ventura to Goleta.
? Address the challenge of Climate Change by continued implementation of energy efficiency improvements and
sustainable practices in county building and facilities, the County Climate Action Plan and the EMPower program
and initiate implementation of a Community Choice Energy program.
? Allocate resources to implement the County Food Action Plan.
? Move forward with implementation of the Resource Recovery Project to increase recycling, generate green
energy and ensure long-term management of our solid waste.
? Continue to coordinate with Federal and State government and local water purveyors to address the drought
emergency through increased water conservation efforts, promoting sustainable use of groundwater resources,
direct and indirect reuse, and desalination.
Monitor the Coastal Commission’s review of the Goleta Beach Park permit.
? Continue to maintain a Second District office that is responsive to and respectful of all constituents.
? Continue to monitor the progress of the Goleta Valley Community Plan environmental review processes.
? Remain engaged and insure stakeholder engagement in the ongoing progress of implementation of the San
Marcos Foothills Park Management Plan.
? Monitor progress on the State St. /Hollister Ave Corridor Improvement Plan.
? Monitor implementation of Eastern Goleta Valley Community Plan policies and programs.
? Meet and encourage partnerships with, and among, individuals and organizations (public, private and
educational) committed to expanding and enhancing recreational, cultural and educational opportunities for
youth and adolescents.
? As the Board’s liaison to the Community Corrections Partnership, remain engaged in the progress and challenges
posed by AB 109/Realignment, and advocate for adequate funding for needed resources.
? Continue to advocate for the rights of our County’s most vulnerable constituents.
? Continue to work closely with Public Health officials and staff on issues concerning tobacco use, Affordable Care
Act implementation, and improved conditions and adoptions in animal services.
? Work with local business partners to enhance and develop business opportunities on the South Coast.
? Continue to ensure that environmental protections are in place within the County.
? Monitor ongoing compliance with Phases III and IV of the Plains Oil Spill at Refugio Beach recovery and response.
Continue to preserve public safety and make sure resources are prioritized to keep our community safe.
? Continue to promote fiscal responsibility so that we are using public resources efficiently and effectively.
? Continue to protect safety net services for our most vulnerable community members.
? Continue to provide timely, responsive, and professional constituent service that responds to issues important to
constituents.
? Continue to plan for the future by encouraging strong neighborhood and environmental planning.
Infrastructure maintenance will continue to be a high priority for Peter in the next fiscal year. He is committed to
pressuring the Board to fully fund their annual maintenance responsibilities for roads, parks, and public buildings, and
plans to address the over $300 million of deferred maintenance.
Continue to with Sheriff, Fire, and the County Executive Office (CEO) to review emergency dispatch operations
and implement any necessary changes.
? Continue to work with Santa Barbara County Economic Vitality Team to create new economic development
opportunities in the Fifth District.
? Continue to work with the Department of Behavioral Wellness, Marian Medical Center and other partners to
develop one or more new mental health facilities in North County.
? Continue to work with our onshore oil producers to increase property tax revenue and high paying jobs to the
County.
? Continue to work with Supervisor Farr and staff on water capacity and recreation issues at Lake Cachuma;
develop new water conservation programs Countywide.
Complete an internal-facing, organizational Strategic Plan to guide priorities and goals for a high-performing
organization
? Establish capital funding criteria and establish recommended priority projects
? Coordinate a review and recommendations for improvements to the County’s dispatch services for emergency
response
? Fully operationalize internal and external Aware and Prepare Alert communications program
? Conduct an internal program review and complete a Strategic Plan for the Santa Barbara County Office of
Emergency Management
? Complete the 5 year upgrade to the multi-jurisdiction Hazard Mitigation Plan
? Develop a customized Workers’ Compensation Dashboard, for each department, to enhance trend analysis, and
injury prevention
? Increase Safety/Security awareness by delivering Situation-Awareness training to all Departments
? Establish a robust internal and external communications program and implement the recommendations of the
Strategic Communications Plan; provide appropriate public information on potential Transient Occupancy Tax
(TOT) measure
Maintain appropriate reserve balances to enhance financial stability
? Continue to increase ongoing funding for maintenance needs
? Continue to anticipate, communicate, and mitigate risk
? Ensure successful implementation of the Behavioral Wellness system change effort
? Continue activities of the Drought Task Force
? Fully operationalize internal and external Aware and Prepare Alert communications program
? Implement the 2016 Legislative Program
? Establish a robust internal and external communications program and implement the recommendations of the
Strategic Communications Plan; provide appropriate public information on potential Transient Occupancy Tax
(TOT) measure
? Establish capital funding criteria and establish recommended priority projects
? Coordinate a review and recommendations for improvements to the County’s dispatch services for emergency
response
? Complete an internal-facing, organizational Strategic Plan to guide priorities and goals for a high-performing
organization
? Continue to strive for excellent service to the public, departments, Board members, and community partners
Conduct an internal program review and complete a Strategic Plan for the Santa Barbara County Office of
Emergency Management
? Complete the 5 year upgrade to the multi-jurisdiction Hazard Mitigation Plan
? Complete required steps to determine if and when Phase III monitoring is met and complete After Action Reports
for the 2015 Refugio Oil Spill
? Utilizing funding from the Homeland Security Grant Program, continue the build-out of the Santa Cruz Island
Public Safety Communications Project
? Maintain efficiencies and safeguards through sustained regulatory oversight of Oil & Gas activities throughout the
Operational Area
? Sustain necessary training and exercise activities for the Red, White, and Blue EOC Response Teams.
? Provide excellent customer service when providing support to local jurisdictions and day-to-day activities at the
Emergency Operations Center
? Complete required updates to departmental Continuity of Operations Plans (COOP)
? Participate in nuclear preparedness drills, exercises and outreach programs fulfilling our obligation as part of the
requirements of the Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant program
? Continue monitoring drought situation and active pursuit of emergency response, as needed
Develop a customized Workers’ Compensation Dashboard, for each department, to enhance trend analysis, and
injury prevention
? Sustain a 100% closing ratio for Workers’ Compensation and General Liability Programs
? Maintain Workers’ Compensation rate stabilization
? Increase Safety/Security awareness by delivering Situation-Awareness training to all Departments
? Implement Corrective Action plans to address safety concerns
Litigate against: 1) United Launch Alliance’s property tax appeals, where the total 9-year valuation dispute is
$3.56 billion; 2) civil rights and tort cases, including four already set for trial before March 2017; 3) FY 06/07-08/09
Medi-Cal program audits, which disallowed about $8.2 million of County costs; 4) “Camp 4” and “Mooney and
Escobar” Fee-To-Trust decisions; 5) Zoom Properties’ challenge to the Eastern Goleta Valley Community Plan; 6)
District Court’s denial of “qualified immunity” in Shafer; 7) Mosby appeal of the Superior Court’s decision
upholding the Board’s denial of a Conditional Use Permit; and 8) Any Refugio Oil Spill damages that the County
does not recover through claims (the County already has collected 100% of the $1.7 million that the County has
claimed to date for its “removal costs” and “increased costs of government services" from the May 2015 spill.)
? Provide timely legal support, concurrently, to two major construction projects: 1) $96 million Northern Branch Jail
project; and 2) $125 million Tajiguas Resource Recovery Project.
? Investigate and respond to: 1) Channelkeeper’s Clean Water Act allegations about County’s Transfer Station; and
2) Disability Rights California’s Report on Inspection of the Santa Barbara County Jail.
? Provide timely legal support about multiple, high-visibility “land use” projects and “water” issues, including
“Groundwater Sustainability Agency” decisions that are due by June 30, 2017.
$96.1 million Northern Branch Jail Project: Continue time-sensitive and intensive legal support: 1) for potential
award of construction contracts in Spring-Summer 2016; and 2) through scheduled substantial completion in June
2018. Because of the State’s notification and/or concurrence requirements involving AB900 bond financing, legal
support will continue to be more complicated for this project than for non-AB900 projects:
o We expect to see a 6-month spike in legal support during the upcoming bid and contract award processes.
o After that, we expect to see a sustained, heavy demand for legal support throughout the next four years for:
1) supporting the 9 separate contracts within this project (2 State agreements; separate contracts for onsite
construction and offsite construction; and 5 consultant agreements [construction management; architect;
project expert; Inspector of Record; and testing and special inspections]); 2) construction “change orders;”
and 3) any construction claims, litigation, closeouts and audits.
? United Launch Alliance property tax assessment appeals: As discussed under “Accomplishments,” the
Assessment Appeals Board in 2015 found that the County’s $234 million “escape assessment” for 2008 was not
duplicative of the 2008 “regular assessments,” since the property within the escape assessment was not
reported and not previously assessed in 2008. That said, we expect that during the next 2-plus years, ULA will
continue to vigorously litigate each of the assessment years within this $3.56 billion valuation dispute.
? Refugio Oil Spill: If the County sees further damages from the oil spill -- beyond the $1.7 million that the County
already has recovered -- we will be prepared to bring litigation concerning that loss. Our success in working
closely with the Petroleum and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration and the separate Natural Resource
Damage Assessment process also means that we will be providing legal support to the County’s role in those
functions for about the next 1-3 years.
? $125 million Tajiguas Resource Recovery Project: Continue timely and intensive legal support for this project that
proposes to use conversion technology to extend the life of the Tajiguas Landfill. In 2015 and 2016, Public Works
informed the Board of Supervisors about contracting changes that they are recommending, including: 1) a shift
from private to public financing; 2) a changed role for Mustang Renewable Power Ventures; and 3) using flow
contracts with other jurisdictions, instead of forming a Joint Powers Authority. This is a complex area of law,
where implementing these changes will require extensive additional attorney time.
2016-18 Objectives (Cont’d)
? Federal civil rights, state tort and Workers’ Compensation litigation:
o Federal civil rights and state tort litigation: Defend civil actions for damages against the County and its
employees, including four cases that already are set for trial before March 2017: Dettamanti (alleges Sheriff’s
deputy used excessive force in making an arrest); Fewell (alleges Sheriff’s deputy used excessive force in
shooting plaintiff); Markee (alleges that dangerous condition of public property caused fatal fall from Sea
Lookout Park); Bordegaray (alleges Sheriff’s deputies used excessive force in shooting plaintiff, then failed to
provide necessary medical care). Litigate County’s appeal of the District Court’s denial of “qualified
immunity” in Shafer, involving an excessive force claim against a Sheriff’s deputy, where Plaintiff’s damages,
attorney’s fees and costs total about $397,000.
o Self-insured workers’ compensation “tail claims” litigation: Continue to reduce the County’s self-insured
workers’ compensation liability for injuries occurring before July 2010, by economically resolving the 17
remaining litigated cases, which include some of the most costly and difficult to resolve.
? Other litigation outside of the General Liability Fund and Workers’ Compensation Fund:
o Zoom Properties Superior Court litigation: On October 20, 2015, the Board of Supervisors adopted the Eastern
Goleta Valley Community Plan and certified the Final Environmental Impact Report for that project.
Challenging the new Mixed Use (MU) zoning on the Hollister Avenue – State Street corridor, Petitioner filed
litigation concerning: 1) California Environmental Quality Act; 2) Planning and Zoning law; and 3) “takings.”
We expect to be defending against this case throughout FY 2016-17.
o Mosby appellate litigation: On November 13, 2015, the Superior Court upheld the actions by the Board of
Supervisors to deny the Conditional Use Permit in the Mosby Sports and Outdoor Recreation Project. Mr.
Mosby has filed a Notice of Appeal to the Court of Appeal of California. We expect that the Court of Appeal
will hear this case before January 2017.
o State audit of County Medi-Cal programs: We expect that our litigation to challenge about $8.2 million of
disallowed County costs for FY06/07-FY08/09 will be ongoing throughout FY 2016-17.
o Fee-To-Trust litigation, concerning both the about 1,428-acre “Camp 4” property and the about 2.3-acre
“Mooney and Escobar” property: For the Camp 4 property: 1) in January 2015, the County filed an appeal
with the Interior Board of Indian Appeals, contesting both the “Finding of No Significant Impact” and the
Notice of Decision of intent to accept this property into trust; and 2) we expect to receive the appeal
decision during Spring 2016 and are prepared to litigate further in U.S. District Court if needed, to protect the
County’s land use, regulatory, environmental and property tax interests. For the “Mooney and Escobar”
property: 1) in response to the February 2016 Notice of Decision by Bureau of Indian Affairs to take this 2016-18 Objectives (Cont’d)
property into trust, the County on March 17, 2016 filed its appeal with the Interior Board of Indian Appeals;
and 2) we expect substantive filings and the potential hearing for this appeal to last throughout most of FY
2016-17.
? PEPRA Implementation: The California Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA) addresses the
sharing of “normal costs” between public employers and public employees. Since a key subdivision of PEPRA
becomes operative on January 1, 2018, CEO and Human Resources have requested additional legal support during
the next year.
? Water: Provide timely legal support to the Board of Supervisors and County staff about:
o Potential extension of the 1963 Water Supply Agreement between the State and the Santa Barbara County
Flood Control and Water Conservation District. This would be complicated by 19 Water Supply Retention
Agreements executed between 1983-1988, involving the Flood Control and Water Conservation District; and a
Transfer of Financial Responsibility Agreement in 1991, between the Flood Control and Water Conservation
District, and the Central Coast Water Authority.
o Proposed Bay Delta Conservation Plan.
o Central Coast Water Agency’s requested re-acquisition of 12,214 acre-feet/year of State water.
o Preparation of required planning and actions under the 2014 “Sustainable Groundwater Management Act,”
including: 1) “Groundwater Sustainability Agency” decisions that are due by June 30, 2017; 2) the first
“Groundwater Sustainability Plan” in Santa Barbara County is due for Cuyama Valley by January 31, 2020; and
3) Groundwater Sustainability Plans for San Antonio Creek Valley and Santa Ynez River Valley are due by
January 31, 2022.
? Provide advisory legal support for other significant “land use” projects, including: Gaviota Coast Plan; Short-Term
Rental Ordinance; Medical Marijuana Regulations; GPS River Rock Expansion Project; “Hoop Structures” Zoning
Amendments; and Pacific Coast Energy Company’s request for an Oil Drilling and Production Plan (ODPP).
? Contract Improvement Workgroup: Provide legal support to this group’s work to: identify and implement
contract process improvements, propose policies, assist departments in monitoring contracts, and provide
training.“Laura’s Law:” As previously reported, if the Board chooses to implement “Assisted Outpatient Treatment
Services:” 1) we have completed background research and outreach to other counties about standards and
procedures, and are prepared to move forward; but 2) would require the additional resources of a 60% FTE Senior
Deputy County Counsel and 50% supporting paralegal to provide legal support to Department of Behavioral
Wellness for: their development administrative procedures; any necessary training for their Staff; petition filing;
and in-court advocacy for orders authorizing and continuing assisted outpatient treatment.
Assist allied agencies with the investigation and prosecution of those responsible for committing violent crimes
that have resulted in an increase in homicides and gang-related murders in North County. In calendar year 2015,
the City of Santa Maria’s murder rate has increased to one of the highest in the state per capita.
? Continue criminal investigations of the Refugio Oil Spill and initiate complaints as appropriate.
? Pursue the expansion of the Misdemeanor Diversion Program (MDP) to include Proposition 47 cases for serious
and high-risk drug offenders, which would provide therapeutic resources for certain drug offenses.
? Continue to successfully manage witness safety and availability in gang violence cases.
? Work collaboratively with countywide partners to develop protocols and provide outreach and education to
abate human trafficking.
? Reduce sexual exploitation among youth offenders through the creation of CSEC (Commercially Sexually
Exploited Children) Court, a multi-agency collaboration designed to target females at high risk of exploitation and
recidivism.
? Continue to work with Real Estate Advisory Team of real estate professionals with the goal of identifying trends
in order to deter fraudulent activity.
? Expand victim services to meet the needs of underserved victims of crime in Santa Maria.
Create a focus group to identify new case management improvements to ensure final product meets all
department needs, including ease of use and comprehensive detail of information and reporting.
? Upgrade the current 20-year-old case management system to a new web-based interface. The case management
upgrade will provide improved technology for data entry and retrieval, detailed case reporting, and ensure that
evidence based reporting requirements are met.
Assist allied agencies with the investigation and prosecution of those responsible for homicides and gang-related
murders. The City of Santa Maria and County of Santa Barbara’s murder rate has increased to one of the highest
in the state per capita. Such crimes disproportionately strain this office’s financial resources, and impede its ability
to accomplish its mission of public safety and attain other necessary objectives.
? Continue criminal investigations of the Refugio Oil Spill and initiate complaints as appropriate.
? Explore expansion of the Misdemeanor Diversion Program (MDP) to include Proposition 47 cases for serious and
high-risk drug offenders, which would provide therapeutic resources for certain drug offenses.
? Continue to successfully manage witness safety and availability in gang violence cases.
? Continue to investigate and prosecute suspects who are accessing and disseminating child pornography.
? Continue outreach efforts and education in order to combat elder abuse in Santa Barbara County.
? Obtain additional grant funding to meet the needs of victims of violent crime in Santa Maria.
? Develop internal protocols and performance measurements to identify opportunities for the earlier disposition of
cases, which would free up resources for the entire criminal justice system.
? The Real Estate Fraud Unit will continue to work with the Santa Barbara County Real Estate Fraud Advisory Team,
in order to identify real estate fraud trends and practices in the County of Santa Barbara.
Continue partnerships with allied agencies to identify and prosecute violators in the areas of consumer fraud and
environmental crimes.
? Engage more investigative and prosecutorial resources in consumer fraud and environmental cases at earlier
stages.
? Continue civil investigations of the Refugio Oil Spill and initiate complaints as appropriate.
Increase the number of eligible medium and high risk offenders enrolled under the affordable care act.
? Develop a process for tracking employment and education enrollment for high risk adult offenders.
? Enhance employment partnership for justice involved individuals with the Workforce Development Board.
? Streamline and automate the booking process at the Santa Maria Juvenile Hall.
? Automate the juvenile Child and Adolescent Needs and Strengths (CANS) assessment tool.
? Increase community understanding of, and access to, the many aspects of probation services through effective
community outreach and the use of technology and social media.
2016-18 Objectives
Focus Area: Providing Quality Information and Technology Systems Support for Departmental Operations
? Replicate case management database to the cloud to improve data redundancy.
? Update Probation Case Management System to the latest release.
? Implement Client Appointment Text Notification System “in-house”.
? Streamline and automate booking process at Santa Maria Juvenile Hall.
? Automate Juvenile Child and Adolescent Needs and Strengths assessment tool.
? Develop interface between Probation Case Management Systems and the Courts.
Focus Area: Providing Quality Staffing for Departmental Operations
? Reviews the Department’s Administrative Policy Manual and develops a process to ensure ongoing updates.
? Develop a Survival Skills for Supervisors training during the 2016-2017 training year.
Focus Area: Providing Quality Support Services and Financing for Departmental Operations
? Assess feasibility of online payment portal that is integrated with the Department’s RevQ collection software.
? Continue to refine workflow within the Revenue Recovery Unit related to Franchise Tax Board Court Ordered
Debt collections referrals for adult offender victim restitution accounts that are delinquent by 90 or more days.
2016-18 Objectives
Focus Area: Operating Quality Juvenile Treatment and Detention Facilities and Programs
? In collaboration with the Department of Behavioral Wellness and community partners enhance drug and alcohol
treatment for youth committed to the Los Prietos Boys Camp.
? Develop and implement an enhanced Incentive-Sanction Behavioral Response Matrix in the Santa Maria Juvenile
Hall.
? Utilize technology to maximize efficiencies and effectively track data and outcomes for youth entering the
juvenile institutions.
Focus Area: Providing Evidenced Based and Effective Programs and Services for Juvenile Offenders and Their Families
? Continue to collaborate with the DBW and lead agency, DSS in the development and implementation of the
Commercially Sexually Exploited Children (CSEC) Interagency Protocol Development Team.
? Work in partnership with DSS to address foster care reform that emphasizes shorter term, local programs for
probation youth and the recruitment and retention of resource families for traditional or specialized foster care.
? Work with DBW and DSS in the development and implementation of a community based program to assist
victims of human trafficking.
Focus Area: Providing Evidenced Based and Effective Programs and Services for Adult Offenders
? Increase the use of medication assisted treatment, detox, Secure Continuous Remote Alcohol Monitoring
(SCRAM), and outpatient treatment in lieu of incarceration for the severely addicted.
? Increase the fidelity and availability of evidence-based program slots in the community by completing
assessments and evaluations on all adult programs and identify use of evidence-based models and fidelity to the
model.
? Refine the implementation of the Violation Sanction Matrix and begin focusing on the development of Incentives
to enhance the protocol.
Represent court-appointed clients in all matters where there is no legal impediment to doing so.
? Process all resentencing petitions for Proposition 47 applicants expeditiously.
? Implement our new case management system and integrate it with the systems used by our other justice
partners.
? Collaborate with the Community Corrections Partnership, the Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council, and
community providers to improve the functioning of our Adult and Juvenile justice systems.
? Process almost 300 new expungements, facilitating clients’ finding employment and housing.
? Accept a grant through the Santa Barbara Family Services Agency to provide holistic services to certain Public
Defender clients.
Finalize installation of CMS and leverage operational efficiencies through its usage.
? Continue use of volunteers to meet non-core functions, freeing support staff to focus on higher-priority matters.
? Continue successful implementation of 2011 Criminal Justice Realignment (AB 109) through collaboration with the
Courts, Sheriff, Probation and defense attorneys to find and place clients in appropriate alternative sentencing
programs. Through this collaboration, each agency is able to serve a different segment of the jail population to
achieve the best outcome for individual clients.
? Expansion of Proposition 47 outreach to ensure all persons eligible for Proposition 47 relief are identified and
appropriately processed through the system.
Expand the Volunteer Attorney program to enable staff attorneys to focus on higher-priority core tasks.
? Investigate creation of a post-Bar fellowship program to provide additional in-depth support to the attorneys on a
cost-effective basis.
? Expand use of outside speakers and experts on various legal, ethical, and trial practices topics to provide high
quality training to the attorney staff at minimal cost to the County.
? Continue partnership with other Public Defender Offices to participate in web-based legal education and to
require attorneys within the office to provide continuing legal education to other attorneys in our office on a
regular basis.
? Continue to collaborate with the Courts, Mental Health, Probation, Sheriff, District Attorney, and various
community organizations to improve the functioning of the Therapeutic Courts. These court programs have
proven to be successful at rehabilitation, reducing recidivism, enhancing public safety, and helping individuals to
become productive members of the community. This helps reduce jail overcrowding and saves the County
money.

Ensure compliance with new statutes regarding increased training and education for attorneys assigned to
Juvenile Court and proper representation of juveniles through the “post dispositional phase.”
? Work with school districts to identify areas where outcomes in the juvenile court can be improved by increased
collaboration between the two agencies.
? Work with the Truancy Program to encourage both minors and parents to recognize the importance of
participating in school programs.
Grand Jury: The Santa Barbara County Grand Jury will continue its major role of: government oversight;
investigation into citizen complaints; and determination of whether evidence presented by the District Attorney is
of a sufficient nature to warrant a person to stand trial in court when a Criminal Grand Jury is impaneled.
? Pretrial Services: Begin using the Virginia Pretrial Risk Assessment Instrument (VPRAI) to determine arrestee’s
probability of appearing at the next scheduled hearing and likelihood of re-offending if released on their own
recognizance. The Department will explore additional possibilities for supervised pretrial release through
partnerships with Probation and the Sheriff’s Department in employing electronic monitoring, alcohol monitoring,
GPS tracking, home visitation, and substance abuse testing.
? Enhanced Collections: The Enhanced Collections Unit continues to explore options in the use of Interactive Voice
Response (IVR) systems that will interface with the Court’s new case management system enabling better
collection methods for the County and Court. Additionally, the Court will relocate the North County collection
office to the Santa Maria courthouse increasing accessibility for payers addressing their delinquent accounts.
? Conflict Defense: The Court is pursuing a one year extension of the Conflict Defense contracts on both ends of the
county with the respective teams of lawyers.
Functions of the Civil and Criminal Grand Jury
The Santa Barbara County Grand Jury will continue its three predominant functions:
? Government oversight;
? Investigation into citizen complaints;
? Determination of whether evidence presented by the District Attorney is of a sufficient nature to warrant a
person to stand trial in court when a Criminal Grand Jury is impaneled.
Pretrial Services
? Begin using calibrated VPRAI in determining arrestee’s probability of appearing at the next scheduled hearing and
likelihood of reoffending if released on their own recognizance.
? Consolidate supervision of different pretrial units under one pretrial program services supervisor.
? Standardize practices, procedures, and opportunities for pretrial release countywide.
Explore additional possibilities for supervised pretrial release through partnerships with Probation and the
Sheriff’s Department in employing electronic monitoring, alcohol monitoring, GPS tracking, home visitation, and
substance abuse testing.
Enhanced Collections
Court Special Services will begin the revision of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the County that
implements and enhances the collection of court-ordered debt and other monies owed under a court order.
The Enhanced Collection Unit is looking into the cost and benefits of employing an Interactive Voice Response (IVR)
system that will interface with the Court’s new case management system (CMS) (Odyssey) to enable better collection
methods for the County and Court. The Court has transitioned into a temporary IVR system that works with the old
CMS but is still researching the best IVR system to work with the new CMS.
Closely monitor investigative costs to ensure consistency in approval of payment and recommend caps on the
authorized expenditures.
? Establish guidelines for various investigative expenses and expert witnesses by reviewing other counties’
practices.
Continue to implement recommendations identified in the 2012 Citygate Deployment and Departmental
Performance Audit Report to enhance critical emergency service delivery.
? Address the longstanding capital projects backlog.
? Explore Dispatch Center improvements and options.
? Participate with the Emergency Medical Services Agency (EMSA) and Operational Area Fire Chiefs to work
towards a new ambulance service contract that fully utilizes the Fire Department’s infrastructure, personnel and
equipment within the transport system.
? Develop a Santa Barbara County Type III Incident Management Team to manage local emergency incidents.
? Continue contract helicopter service at Santa Barbara Airport for Red Flag or High Fire Danger days.
? Revise the Santa Barbara County Code Chapter 15 (local fire code) to include adoption of the 2016 California Fire
Code and better align the County Code with State Title XIV Fire Safe Regulations.
Continue to follow Citygate recommendations to enhance critical emergency service delivery.
? Participate with the Emergency Medical Services Agency (EMSA) and Operational Area Fire Chiefs to work
towards a new ambulance service contract that fully utilizes the Fire Department’s infrastructure, personnel and
equipment within the transport system.
? Complete the rebuild of Fire Station 41 in Cuyama.
? Continue to prioritize and address the longstanding capital projects backlog.
? Evaluate recommendations from the dispatch study and develop a plan to improve emergency 911 dispatch
services within the County.
? Update the department’s strategic plan.
? Continue succession planning efforts and update the Career Development Guide to ensure sworn personnel have
a guide/roadmap to strengthen their leadership, emergency operations, and management skills.
Develop an outreach program to explore new avenues for attracting and recruiting female firefighters through
Allan Hancock and other local colleges.
? Analyze the fiscal and logistical processes within the department.
Revise the Santa Barbara County Code Chapter 15 to include adoption of the 2016 California Fire Code and better
align the County Code with State Title XIV Fire Safe Regulations.
? Review, perform a time study and update Fire Prevention inspection and permit fees.
? Identify hazardous fuel reduction projects in the State Responsibility Areas (SRA) to implement pending CEQA
guidelines.
? Ensure that Local Responsibility Area defensible space inspections comply with Public Resources Code 4291 to
mirror inspections done in the State Responsibility Areas.
? Implement a new electronic storage and tracking system for all new land use and building development projects
occurring within the Fire Department’s jurisdiction.
? Enhance engine company inspections of businesses and occupancies through training and education.
Update the Santa Barbara County Operational Area Response Plan, ensuring consistent communications and
timely emergency response.
? Develop a Santa Barbara County Type III Incident Management Team to manage local emergency incidents.
? Continue contract helicopter service at Santa Barbara Airport for Red Flag or High Fire Danger days.
? Strengthen the oil spill and hazardous materials response to Baaken oil through enhanced training programs.
? Strengthen the Fire Department’s Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) and Paramedic programs through
enhanced training programs, administrative oversight and a continuous quality improvement (CQI) program.
Implement Smart Justice application to allow access to state-wide criminal justice data while in the field.
? Successfully bid and break ground for the Northern Branch Jail.
? Initiate and continue the hiring plan to staff the Northern Branch Jail.
? Replace outdated Jail Management System to allow for future growth and data extraction in the Jail system.
? Acquire and install an inmate Electronic Medical Records database for the Jail system.
? Continue to work cooperatively with the County Fire Department in the operation of the Air Support Unit (ASU).
Research best practices for Records Management Systems and replace current outdated system, to conform to
updated technologies and become more efficient in preparing, processing, and disseminating reports.
? Implement Smart Justice application for the department to allow Law Enforcement access to state-wide criminal
justice data while in the field.
Initiate construction for the Northern Branch Jail.
? Replace the Jail Management System with current technologies.
? Acquire and install an inmate Electronic Medical Records database.
Enhance Countywide communications to deliver consistent levels of radio traffic for officer safety concerns.
? Develop and implement an on-line citizen reporting tool. This web-based reporting system will leverage limited
resources and help make crime reporting efficient.
Submit a successful Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) Service Area Competition (SAC) grant
application for continued federal support and Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) status.
? Initiate the process for National Public Health Accreditation by completing all three prerequisites: a Community
Health Assessment, a Department Strategic Plan, and a Community Health Improvement Plan.
? Collaborate with CenCal Health on the “Whole Child Model” for the California Children’s Services Program.
? Work with County and Community partners on the “Health for all Kids Act” that will extend Medi-Cal coverage to
all children under the age of 18.
? Clarify and establish agreements with Animal Adoption partners to improve animal welfare.
? Perform outreach to all County HIV infected/AIDS patients for linkages to care, case management, and partner
services.
Expand and Improve the PHD’s Compliance Program including multi-agency collaborations for privacy, security
and staff training.
? Develop and implement the Department’s Facilities Master Plan in alignment with the Department’s Strategic
Plan and Mission.
? Collaborate with County CEO’s office, General Services and Risk Management to evaluate and implement facility
and operational improvements to ensure the safety of County staff and our clients.
? Implement improvements to the Department’s website, signage, and “branding” as part of a strategic plan
initiative to educate and inform our patients, clients, and the community to the range of services provided by the
Department.
Complete and submit a successful HRSA Service Area Competition (SAC) grant application for continued federal
funding in support of our Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) status for the provision of comprehensive
primary care services to our underserved communities.
? Implementation of patient electronic access to their providers and medical record through a Patient Portal known
as “My Medical Home”.
? Expand the successful Pharmacy Diabetes Clinic to the Santa Barbara, Lompoc and Santa Maria Health Centers to
help diabetic patients better manage their care and treatment.
? Provide substance abuse screening, brief intervention, and referral to treatment (SBIRT) services for eligible
patients at the SBC HCCs with personnel certified through an approved SBIRT training; and successfully document
screening, brief intervention, treatment/referral coordination planning in the patient’s medical record.
? Pursue achievement of Level III Patient Centered Medical Home accreditation at the Lompoc, Santa Maria and
Santa Barbara Health Care Centers.
Collaborate with CenCal Health in the design and implementation of the new “Whole Child Model” for the
California Children’s Services (CCS) program. Evaluate the County staffing structure necessary as the State
transitions the utilization review, case management, provider contracting, and referral tracking functions of
CSS to CenCal Health to coordinate client service delivery.
? Continue coordination with the Department of Social Services to identify patients with medical necessity for
“fast-tracking” into Medi-Cal coverage in order to assist with gaining prompt access to critical specialty
services.
? Partner with County and community organizations on the implementation of the “Health for all Kids Act”
that will extend and expand Medi-Cal coverage to all children under the age of 18.
Initiate the process for National Public Health Accreditation by completing all three prerequisites: a Community
Health Assessment, a Department Strategic Plan, and a Community Health Improvement Plan.
? Perform outreach to all HIV infected/AIDS patients in Santa Barbara County to offer linkages to care, partner
services, and HIV/AIDS case management.
? Promote alternate Latent Tuberculosis (TB) treatment regimens to help reduce the incidence of TB through
educational outreach campaigns for providers serving at-risk populations.
? Create a calendar of topics to communicate health related activities and events with our community.
? Promote Santa Barbara County as a Healthy Eating Active Living (HEAL) community.
Improve and prioritize systems in Environmental Health Services (EHS) for initial contacts with customers.
? Ensure public health disaster response plans and procedures include Spanish language written materials and
bilingual staff for public information and field operations.
? Enhance EMS, and Fire medical call screening in addition to Hazardous Materials call screening as part of the
Sheriff Dispatch center.
? Develop streamlined Hazardous Materials release & Proposition 65 reporting procedures for use by business
community and Environmental Health Services.
? Develop recommendations for the safe disposal of medications.
Alcohol and Other Drug Program
? Development of Screening, Brief Intervention and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) services in Isla Vista.
? Continued integration of alcohol and other drug (AOD) with mental health and primary care services by Drug Medi-Cal (DMC)
Certifying existing mental health clinics.
? Establishment of Intensive Outpatient Treatment (IOT) services in every region of the county and sobering center in Isla Vista
Administration and Support
? Creation of a comprehensive, integrated, behavioral health system
? The Office of Strategy Management supports creating, communicating, executing and sustaining strategic initiatives;
improvement in communications, outcome measurement, and staff development.
? Established departmental metrics developed and approved by the BOS for semi-annual distribution.
? Departmental identity and name change.
Mental Health Community Services Program
? Implement crisis stabilization units in North. Crisis stabilization unit and Crisis Residential House in South County now open
? Continue to improve access to health care through Mental Health Services Act funding and Affordable Care Act that allowed us
to serve all based on clinical need.
Mental Health Inpatient Services
? Complete planning of a Consolidated Mental Health Treatment Center to provide for additional inpatient beds in Santa Maria in
conjunction with Marian Medical Center.
? Improve client outcomes and reduce lengths of stay through the expansion of the crisis service system (SB 82)
Mental Health Outpatient Services
? Establish evidence-based practices delivered through specialty teams at all adult and children’s outpatient clinics to
individualize services based on unique needs.
? Expand Forensic programming and Homeless services countywide.
Enhance service to clients with complex needs, continue the multi-year process to create a comprehensive and
integrated behavioral health system that includes mental health services, substance abuse services, physical
health care services, and support services.
? Create, execute and sustain strategic initiatives within the Department through continual measures of outcomes
of care, program evaluation, and enhance training opportunities.
? Increase collaborative efforts to transform organizational culture with ongoing outreach and involvement in
program development to staff, clients, families, and community-based providers, resulting in improved client
outcomes.
? Augment capacity to measure and evaluate systems, programs, and individual outcomes.
? Provide structure and establish a framework for care and recovery by development of defined long-term
organizational strategic plans.
? Improve management of care for high need, high utilization, high cost, and legal system involved clients.
? Present annual system report inclusive of annual metrics.
Improve client outcomes and reduce lengths of stay through the expansion of the crisis service system through
new crisis system resources, funded through SB 82.
? Increase access to inpatient care by improved utilization management of the PHF reducing lengths of stay and
stepping down level of care as quickly as possible.
? Complete planning of a Consolidated Mental Health Treatment Center to provide for additional inpatient beds in
Santa Maria.
? Increase access to services by the creation of additional housing options within the community to allow for
restoration of competency on an outpatient basis, when clinically appropriate, rather than extending inpatient
lengths of stay.
? Open Crisis Stabilization Unit in North County.
Establish evidence-based practices, delivered through specialty teams at all adult and children’s outpatient clinics,
to individualize services based on unique needs.
? Equip all outpatient adult clinics with fully developed co-occurring services to serve individuals with serious
mental health, substance use, and medical conditions through a comprehensive system of recovery and
resiliency.
? Expand community care resources by increasing the number of homeless shelter and board and care bed
resources.
? Enhance communication and collaboration with Community Based Organizations (CBO) providers to review and
update all outpatient service contracts to define and improve clinical client outcomes.
Continue the integration of the principles of MHSA into all outpatient programs and services that includes
adherence to established evidence- based practices delivered through specialty teams at all adult and children’s
outpatient clinics.
? Implement a crisis stabilization unit in the North County.
? Reduce length of stay within psychiatric health facility through development of appropriate community supports
and housing.
? Utilize MHSA housing funds to create permanent housing units.
? Develop strategies to expand safe and stable housing options within Santa Barbara County for complex clients.
? Coordination with community partners to address needs of high utilizers.
Further integrate substance abuse services with the outpatient MHSA-funded programs.
? Implement State approved and expanded Drug Medi-Cal services.
Increase the opportunity for female specific programming and interventions for youth in the Santa Maria Juvenile
Hall and at the Alternative Report and Resource Centers (ARRCs).
? Develop and initiate the Santa Barbara County Outpatient Delivery System for Alcohol and Drug Programs.
? Develop substance abuse treatment programming within the Juvenile Hall including SBIRT and linkage to
community treatment upon release.
? Develop substance abuse treatment programming at the Los Prietos Boys Academy through the Strengthening
Families Program.
? Coordinate and facilitate the Pew-MacArthur Results First Initiative which is designed to help assess the costs and
benefits of intervention options available to the criminal justice system and allow for the use of data to make
decisions based on proven results.
Refine and standardize strategies for staff to continue meeting state mandates. Streamline business processes to
improve service delivery and ensure timely and accurate benefit determinations are made.
? Implement legislative programmatic changes in the Child Welfare, Adult Protective Services, In-Home Supportive
Services, and CalFresh programs that will require extensive collaboration with other County Departments and/or
Community Partners.
? Implement several technology enhancements and modernization improvements to comply with Federal security
requirements, increase departmental efficiencies, and improve client services.
? Continue to develop innovative strategies that support Welfare to Work participants and assist them in
overcoming employment barriers so they can attain and retain unsubsidized employment.
? Utilize data collected to identify specific interventions needed to ensure CalWORKs children and families have the
support, opportunities, and resources necessary to thrive.
Continue to achieve a structurally balanced budget by maximizing revenues and controlling costs.
? Replace and modernize an antiquated employee records database to increase efficiency and add critical tracking
elements.
? Expand the IVR system capabilities to allow for call recording for quality assurance reviews and verbal attestation
to eliminate the need for a wet signature from clients served by the Betteravia and Lompoc offices.
? Work with program staff to use the newly completed Computer Information Systems Replication Project to
provide enhanced data that identifies various client and caseload trends, demographics, and emerging
department data needs.
? Transition to a new remote access platform to comply with Federal security requirements.
Continue the quality assurance campaign for line staff on Income & Eligibility Verification System (IEVS)
processing to improve case accuracy and audit performance and to respond to audit findings.
? Collaborate with the County Office of Education to enter into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) under
Assembly Bill (AB) 402 to share information regarding school lunch participants who may be eligible to receive
CalFresh benefits so they can obtain and retain the food aid they need.
? Gather and utilize comprehensive family-level needs data using the Family Development Matrix (FDM) outcome
tool in order to provide specific interventions needed to ensure CalWORKs children and families have the
support, opportunities, and resources necessary to thrive.
? Continue to develop innovative strategies that support Welfare to Work participants and assist them in
overcoming employment barriers so they can attain and retain unsubsidized employment.
Focus on streamlining business processes and conducting refresher training to ensure timely and accurate benefit
determinations are made and customer service is improved.
? Building upon the modernized IVR implemented in FY 2015/16, pursue additional telephone infrastructure
solutions for the estimated 150,000 annual calls to the Benefit Service Center to improve customer service and
agency efficiency by implementing recent regulatory changes to streamline application and renewal processes,
such as call recording/verbal attestation, which would expedite the signature process and eliminate thousands of
mailings each month saving time and postage/office expenses.
? Continue Horizontal Integration efforts to ensure health coverage and other safety net programs are offered to
all public assistance recipients, focusing on vulnerable populations such as those who receive General Relief, In-
Home Supportive Services, and Extended Foster Care.
Implement changes to the APS program as a result of Senate Bill (SB) 196, which permits APS Social Workers to
initiate restraining orders on behalf of vulnerable adults.
? Implement and enforce changes in the IHSS program related to provisions of SB 855 and SB 873, which establish
overtime pay for IHSS providers, limit the number of hours they may work each week, and specify compensation
for travel time and wait time.
? Collaborate as a member of the Human Trafficking Task Force with community partners to expand and develop
education, outreach, prevention, and intervention programs for youth who are victims of, or at risk of,
commercial sexual exploitation in Santa Barbara County.
? Prepare for implementation of the new CWS California Common Core Curriculum, a mandated statewide
standardized training program for new child welfare workers and supervisors.
? Implement changes to the CWS program as a result of AB 403, Continuum of Care Reform, with a comprehensive
framework that supports children, youth, and families across placement settings in achieving safety, permanency,
and well-being.
Continual process improvement through teamwork, emerging technology and careful analysis of work flow
impediments.
? Training in complex case management issues and continual evaluation of promising practices being developed
throughout the state.
? Improve case opening processes by creating electronic filters to screen out duplicative referrals from Social
Services.
? Shorten the timeline between case opening and the receipt of Child Support through active case management
strategies.
? Implement electronic lien processing with the Clerk-Recorder-Assessor.
? Expand electronic court filing to include default judgments.
? Cooperation with community and county service providers to assist customers in overcoming barriers to success.
Continue ongoing efforts to strengthen partnerships and build referral systems to community providers who can
help our customers.
? Further educate staff in changing regulations and provide more in-depth understanding of county programs and
processes to better assist customers referred to other county agencies for services.
? Reach out to other departments to help them better understand what Child Support Services can do for their
customers.
? Implement electronic lien processing system with the Clerk-Recorder-Assessor.
? Expand electronic court filing to include default judgments.
? Increase stipulated orders from 28% to 30% by extending attorney’s “office hours” and discussing advantages
with both parties.
? Analyze reasons for redundant automatic Service Requests being initiated by Social Services, and strengthen
process for eliminating duplicate efforts.
? Shorten the timeline between case opening and the receipt of Child Support through active case management
strategies.
? Monitor and assess activities related to case management by utilizing statistical data being provided by the State.
? Analyze success of efforts to attract new customers to help focus future outreach activities.
? Continue process improvement and technology enhancement strategies to improve performance and overcome
technical barriers.
Continue to invest in high level of fiscal reporting and accountability.
? Promote evidence based strategies that help children become ready for kindergarten and report on investment
outcomes and impacts through a robust evaluation system.
? Continue to improve the quality of preschool and child care programs including the number of programs achieving
national accreditation.
? Expand the number of high-quality preschool and child care spaces in the County.
? Implement new communications strategies that help parents and key stakeholders understand their role in
supporting the healthy development of children in the first five years of life.
? Leverage First 5’s funding and impact through collaboration with, and direct support of, partner agencies so they
may to continue to serve with strength as the local leaders serving 0-5 year olds and their families.
? Proactively plan for anticipated decreasing revenue in ways that preserve First 5’s impact in the long-term.
Support the First 5 Children and Families Commission in their key role of overseeing Proposition 10 expenditures
in accordance with the priorities detailed in First 5’s strategic plan.
? Explore opportunities to decrease administrative operating costs in response to anticipated decreasing revenue
while preserving as much as possible First 5’s programmatic impacts.
? Ensure a high level of fiscal accountability and oversight in relation to the granting of funds for program purposes
and reporting on outcomes to ensure the effective and efficient use of tax payer dollars; compliance with State,
local, and other accounting and reporting requirements; and adherence to the will of California voters and
Proposition 10.
? Engage with partners in an effort to streamline fiscal and administrative accountability processes in a manner that
preserves accountability and oversight, but that also simplifies First 5’s work, and reduces burdens on partners.
? Secure new, less expensive office space in South County.
Provide greater access and transparency to interested parties by publishing data, results, and outcomes on an
ongoing basis on the Commission’s website and other direct communications venues.
? In anticipation of new Strategic Plan, work on developing a research brief that outlines new and emerging areas
that impact the work of the Commission in serving children and families.
? Revise current set of program indicators that track results so that they are easier to gather, better to
communicate, and more accurately reflect, the desired results that are hoped to be achieved.
? Increase the ability within First 5 and the broader community to measure outcomes and results on a longitudinal
basis.
? Engage partners and funded agencies in effort to streamline contracting/grant making processes so as to simplify
First 5’s work internally and also reduce unnecessary burdens on First 5’s partners.
? Engage partners, stakeholders, and funded agencies in effort to improve data collection, alignment, and
evaluation so as to better inform strategies and move toward aligned data systems throughout the 0-5 sector and
connected with the K-12 system so measurements of kindergarten readiness are possible on a regional or even
county-wide basis.
Invest in evidence based programs and strategies serving children and families who are most in need.
? Promote, improve, and create systems of evaluating outcomes and results within the social service and
educational system serving children age 0-5 to allow for increased longitudinal measurement of program success
and to better inform future strategies.
? Implement a new strategy within First 5, in partnership with other funders and providers, to create increased
capacity and parental access to high quality preschool and childcare services.
? Explore and create new communications and strategies to increase revenue within the system serving 0-5 year
olds and their families to support healthy child development, kindergarten readiness, and increased public
support for efforts to meet the needs of children in the early years.
? Leverage First 5 funds and secure additional funding to build the long term capacity of the 0-5 serving sector so
that their impact can last beyond the life of First 5 funding.
? Implement new communications strategies that help parents and key stakeholders understand their key role in
supporting the healthy development of children in the first five years of life.
? Expand the number of high-quality preschool and child care spaces.
? Fully implement the new program to provide scholarships to parents who cannot currently afford high quality
preschool and child care services.
The department was awarded a contract for a detection dog team program through the California Department of
Food and Agriculture fully funded by the Federal Farm Bill. This dog team will enhance current department
inspection and detection activities of plant material entering the County through parcel delivery facilities such as
the United States Postal Service, United Parcel Service and Federal Express.
? Assure staff is prepared to become certified through the U.S. Department of Agriculture Export Services program
as Accredited Certifying Officials for the U.S. Department of Agriculture and provide phytosanitary certification
services to the local agricultural industry in order to export their products to other countries.
? Increase consumer protection by adding a credit card theft device inspection procedure to existing retail motor
fuel meter (gas pumps) annual inspection program.
? Achieve 100% pesticide use reporting by the agricultural and pest control industry directly into the CalAg System.
Administrative staff will continue to ensure 100% of the agricultural and pest control industry are making the transition
to entering their pesticide use reports into the CalAg Permit system directly.
Also, the Administrative staff will work with the agricultural industry to ensure they are entering inspection data
directly into the Phytosanitary Certificate Issuance & Tracking System.
Collaborate with the citrus growers, the public and beekeeper associations on outreach and education on the Asian
Citrus Psyllid (ACP) pest that spreads Huanglongbing (HLB), the devastating disease of citrus trees.
Assist CDFA in monitoring the effectiveness of two biological control agents which have been released in Santa
Barbara County to combat the ACP.
Assist the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) in early detection efforts by deploying and maintaining
trapping equipment for the Gold-Spotted Oak Borer (GSOB), the Kuroshio Shot Hole Borer (KSHB) and the
Polyphagous Shot Hole Borer (PSHB), which are deadly to hundreds of tree species including Oak and Avocado
varieties.
Acquire the required licensing as Agricultural Biologists, and assure that staff is prepared to become certified through
the USDA Export Services program as Accredited Certifying Officials in order to provide phytosanitary certification
services to our local agricultural industry so they can export their local agricultural products.
Improve customer service for the Cuyama Valley growers, by scheduling appointments for issuance of Restricted
Material permits at the Cuyama Valley Family Resource Center.
Plan and participate in the second Spray Safe Event (2017) in Santa Barbara County. This event is a commitment to
safe farming developed by growers and applicators to ensure worker safety and to protect public health.
Prepare and train department staff for the November 2016 Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant Emergency Response
Exercise.
Our department will participate in a newly developed CalPEAT’s statewide pesticide use enforcement data
management system to be implemented by 2017. This new database and technology will enable our biologists to
conduct paperless pesticide use monitoring inspections using tablets in the field. This will provide greater efficiencies
for the pesticide enforcement program.
Integrate our Detection Dog Team into existing inspections at all County parcel facilities. The team will also conduct
public education and outreach events to emphasize the importance of preventing invasive pests from entering the
County and State.
Based on feedback from commodity groups, our Agricultural Integrated Pest Management Specialist (AIPMS) will
provide education and outreach by developing “tailgate” trainings targeting agricultural pest identification and IPM
principles to our local industry.
Implement and maintain pesticide container recycling events throughout the county for the agriculture and pest
control industry. This event is to help prevent and/or minimize plastic containers from entering the county landfills.
Replace the aging 20-gallon Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) inspection equipment prover unit with a more efficient
and safer 25-gallon prover unit in order to ensure appropriate testing of LPG meters.
Explore other resources and venues for developing broader outreach to educate the public on the Weights and
Measures program and how it affects everyone’s daily lives through their consumer protection programs.
Work with other agencies on developing testing procedures for alternative energy fuel sources, such as Hydrogen,
Compressed and Liquefied Natural Gas and electrical vehicle charging stations.
Continue to survey businesses, which include agricultural processing plants and wineries, to increase the number of
businesses that qualify for the County Wholesale Packer Program.
The California Agricultural Commissioner’s and Sealers Association (CACASA) drafted a legislative bill requiring Service
Agents to submit illegal and suspicious devices found on retail motor fuel meters directly to the Agricultural
Commissioner’s Office or law enforcement. This new legislation along with our credit card theft device inspection
procedure on retail motor fuel meters (gas pumps) is an increase in consumer protection from credit card data theft
which has become a national threat to consumers nationwide.
Complete local adoption of the Gaviota Community Plan.
? Implement key measures of the 2015-23 Housing Element:
o Evaluate and adopt modifications to the Design Residential zone district standards to encourage and
incentivize the provision of affordable, special needs, and senior housing.
o Evaluate and adopt modifications to the Zoning Ordinances to allow combined emergency shelters, single
room occupancy projects, treatment facilities, and temporary housing with a ministerial permit in some
zones.
? Complete the adoption of zoning regulations to address the use of Short Term Rentals.
? Complete conversion of microfiche records for online access for the public on the Department’s website.
? Ensure continued success of the Department through recruitment, development, and retention of staff.
Convert remaining historic microfiche planning permit records for online access.
? Begin digitizing paper permitting records for online access for customers and staff.
? Continue department training program. Develop and implement internal Supervisor Training Program as part of
succession planning efforts.
? Implement credit card option for online and direct permit and invoice payments.
Review and update the procedures and oversight mechanisms for the permit compliance program countywide,
ensuring projects are built according to approved plans and mitigation measures and that conditions
implementing the County’s Comprehensive Plan are completed.
? Continue to focus on providing accurate initial cost and time estimates for large planning projects.
? Complete implementation of electronic plan check to all customers to enhance customer service.
? Complete assessment and property owner outreach for earthquake-prone structures.
? Continue customer outreach on building permitting processes to enhance coordination of multi-agency review,
increasing efficiency and enhancing customer satisfaction.
? Provide information or workshops for engineers and architects on most common construction plan issues and
suggestions for improvements.
? Continue to provide feedback to permitting staff from post-approval observations in the field to improve
conditioning of projects.
? Continue building on the cooperative relationships with staff of the Division of Oil, Gas and Geothermal
Resources, the Regional Water Quality Control Board, and Federal Pipeline Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration to facilitate more efficient permitting and compliance oversight for oil and gas projects, including
remediation.
? Continue building on the cooperative relationships with the Federal Bureau of Safety and Environmental
Enforcement and Bureau of Ocean Energy Management to ensure that offshore operators maintain permit
compliance of related onshore facilities to ensure the protection of human health and the environment.
Administer the CREF Grant Program, including preparing the annual status report and conducting the 2017
competitive grant cycle process.
? Execute multiple agreements with CREF grant awardees.
? Monitor grant awards funded through CREF to ensure that the projects comply with their contracts/grant
proposals and provide expected public benefits.
? Reassess participating operators’ CREF fee requirements to account for reduced production while Plains All
American Pipeline is shut down.
Pursue additional enforcement resolution options for longstanding complex enforcement cases.
? Seek amendments to State law to increase financial disincentives for one-time violations.
? Provide materials to and/or conduct workshops for Isla Vista tenants to explain the code enforcement process.
Complete local adoption hearings for the Gaviota Community Plan and submit the plans to the Coastal
Commission for review and certification.
? Complete the Hollister–State Street streetscape plan.
? Complete the Santa Claus Lane Project, a master plan for streetscape improvements, safe beach access, and
parking improvements to enhance recreation and business opportunities along Santa Claus Lane.
? Continue implementation phase of the County’s Energy and Climate Action Plan, including the initiation of high
priority measures and completion of a GHG inventory/forecast update.
? Continue implementation of the 2015-23 Housing Element, including evaluation and adoption of modifications to
the Zoning Ordinances to allow combined emergency shelters, single room occupancy projects, treatment
facilities, and temporary housing with a ministerial permit in some zones.
Conduct public outreach, prepare draft ordinance, and environmental review to streamline permitting for
agriculture and other uses on agriculturally zoned properties.
? Manage the Coastal Resiliency (Phase II) grant project, a multi-jurisdictional collaboration to model sea level rise
and potential hazards. Complete a Coastal Hazard Vulnerability Assessment and develop policies and programs to
mitigate impacts from coastal hazards.
? Complete the Airport Land Use Compatibility (ALUP) project to amend the Comprehensive Plan and Land Use and
Development Code to achieve consistency with the ALUP.
? Prepare and submit a Scenic Highway Designation application to Caltrans for a segment of Highway 101 through
Gaviota.
? Pursue grants to fund additional long range planning work prioritized in the work program.
? Conduct research and public outreach for update of the Circulation Element.
? Complete California Coastal Commission certification process for the Eastern Goleta Valley Community Plan.
? Complete adoption of an ordinance to address the use of Short Term Rentals.
? Support the County’s multiyear effort to implement the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act through the
updating of land use policies and regulations.
? Complete adoption of regulations for the cultivation of Medical Marijuana. The project will include licensing, tax
and other revenue generating models for Board consideration.
? Complete the Eastern Goleta Valley Community Plan (EGVCP) Focused ESH/RC Overlay Mapping project. This
project will update the ESH/RC Overlay Map within the Rural Area of the EGVCP plan area.
Developed Strategic Plan for drought contingencies.
? Address State Water Project issues with input from the CEO and Board of Supervisors.
? Complete Water Supply review to determine available options.
? Certify the Tajiguas Resource Recovery Project EIR.
? Create waste commitment agreements for the Tajiguas Resource Recovery Project.
? Complete the design of the Laguna County Sanitation District Master Plan.
? Prepare for and implement in a timely manner the additional funding the Board has designated to deferred
maintenance.
? Continue pursuing partnerships with the private sector to determine and utilize cost effective pavement
preservation strategies to maximize the use of funds.
? Implement the new permits accounting system with tracking controls and create metrics for effectiveness.
? Continue working with UCSB on developing internship program to increase number, completeness, and
consistency of dataset available to the general public and professional surveyors.
? Construct projects to address deferred maintenance with Board provided funding.
Complete organizational issues associated with the Public Works disaster recovery process training and response.
? Complete fee study of Transportation Encroachment Permits and County Surveyors Office.
? In response to Employee Voice Survey and Leadership training, develop a higher level of public information for
the public through greater communications in writing, through news organizations and through social media.
? Conduct leadership training for all supervisors in Public Works.
Update development review and permit fees to increase cost recovery where possible.
? Complete the Goleta Transportation Improvement Program (GTIP) update by end of 2016.
? Update and improve all division’s websites.
? Construct CDBG Calle Real Sidewalk – Phase II adjacent to County Campus in Goleta.
? Update and create performance metrics for each section to track customer service, efficiency and effectiveness.
? Complete over $1,000,000 in Isla Vista structure improvements.
? Start construction of the Goleta Beach Access Bridge.
? Start construction of Jalama Bridge 51C-0013 rehabilitation project.
Provide mandated surveying services to County Government, survey professionals and general public.
? Perform County Surveyors Office fee study and implement new schedule.
? Continue working with UCSB on developing internship program to increase number, completeness and
consistency of dataset available to the general public and professional surveyors using the Interactive GIS
Surveyor Information System customer service tool.
? Manage County Surveyor’s budget to insure the division finishes with a positive balance at the end of the fiscal
year.
Address Drought issues with leadership and technical competence.
? Monitor water supply / drought issues closely; support CEO as needed.
? Facilitate Central Coast Water Agency’s (CCWA) request of the Board to re-acquisition of suspended Table A
water.
? Strategic planning if the 2015-16 Winter and Spring seasons remain dry.
? Continue towards completion of the Lower Mission Creek Project construction below US 101.
? Complete Isla Vista storm drain improvements.
? Initiate discussions on a Cachuma Contract renewal process.
Complete the design of the Laguna County Sanitation District (LCSD) Master Plan.
? Continue moving forward on detailed design and environmental review of the Phase I LCSD plant upgrade
including the Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP).
? Finalize contracts with vendor for the Resource Recovery Project proposed at Tajiguas including preparation of
necessary documents and review of financial and technical information.
Work on developing the future plans for the Tajiguas Landfill Gas Contract as Fortistar Lease Agreement will
expire in March 2018 and their Purchase Power Agreement will expire in 2021.
? Pursue funding for recycled water projects including Waller Park, Rancho Santa Maria and Santa Maria Energy.
Provide oversight and direction in the development of capital and deferred maintenance improvements.
? Complete construction of the Arroyo Burro Boardwalk project.
? Advance technologies to provide more simplified check-in and cash management processes at our camping facilities.
? Continue to administer over $6 million in HUD federal grant programs, including the CDBG, HOME, ESG and
Continuum of Care (CoC) funds, which provide vital public services and capital improvements to community
infrastructure.
? Continue the “Lunch and Learn” series and develop other methods of getting information out to a broader segment
of the community to maximize participation of eligible individuals and families in the affordable housing program.
? Continue to partner with the Santa Barbara Bowl Foundation to promote arts outreach to rural and underserved
communities and advocate for increased arts education opportunities. Revise Community Arts Enrichment (CAE)
grant application based on increased funding support from Arts Subsidy to maximize community impact and
community engagement.
? Organize community outreach efforts to increase participation in arts exhibitions at the County’s Channing Peake
and Betteravia Galleries.
? Pursue additional funding sources for ECAP and sustainability program implementation, both in support of other
department’s efforts and to expand emPower’s service model to help more consumers save more energy.
? Facilitate greater interagency and cross-sector collaboration on sustainability activities to accelerate progress and
reporting towards ECAP 2020 targets.
? Initiate Phase 2 implementation activities in collaboration with as many as 27 other participating jurisdictions, if
County BOS wishes to proceed with CCE.
In the next fiscal year, the Administration and Support division will complete projects and explore new opportunities
to improve Departmental operations, staff training, and program implementation.
? Expand the online reservation system to allow online modifications which would create greater efficiencies.
? Provide oversight and direction in the development of capital and deferred maintenance improvements.
? Continue to improve and enhance loan, compliance and fiscal monitoring for all Housing and grant programs,
including HOME, Community Development Block Grants (CDBG), and Emergency Solutions Grant programs (ESG).
? Update and provide revisions to the Park policies manual and begin the development of a Community Services
Department policies and procedures manual.
? Implement training workshops to improve customer service and relations and provide professional training
opportunities for staff.
The Parks Division will improve public access and user experience at County parks:
? Continue to make improvements to the Park policies manual and development of a Community Services
Department policies and procedures manual.
? Implement a countywide safety inspection program for County parks and open spaces to ensure health and
safety of park visitors.
? Improve and leverage technologies to provide simpler check-in and cash management processes at our camping
facilities.
? Complete the design of various facilities at Cachuma Lake including the water treatment plants and electrical
upgrades at RV hookup sites.
? At Jalama Beach, Parks will do the following:
o Design upgrades to include affordable accommodations and provide additional facilities for the public.
o Design and replace the restrooms to better serve the public.
o Work with Pacific Railroad to obtain permits, design, and completely replace the only fresh water supply line
to the park.
? Complete construction of the Arroyo Burro Boardwalk project.
? Complete design and construction of the Arroyo Burro Sewer Lift Station upgrades.
? Complete design and construction of the Arroyo Burro Ranger Office and Storage Area improvements.
? Complete design of the Santa Claus Lane Beach Access parking area.
? Obtain permits from the California Public Utilities Commission and the California Coastal Commission for an atgrade
crossing for the Santa Claus Lane Beach Access project.
? Complete construction of the Point Sal access road culvert repair.
The Housing and Community Development division will continue to administer various Federal, State, and local
funding sources to provide public services for eligible populations, including homeless services, affordable housing,
and public infrastructure development and renovation.
? Continue to administer over $6 million in HUD federal grant programs, including the CDBG, HOME, ESG and
Continuum of Care (CoC) funds, which provide vital public services and capital improvements to community
infrastructure.
? Provide programmatic support to the Santa Barbara County Continuum of Care as Collaborative Applicant, which
annually applies for $1.7 million in funds on behalf of the CoC, and as administrator of the Homeless Management
Information System (HMIS).
? Administer the County’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance (IHO) Program, by monitoring units under affordability
covenants, certifying households, and calculating the annual In Lieu fee.
? Conduct a housing lottery to advertise the availability of three affordable housing units at The Preserves at San
Marcos and 18 units at the Cavalleto Tree Farms housing development in Goleta. Both projects developed
affordable housing units under the County’s Inclusionary Housing Program (IHO).
? Certify households for remaining IHO units at the Preserves at San Marcos and the Cavalleto Tree Farm
development, both projects in Goleta.
? Continue to improve and enhance monitoring for all Federal programs, including HOME, Emergency Solutions
Grant (ESG), and Community Development Block Grants (CDBG).
? Continue the implementation of the Santa Barbara County Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) to
collect and analyze client, service, and housing data for individuals and families served by homeless assistance
and prevention programs countywide.
? Develop guidelines for the monitoring of General Fund homeless assistance grants for Shelter Operations and
Warming Centers. Continue monitoring of HCD’s Emergency Solutions Grant and Continuum of Care Programfunded
projects.
? Continue the Lunch and Learn series and develop other methods of distributing information to a broader
segment of the community to maximize participation of eligible individuals and families in the affordable housing
program.
? Continue to monitor owners of affordable units and rental properties to ensure compliance and address noncompliance
promptly, ensuring the maximum number of affordable units remain available to the community.
? Continue affordable housing monitoring as required for U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) regulatory compliance.
Arts
? Organize and engage 100 County cultural nonprofits in the Americans for the Arts “Arts and Economic Prosperity
V” study defining the economic impact of nonprofit arts and cultural organizations and their audiences in Santa
Barbara County.
? Continue to partner with the Santa Barbara Bowl Foundation to promote arts outreach to rural and underserved
communities and advocate for increased arts education opportunities. Revise Community Arts Enrichment (CAE)
grant application based on increased funding support from Arts Subsidy to maximize community impact and
community engagement.
? Develop a Public Art plan for the North County Jail Project Percent for Art funds through the ad hoc committee of
major stakeholders, County Art in Public Places and the Arts Commission.
? Redesign website and increase online presence and traffic to the Arts Commission’s website. Employ more social
media to engage a more diverse audience.
? Develop specific goals and objectives to achieve the Arts Commissions vision set out in the 3-5 Year Strategic
Plan.
? Organize community outreach efforts to increase participation in arts exhibitions at the County’s Channing Peake
and Betteravia Galleries.
Libraries
? Prepare and obtain approval of the annual library operations agreement.
? Continue to coordinate quarterly library zone administration meetings to improve communication and library
system operations.
? Continue to explore various types of operational and funding structures for a potential tax levy for the County
library system.
Shelter Services
? Continue to provide funding for shelter and warming centers.
emPower Central Coast
? Pursue structural and technological efficiencies in delivery of continued program services in collaboration with
the State.
? Increase number of participating contractors and number of completed and reported projects.
? Pursue additional funding contracts to extend and enhance services to help more consumers save more energy
(i.e. commercial properties).
Energy and Climate Action Implementation
? Facilitate greater interdepartmental collaboration on sustainability activities, pursue additional funding sources
for ECAP implementation, and accelerate progress towards ECAP 2020 targets.
Community Choice Energy
? Complete Phase 1 and bring feasibility study to County Board of Supervisors and other participating jurisdiction’s
Boards and Councils.
? Initiate Phase 2 with as many as 27 other participating jurisdictions, if County BOS wishes to implement CCE.
Phase 2 includes activities such as adoption of resolution, preparing an implementation/business plan including
power purchase and financing strategy (often with a consultant), agency start up (i.e. JPA), CPUC approval of
implementation plan, establishing a cost responsibility surcharge, public outreach, and RFP for energy services.
The Department’s top priority is to complete the second phase of the implementation of the Property Tax
System.
? Deploy a web-based Countywide time capture system.
? Plan for the administration of the consolidated RDA Oversight Board and RDA dissolution process.
? Provide accounting support/training, grant compliance, and review of the Northern Branch Jail project.
? Maintain and enhance the 65 applications in the A-C that serve multiple departments and County agencies.
? Distribute an estimated $850 to $875 million in property taxes to local agencies annually.
? Manage biweekly payroll process for approximately 4,500 employees.
? Validate and record 105,000 transactional documents, an average of almost 500 per day, which include claim
payments, vendor changes, general ledger accounting transactions, budget entries, deposit entries, and journal
entries.
Manage the A-C office effectively by submission of timely budgets that include the resources necessary to carry
out the duties of the office.
? Recruit and hire well-qualified staff.
? Conduct a recruitment for a new class of Accountant-Auditors for the New Auditor Training and Development
Program.
? Encourage staff performance.
? Support staff training.
? Provide modern technology.
? Promote employee health, wellness, and quality of life.
? Rewrite the County credit card policy and procedures.
? Transition leadership resulting from the retirement of Auditor-Controller with 25 years of service as the elected
Auditor.
Focus on completing mandated audits, training staff, and continue to provide enhanced reporting to the Board of
Supervisors.
? Complete projects to assist departments in improving processes. Our currently anticipated projects include:
o Continuing our audit series of employee benefits. The audits will evaluate the inventory of benefits and
address any identified process improvements in adding, removing, and managing benefits; as well as internal
controls over disbursing these benefits.
o Examine departmental processes for assets held on behalf of others; this includes the Public
Administrator/Guardian and the Sheriff’s seizure/forfeiture process.
o County cell phone use to review departmental policies and identify cost reduction opportunities.
? As resources exist, perform audits to increase contractor monitoring.
? Perform projects listed in our Internal Audit Plan, including:
o Cash and Investment Reviews
o Tax Redemption Officer Audits
o County Fraud/Loss Activities
o External Bank Accounts
Applications Development and Systems
? Finishing the implementation of the Property Tax System will be the Department’s top priority.
? Develop additional controls and capabilities (e.g. overtime and leave management) for the time capture system
deployed in January 2016.
? Extend our current strategic plan for application maintenance and development to 5 and 10 year periods.
? Maintain and enhance the 65 applications in the A-C that serve multiple departments and County agencies.
Property Tax Administration
? Distribute an estimated $850 to $875 million in property taxes to local agencies annually.
? Plan for the administration of the consolidated RDA Oversight Board (July 1, 2018) and the RDA dissolution
process.
? Eliminate any remaining transaction backlogs caused by the implementation of the new system.
? Implement necessary subsystems to better interface with the new core Aumentum property tax system and
create more efficient processing (Phase 2).
Payroll Operations
? Manage biweekly payroll process for approximately 4,500 employees.
? Continue to work with the Human Resources Benefits Division t0 review the evolving requirements of the
Affordable Care Act (ACA); aide eligibility determination reporting; maintain ongoing payroll reporting to fulfill
IRS annual reporting requirements.
? Participate in constant improvement of technology supporting new-hire onboarding, employee changes, payroll
cost accounting, payroll calculations, and reporting.
? Continue publishing periodic newsletters for up-to-date Payroll compliance.
? Provide Countywide department-level training to HR/Payroll administrators for accuracy, efficiency, and
compliance with MOUs, employment laws, and Civil Service Rules.
? Division cross-training and rotation of duties for enhanced internal controls.
? Collaborate with Applications Development Division to enhance time capture system improvements.
Financial Accounting and Customer Support
? Provide additional FIN training offerings utilizing expanded platforms.
? Automate the update of vendor data from Payroll to FIN.
? Continue to seek out improved efficiencies and controls in the processing of claims and general ledger
transactions.
? Validate, process, and record all annual general ledger accounting transactions including a high volume of deposit
entries, journal entries, and claim payments.
? Respond to customer service requests in a timely and efficient manner.
Advanced and Specialty Accounting
? Support and enhance the County’s contract review process.
? Provide accounting and grant compliance oversight for the Northern Branch Jail project.
? Assist departments and agencies in the complex allocations of inter-agency revenues and taxes.
? Report timely and accurate information on Sales Tax, TOT, and financial information to the State for Special
Districts.
? Document revenue streams as a system and utilize tools to increase the reliability of information used to create
forecasts and predictions for Sales Taxes, Transient Occupancy Taxes, Realignments Revenues, and Court Fines &
Fees.
? Support cost recovery for disasters and extraordinary incidents and implement procedures that allow for more
timely reporting and claiming for such events.
? Develop the framework for managing the final phases of closing the redevelopment agencies within the County
and the future consolidation into a single Oversight Board.
Prepare timely and accurate financial documents that include the County’s Comprehensive Annual Financial
Report, County Budget, Cost Allocation Plan, and a variety of financial reporting and compliance documents to
State Agencies.
? Provide the Board of Supervisors, CEO, and management with the financial information necessary to make
decisions that impact services to the community.
? Implement significant new GASB reporting pronouncements, including Other Post Employment Benefits (OPEB).
The Assessor will complete 97% of all assessment work items by close of the annual tax roll, which becomes the
base upon which local property taxes are levied, collected, and distributed to cities, the County, and special
districts to fund government services.
? The Assessor will continue the process of analyzing the requirements to modernize the Assessor Property
System.
? Elections will conduct the 2016 Presidential General Election, the 2018 Direct Primary Election, and any local
elections as requested by local agencies.
? Elections, through voter outreach and support, will strive to materially maintain or increase the voter turnout rate
related to the last comparable election.
? The Clerk-Recorder will record 75,000 official documents per Fiscal Year and index 100% of those documents the
same day.
? The Clerk-Recorder plans to complete the mandated redaction of Social Security Numbers in all official records
dating back to 1980.
Prepare, monitor, and execute a FY 2016-17 Budget in support of the Department’s FY 2016-17 goals and
objectives.
? Provide administrative support in the timely recruitment of new staff as attrition occurs to minimize impact on
service levels and ensure business continuity.
Conduct the 2016 Presidential General Election, the 2018 Direct Primary Election, and any local elections as
requested by local agencies.
? Through voter outreach and support, strive to materially maintain or increase the voter turnout rate related to
the last comparable election.
? Establish efficient processes and procedures for the implementation of Conditional Voter Registration, which will
allow voters to register to vote and vote on the same day, up to and including Election Day. Conditional Voter
Registration is effective January of the year following the certification of VoteCal, the State of California’s
statewide voter registration database. Anticipated effective date is January 2017.
? Update our website to make it more accessible to all viewers.
? Adopt a revised Single Comprehensive Code, which will align with the reporting categories required by the
Political Reform Act.
? Continue to research new vote tabulation systems with a goal to acquire and implement a new system by FY 2017-
18.
Complete the mandated redaction of Social Security Numbers in all official records dating back to 1980.
? Pursue updating the Documentary Tax Ordinance to clarify and include recent updates from the legislature
regarding the tax.
? Pursue standardizing Indexing practices with other counties, create a new training manual, and provide training
for the staff.
? Continue automating the historic birth certificates which currently reside on microfilm and paper books, which
will decrease the wait time for customers requesting birth records from the 1960’s.
Complete 97% of all assessment work items by close of the annual tax roll, which becomes the base upon which
local property taxes are levied, collected, and distributed to cities, the County and special districts to fund
government services.
? Perform timely resolution of assessment appeals within the statutory timeframe while adequately defending the
disputed roll value at risk.
? Complete review of all parcels subject to Section 51 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, which require property
values to be enrolled at the lesser of factored base value or market value as of the January 1st tax lien date, by
June 30th as part of the assessment roll.
? Continue the process of analyzing the requirements to modernize the Assessor Property System.
Continue to meet all State and County milestones for the Northern Branch Jail (AB900) facility.
? Integrate facility condition consultant reports into deferred maintenance and capital project planning.
? Implement the Countywide IT strategic plan update establishing information technology governance.
? Complete a five year Countywide strategic plan for the public safety microwave radio communication network.
? Finish the North County Crisis Stabilization Unit for Behavioral Wellness.
? Accomplish the rehabilitation and renovations at the Isla Vista Community Center by upgrade to existing
restroom facilities, interior painting, flooring, upgrades to address ADA compliance issues, installation of
additional windows and doors, and installation of audio-visual equipment.
? Finalize New Cuyama Community Pool reconstruction. In 2012, the community pool complex failed due to
liquefying soils conditions.
Manage the Northern Branch Jail executive oversight, financial operation and annual audits.
? Focus on strategic planning, team building, performance management, and succession planning to ensure that
County and Departmental goals are achieved.
? Review all departmental accounting processes and procedures to ensure compliance with all county, state and
federal requirements.
Secure all approvals to award the Northern Branch Jail (AB900) contract, construct the Jail complex and offsite
utilities packages, and complete all steps required to receive State reimbursements in accordance with the
conditional award.
? Integrate facilities condition consultant reports into maintenance and capital project planning.
? Prioritize and integrate sustainable design principles into project planning, design, and construction.
? Finalize the rehabilitation and renovations at the Isla Vista Community Center.
? Accomplish New Cuyama Community Pool reconstruction, using an enhanced design and durable construction
materials.
? Complete improvements to the Santa Ynez Airport by adding runway edge and threshold lights, taxiway edge
lights, guidance signs and a new backup generator.
Integrate the facility condition consultant reports with the County deferred maintenance priorities. Once the
data has been compiled it will be used for deferred maintenance and capital project planning.
? Complete reclassification of several departmental positions to improve customer service, accountability and
efficiency.
? Determine new water-efficient solutions to implement at County facilities to reduce water cost and consumption.
? Improve the Real Property software to facilitate improved tracking of leases and agreements.
? Identify opportunities and implementation plans for County energy and utility commissioning initiatives (Greenenergy
options).
Continue efforts towards right sizing the County’s vehicle fleet, right sizing the total number of vehicles operated
by the County and always procuring the most efficient vehicle possible for the vehicle’s intended use.
? Work to set fleet fossil fuel reduction goal.
Prepare a five year countywide strategic plan for the public safety microwave radio communication network.
? Establish the Governing Board of Information Technology Systems to improve countywide governance processes.
? Produce a plan and report on progress regarding improving the County’s Cybersecurity posture.
? Develop the use of an electronic signage system for County events, building and campus information.
? Research, establish and support departments as they complete the required steps to migrate to Windows 10.
? Launch an enterprise video surveillance service with centralized mass storage and flexible retention options.
? Complete the Countywide email system upgrade.
Implement County wide purchasing system ensuring integration with County’s financial system and departmental
reporting requirements. This process will include a review of centralized purchasing policies and procedures to
identify operational efficiencies that can be included with the system.
? Incorporate State and County green initiatives into procurement documents, as permitted by regulatory
requirements.
? Increase efforts to target local vendors for bidding opportunities and educate them on how to do business with
the County, in an effort to expand the Local Vendor Outreach Program and increase local vendor participation
rates.
Successfully bid, select a pre-qualified contractor and begin the construction phase of the project.
? Continue to meet all State and County milestones within established time frames.
Upon Board of Supervisors’ approval, securing the State’s approval to execute the construction contract for the
AB900 project
? Commencing the construction phase of the project and initiating State reimbursements with the goal of a less
than 60 day turnaround on AB900 reimbursements
? Overseeing the construction phase of the onsite and offsite construction packages.
? Continue to meet all State and County milestones.
? Continue to deliver the project within the $96.1 project budget.
In collaboration with our customer departments, conduct a thorough review of existing Human Resources practices
and implement strategies to streamline and improve efficiency and provide increased levels of customer service
? Develop and implement programs and strategies to proactively address changing trends in the County workforce
? Increase the utilization of technology to improve operational efficiency and to improve access to and analysis of
workforce data that can be used to guide policy and/or program changes
Through cross department collaboration, implement strategies to systematically review and ensure consistent
application of current HR practices
? Leverage technology to enhance the onboarding process and experience for new employees
? Realigning HR administrative/clerical functions to eliminate redundancy, increase productivity, and better manage
expenditures (supplies/services)
? Establish new, collaborative and integrated processes for HR service delivery to avoid repetition and ensure a
seamless customer and employee experience.
Finalize changes to Civil Service Rules, update policies and procedures impacted by these changes, and
communicate impact to HR professionals and other key stakeholders
? Negotiate 8 fair successor collective bargaining agreements within Board of Supervisors budgetary authority
? Relaunch Employee Assistance Program as an extension of HR services
? Launch Wellvolution - a County-wide employee wellness program
Implement talent acquisition and engagement strategies to attract and retain top talent
? Review recruitment policies and strategies and implement strategies to streamline the recruitment process
? Develop and implement proactive talent acquisition tools and strategies to improve HR’s ability to recruit for
hard-to-fill positions
? Utilizing the new recruitment structure, develop stronger relationships with customer departments and expand
each recruiter’s knowledge of his/her assigned departments
Revitalize training and expand organizational development efforts to provide intentional and strategic
programming that engages and develops diverse county-wide talent.
? Identify skill gaps between talent in place and talent needed for future.
Through cross department collaboration, implement strategies to systematically review and ensure consistent
application of current HR practices
? Provide guidance to departments on strategies to address changes in the workforce in terms of generational
change, succession planning, and knowledge transfer
? As changes are made to existing HR policies and strategies, ensure that departments are aware and trained on
how to implement changes and serve as a resource to departments to address any issues that may arise
Working closely with the Auditor-Controller’s office the TTCPA will complete the roll-out of the new property tax
system during its second year of go-live. It will take a significantl
The TTCPA will continue to analyze the feasibility of refunding prior year debt issuances. Potential savings from
this refinancing would be achieved through lower interest rates.
? Prepare, submit and monitor a timely budget that includes resources necessary to carry out the duties of the
office.
? Recruit and hire well-qualified staff.
County revenues are currently processed utilizing paper deposit tickets which are manually entered into the
TTCPA cashiering system. A file is then created and uploaded to the Auditor-Controller financial system. The
Treasury Program will evaluate and analyze the cost/benefit of developing an electronic deposit ticket. This
enhancement will serve County departments and agencies. It will also facilitate the recording of revenue into the
County’s financial system in a more timely manner.
Working closely with the Auditor-Controller’s office, the TTCPA will complete the roll-out of the new property tax
system during its second year of go-live. It will take a significantly longer period for full system implementation to
maximize the efficiencies and outcomes of the new system.
? Identify and implement business process improvements to the manual bankruptcy procedures.
The Veterans’ Services program will continue to move toward a paperless office through a multi-year scanning
project to digitally file veteran records.
Funding the Northern Branch Jail Operations in accordance with the established funding plan; $7,600,000 in FY
2016-17 and $9,100,000 in FY 2017-18.
? Support the Central Coast Coalition on Homelessness and the South Coast Task Force on Youth Safety projects at
the current level of funding.
? Increase the Strategic Reserve to the targeted level, per Board policy.
? Increase existing maintenance funding levels through the Board approved 18% Maintenance Funding Policy.
Continue to fund the Northern Branch Jail Operations fund in the amounts of $7,600,000 in FY 2016-17 and
$9,100,000 in FY 2017-18.
? Provide increased ongoing funding for maintenance needs through the 18% Maintenance Funding Policy
(estimated at $2.5 million in FY 2016-17).
? Fund capital/infrastructure projects based on identified needs, priorities, and available funding sources.
