First District
? Continue to make customer service the
primary focus of County government while
working to enhance responsiveness, efficiency
and accountability including efforts to
promote diversity, expand outreach and
partnerships.
? Work to maintain the long-term fiscal health
and sustainability of our County.
? Maintain and enhance services provided to the
most vulnerable residents of our County
including continued funding of the Children’s
Health Initiative, implementation of
recommendations from the Poverty Study and
outreach into underrepresented communities.
? Promote the public safety of our County
through maintaining and enhancing front line
law enforcement services and fire fuels
reduction efforts.
? Work to protect our open spaces and enhance
recreational opportunities including finalizing
design and permitting for the Santa Claus Lane
Beach Access Improvements and phase two of
the Franklin Trail.
? Continue to work on the planning and
implementation of both regional and local
transportation enhancements and other public
infrastructure improvements including the
Highway 101 HOV Widening Project and
establishment of Commuter Rail service.
? Address the challenge of Climate Change by
continuing to implement energy efficiency
improvements and sustainable practices in
county building and facilities.
? Move forward with implementation of the
Resource Recovery Project to generate green
energy and ensure long-term management of
our solid waste.
Second District
? Continue to maintain a Second District office
that is responsive to and respectful of all
constituents.
? Continue to monitor the progress of the
Goleta Valley Community Plan environmental
review processes.
? Remain engaged in the progress of the San
Marcos Foothills Park Management Plan.
? Monitor progress on the State St. /Hollister
Ave Corridor Improvement Plan.
? Meet and encourage partnerships with, and
among, individuals and organizations (public,
private and educational) committed to
expanding and enhancing recreational, cultural
and educational opportunities for youth and
adolescents.
? As the Board’s liaison to the Community
Corrections Partnership, remain engaged in
the progress and challenges posed by AB
109/Realignment, and advocate for adequate
funding for needed resources.
? Continue displaying school student art in the
Second District Student Art Gallery.
? Continue to advocate for the rights of our
County’s most vulnerable constituents.
? Continue to work closely with Public Health
officials and staff on issues concerning
tobacco use, Affordable Care Act
implementation and improved conditions and
adoptions in animal services.
? Work with local business partners to enhance
and develop business opportunities on the
South Coast.
? Continue to ensure that environmental
protections are in place within the County.
Third District
? Continue to preserve public safety and make
sure resources are prioritized to keep our
community safe.
? Continue to promote fiscal responsibility so
that we are using public resources efficiently
and effectively.
? Continue to protect safety net services for our
most vulnerable community members.
? Protect agriculture.
? Continue to provide timely, responsive, and
professional constituent service that responds
to issues important to constituents.
? Continue to plan for the future by encouraging
strong neighborhood and environmental
planning.
Fourth District
The Fourth District will maintain offices in both
Santa Maria and Lompoc where staff continues to
provide direction to constituents on a multitude of
concerns while relaying information both
professionally and timely.
Supervisor Peter Adam will continue to prioritize
on financial responsibility. He will focus on
returning Santa Barbara to pay-as-you-go financing
of public services. Deferred maintenance on our
roads, parks, and other public infrastructure must
be brought up-to-date through open discussion
and by working side-by-side with County officials to
implement funding sources. He will assist in
determining effective plans to fully fund the
pensions for our county workers. He aims to
replenish our strategic cash reserves.
Supervisor Adam believes that California’s strict
environmental laws can be administered by the
County in a way that is swift and fair to everyone
involved.
Fifth District
? Commission a report by County financial
analysts to identify strengths and weaknesses
in the areas of property, sales, and transient
occupancy tax revenue.
? Develop an economic development strategy
and funding mechanism
? Continue to work with Marian Medical Center
and Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services
to complete the plan for a new mental health
facility.
? Continue to work with our onshore oil
producers to increase property tax revenue to
the County.
? Work with Supervisor Farr on water capacity
and recreation issues at Lake Cachuma.
Board Support
Continue to provide outstanding customer support
to constituents, departments and Board offices.
County Management
? Implement ADMHS system transformation.
? Prepare Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT)
measure for November 2014 ballot.
? Continue support of the Northern Branch Jail
project during schematic design of the project
and join the SB 1022 grant with the project.
? Establish and support Contract Compliance
Oversight Committee processes to improve the
quality and compliance of Board contracts.
? Implement the Alcohol, Drug & Mental Health
Services system transformation effort.
? Assess overall needs for dedicated public
information function to increase countywide
communications, internally and externally.
? Bring consolidated mental health treatment
center study to fruition and provide
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors
on overall facility needs for the Alcohol, Drug &
Mental Health Services system of care.
? Develop of a comprehensive funding plan to
address the County’s unmet maintenance
needs and maintain the condition indexes for
parks and buildings.
? Continued reduction of departmental use of
one-time funds for ongoing operations
(structural balance).
? Improve Countywide public information
coordination and effort.
Emergency Management
? Maintain a highly-trained workforce able to
respond to major emergencies and disasters.
? In a culturally competent manner, have
residents knowledgeable in risk and
preparedness needs.
? Strengthen the effectiveness of local elected
officials and State and Federal legislative
delegations representing the post-disaster
needs of the operational area to expedite:
economic recovery for the region, personal
recovery for families affected by the disaster,
and proper administration of FEMA Public
Assistance programs for local governments
and eligible non-profits.
? Through legislative and lobbying activities,
support scientific and technological
developments that improve the quality of
information used in mitigation, planning, and
disaster management.
? Maintain eligibility for federal funding from
programs such as Hazard Mitigation
Assistance, Homeland Security grants, and
Emergency Management Planning Grants by
leading the development of a Countywide
Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk
Assessment (THIRA), as guided by the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
Comprehensive Preparedness Guide 201 (CPG),
and by engaging participation by Operational
Area partners and the whole community.
? Strengthen information dissemination to the
public and County employees through
cooperative relationships with departmental
Public Information Offices (PIOs) and the news
media, and handle the coordination of pre- and
post-disaster messages with Federal, State,
and local governments and other disaster
response and recovery organizations.
Human Resources
? In collaboration with employees and
departments, develop a two-year cycle
Workforce Plan to assist the organization in
getting the right people, with the right skills, in
the right jobs, at the right time.
? Initiate a labor-management partnership
designed to collaboratively address shared
expectations and outcomes.
? Implement Affordable Care Act provisions for
eligible County employees working in positions
that do not receive benefits.
Risk Management & Employee Insurance
? Continued improvement in managing the
Workers’ Compensation, General Liability and
Medical Malpractice Funds; reduction of
litigated claims; timely closure of non-litigated
claims and continuous review and reporting of
current injury trends within the various
departments.
? Revise/update the Occupational Health
Ordinance supporting the County’s
commitment to equal employment
opportunities for qualified individuals with
disabilities, and to ensure the County’s
compliance with local, State, and Federal laws,
by enacting and implementing a process for
early identification, effective management, and
proper resolution of disability-related
employment issues.
? Review and evaluate the Medical Malpractice
Program to determine the viability of other
Risk Financing options, e.g. primary insurance.
Property tax: Defend against a series of multiyear
property tax assessment appeals and
expected litigation by “United Launch Alliance,”
involving about $710 million of disputed Roll
Value from commercial space activities at
Vandenberg Air Force Base.
? Northern Branch Jail project: Continue intensive
legal support for the “bidding” and
“construction” phases of the Northern Branch
Jail Project, which has a combined project size of about $139 million and involves State funding
from both AB900 and SB1022.
? Resource Recovery Project (proposed use of
conversion technology to extend the life of the
Tajiguas Landfill): We expect to use significant
attorney time to review this $60 million project’s
compliance with CEQA, proposed Joint Powers
Agreement and draft master contract with the
vendor.
? Medi-Cal audits: Prevail in the ongoing appeals
and expected litigation of California Department
of Health’s FY 2006-07 and 2007-08 audits of
ADMHS Medi-Cal programs, to avoid or reduce
County’s repayment of approximately $6M in
disallowed costs.
? Fee-to-trust: Since federal rulemaking in 2013
removed the 30-day waiting period from some
title transfer decisions, be prepared to
immediately respond should there be federal
approval of the 1,400-acre “fee-to-trust”
application by the Santa Ynez Band of Chumash
Indians.
? HUD audits: Defend against HUD’s potential
order that the County repay some or all of the
disputed expenditures from the HUD Monitoring
Report and OIG Audit, with more than $3.6
million disputed.
? Litigation of federal civil rights and state tort
cases: Economically defend these cases “inhouse”
rather than referring them to more
expensive Outside Counsel:
o Trials in two federal court civil rights cases,
and two state court medical malpractice
cases; and
o Ongoing federal court appeals in three civil
rights cases.
? State Water Project: Provide timely legal
support to the Board of Supervisors about
significant water issues, including:
o Potential extension of the 1963 Water
Supply Agreement with the State of
California; and
o The proposed Bay Delta Conservation Plan.
? Workers’ Compensation “tail claims:” Continue
to economically reduce the County’s remaining
portfolio of 45 litigated Workers’ Compensation
cases that are open for injuries occurring before
July 2010, to free the County’s self-insurance
from future liabilities.
? “Taxpayer” suits regarding recording mortgage
documents: Defend ongoing Superior Court
litigation cases against combinations of the
County Recorder, County Sheriff and County
employees related to recording real estate
documents.
? Ballot measure for Transient Occupancy Tax
increase: Prepare a proposed referendum, for
the November 2014 General Election, to increase
the County’s Transient Occupancy Tax.
? “Land use” projects. Provide advisory legal
support for major projects, including: Housing
Element 8-year Update; Goleta Beach 2.0;
Eastern Goleta Valley Community Plan; Las Varas
Project (Gaviota coast); Crown Castle
Telecommunications Project (29 facilities in
Montecito); GPS Mining Project (similar to and
next door to the Diamond Rock Project that we
successfully litigated to Court of Appeal, 2008-
2013); Shell Guadalupe Dunes Project; Cuyama
Solar Project (40 megawatt project on 327
acres); and Winery Ordinance.
Administration & Support
Upgrade servers, server storage unit, and current
20-year-old case management database system to
a new web-based interface. The case management
upgrade will provide improved technology for data
entry and retrieval, as well as provide detailed case
information and enhanced reporting functionality.
Criminal Prosecution
Enhance the Department of Insurance Workers’
Compensation Insurance Fraud Program in order to more vigorously prosecute individuals who file
fraudulent claims, as well as medical provider
fraud, premium fraud, and failure to provide
workers’ compensation insurance.
Increase our understanding of human trafficking in
Santa Barbara County in order to educate the
public and more effectively prevent and eradicate
this crime. The Human Trafficking Task Force will
work together to identify and serve victims, as well
as promote cross training opportunities.
Civil Prosecution
Continue to collaborate with the Weights and
Measures Division of the Agricultural
Commissioner’s Office to initiate a new system for
investigation and enforcement of false and
misleading advertising and unlawful business
practices in commercial transactions.
Administration & Support
Focus Area: Providing Quality Information and
Technology Systems Support for Departmental
Operations
? Create external website to allow probation
clients to complete adult Monthly Report Form
(MRF) electronically from any location to
provide better service to offenders and reduce
data entry by Probation staff.
Focus Area: Providing Quality Staffing for
Departmental Operations
? Facilitate the development of a local Standards
and Training for Corrections Supervising
Probation Officer CORE course.
Focus Area: Providing Quality Support Services and
Financing for Departmental Operations
? Implement workflow within the Revenue
Recovery Unit related to FTBCOD referrals for
adult offender victim restitution accounts that
are delinquent by 90 or more days.
Institutions
Focus Area: Operating Quality Juvenile Treatment
and Detention Facilities and Programs
? Increase rehabilitation of approximately 100
juvenile probationers committed to LPBC by
ensuring that 90% will graduate from the
program.
? Through the effective use of alternatives to
detention, maintain an average daily population
of the juvenile detention and treatment
facilities at or below staffed capacity (132).
? Enhance the available resources and
programming at the ARRCs.
? Ensure that LPBC and SMJH remain compliant
with the requirements of PREA.
? Increase the opportunity for female specific
programming and interventions for youth in the
SMJH and at the ARRCs.
Juvenile Services
Focus Area: Providing Evidenced Based and
Effective Programs and Services for Juvenile
Offenders and Their Families
? Develop a comprehensive Female Specific
Program in the Juvenile Justice System by
implementing Countywide specific programing
that will address the needs of female juvenile
offenders that are at risk for out of home
placement.
? Implement the use of Global Positioning
Satellite (GPS) for post disposition cases of
youthful offenders that graduate from LPBC
with the goal of reducing recidivism.
Adult Services
Focus Area: Providing Evidenced Based and
Effective Programs and Services for Adult
Offenders
? Oversee the local implementation of the
Transition from Jail to Community (TJC)
Initiative which involves the development,
implementation, and evaluation of a model for
jail to community transition.
? Implement a violation sanction matrix that is
responsive to offender risks and needs and
which allows for intermediate sanctions as well
as the use of evidence-based programs.
? Coordinate and facilitate the Pew-MacArthur
Results First Initiative which is designed to help
assess the costs and benefits of intervention
options available to the criminal justice system
and allow for the use of data to make decisions
based on proven results.
Administration & Support
? Expand use of volunteers to meet non-core
functions, freeing support staff to focus on
high-priority matters.
? Continue successful implementation of 2011
Criminal Justice Realignment (AB 109) by
converting two extra-help Rehabilitation
Services Coordinators positions into full-time
staff positions. These two employees work
with the Courts, Sheriff, Probation and defense
attorneys to find and place clients in
appropriate alternative sentencing programs.
By coordinating our efforts with Sheriff and
Probation staff, each agency is able to serve a
different segment of the jail population to
achieve the best outcome for individual clients.
? Increase departmental efficiency through
implementation of a new case management
system. This would provide electronic storage
and remote access of data to staff over our
network or through the internet.
Adult Legal Services
? Expand the Volunteer Attorney program to
enable staff attorneys to focus on higherpriority
core tasks.
? Investigate creation of a post-Bar fellowship
program to provide additional in-depth support
to the attorneys on a cost-effective basis.
? Expand use of outside speakers and experts on
various legal, ethical, and trial practices topics
to provide high quality training to the attorney
staff at minimal cost to the County.
? Continue partnership with other Public
Defender Offices to participate in web-based
legal education and to require attorneys within
the office to provide continuing legal education
to other attorneys in our office on a regular
basis.
? Continue to collaborate with the Courts, Mental
Health, Probation, Sheriff, District Attorney,
and various community organizations to
improve the functioning of the Therapeutic
Courts. These court programs have proven to
be successful at rehabilitation, reducing
recidivism, enhancing public safety, and helping
individuals to become productive members of
the community. This helps reduce jail
overcrowding and saves the County money.
Juvenile Legal Services
? Work with school districts to identify areas
where outcomes in the juvenile court can be
improved by increased collaboration between
the two agencies.
? Work with the Truancy Program to encourage
both minors and parents to recognize the
importance of participating in school programs.
Grand Jury
Functions of the Civil and Criminal Grand Jury
The Santa Barbara County Grand Jury will continue
its three predominant functions:
? Government oversight, as well as,
? Investigation into citizen complaints by the
Civil Grand Jury, and
? Determination of whether evidence presented
by the district attorney is of a sufficient nature
to warrant a person to stand trial in court
when a Criminal Grand Jury is impaneled.
Court Special Services
Enhanced Collections
Court Special Services will begin development of a
written Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
with the County that implements and enhances the
collection of court-ordered debt and other monies
owed under a court order.
Conflict Defense Representation
Conflict Defense for Indigent Defendants
The Conflict Defense Program will protect the
rights and liberties guaranteed by the
Constitutions of California and the United States by
providing defense of indigent defendants when
the Public Defender has determined there is a
conflict of interest.
Administration and Support
? Implement a data analysis tool that will enable
the Department to measure response times
and apply the Citygate emergency response
time recommendations.
? Use the Citygate recommendations as a guide
to restore critical emergency and nonemergency
services that were eliminated in FY
2011-12.
? Continue succession planning efforts and
update the career development guide to
ensure sworn personnel have a guide/roadmap
to enhance their leadership, emergency
operations and management skills.
? Review and update the Chumash operational
agreement to improve emergency response
and operations.
? Use the Citygate recommendations to
establish an efficient resource deployment
model to address the County General Plan
build-out and reassess current Fire
Department resource deployment.
Fire Prevention
? Perform and review a time study and update
Fire Prevention inspection and permit fees.
? Implement and manage an electronic fire
prevention inspection program with electronic
data sharing between all fire departments
within the County.
? Identify hazardous fuel reduction projects in
the State Responsibility Areas (SRA) to
implement pending CEQA guidelines.
Emergency Operations
? Implement a new electronic patient care
reporting system that, among other
improvements, will provide real time data to
study training, treatment guidelines and
patient outcomes.
? Develop and provide large scale emergency
incident command training to all Chief Officers
and Executive Team members.
? Participate with state and local Fire, EMS and
Law officials to develop active shooter
protocols and training for all first responders.
? Strengthen the Fire Department’s Emergency
Medical Technician (EMT) and paramedic
programs through enhanced training
programs, administrative oversight and a
continuous quality improvement program.Administration & Support
? Research best practices for Records
Management Systems and replace current
outdated system, to conform to updated
technologies and become more efficient in
preparing, processing and disseminating
reports.
? Implement Smart Justice application for the
department to allow Law Enforcement access
to state-wide criminal justice data while in the
field.
? Upgrade Computer-Aided Dispatch software
application to latest version, including
enhanced reporting capabilities to user
agencies.
Custody Operations
? Complete the construction document phase
for the Northern Branch Jail to maintain the
timeline for groundbreaking in 2015.
? Complete a sewer upgrade and kitchen
remodel project in the Main Jail. Through a
partnership with County General Services, the
upgraded jail sewer system and kitchen
remodel will improve the infrastructure of
these vital services in the custody facility.
? Research best practices for Jail Management
Systems and replace current outdated system
to conform to current technologies and allow
for future growth in the Jail system.
Countywide Law Enforcement
? Initiate a selection process to choose the
successor vehicle to the Ford Crown Victoria
patrol vehicle, which is no longer
manufactured.
? Enhance coordination and enforcement
efforts with Homeland Security and other
partnering agencies in the interdiction of
panga boat smuggling along the Santa Barbara
County coastline.
? Develop and implement an on-line citizen
reporting tool. This web-based reporting
system will leverage limited resources and
help make crime reporting efficient.
? Develop and implement the WAVE Radio
system, funded by a Homeland Security Grant,
that allows deputies to utilize cell phone
technology to tie into the County radio system.
Administration & Support
? Implement International Classification of
Diseases 10 (ICD-10) diagnosis coding by the
mandated federal deadline of October 1, 2014.
The project will include software installation,
staff training, workflow changes, and testing.
? Participate in a Health Information Exchange
program to securely exchange health
information among providers for treatment
purposes. Continue to meet federal
requirements in order to receive Medi-Cal
financial incentives.
Health Care Centers
? Fully implement the Patient Centered Medical
Home (PCMH) practice model, which is a
profound shift in the management of patients,
scope of services provided, and methods for
service delivery. This transition will be ongoing
for several years. Initial success will be marked
by Level 3 Accreditation of each practice site
(Health Care Center) by the National
Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA).
? Enhance behavioral health services provided
within the primary care model in County
Health Care Centers in order to improve
continuity of care. This is an expectation of
the PCMH practice model and a requirement
within the expanded scope of services for
persons with Medi-Cal coverage.
? Collaborate with CenCal Health, the Medi-Cal
Managed Care Plan, to assess and evaluate the
provision of access to the increasing numbers
of covered residents in areas of the County
where capacity in the private medical
community is limited.
? Analyze pharmacy access for all PHD patients
as a result of expanded coverage of residents
in order to determine if the PHD pharmacies
continue to provide a critical service not
available within the private community.
Indigent Health Programs
? Fully implement the Indigent Care Program by
identifying essential medical services and
eligibility requirements for those residents
unable to qualify for any healthcare coverage.
Identify and secure long-term funding to
replace shrinking state and local funding for
these services.
Disease Prevention & Health Promotion
? Implement a culturally competent, preventive
initiative with community partners to prevent
future cases of tuberculosis.
? Implement a five year community plan to
improve the medical and psycho-social health
and well-being of women of child-bearing age,
infants, children, and adolescents. Work with
community partners on focus areas that will
include access to health and dental care and
other areas such as gestational diabetes, and
perinatal mental health and substance abuse.
Regulatory Programs & Emergency
Preparedness
? Implement an electronic patient care medical
record for Emergency Medical Services that
will document, assess, and analyze the care provided within the EMS system for 9-1-1
medical emergencies.
? Develop robust data collection and reporting
system for the Environmental Health Services
to track key performance measures and
program effectiveness in order to promote
community health and safety.
Tobacco Settlement Health Services
? Engage community partners to evaluate
alternatives and opportunities through the
Affordable Care Act.
Administration & Support
? In order to better serve clients with complex
needs, begin a multi-year process to create a
comprehensive behavioral health system
that integrates mental health services,
substance abuse services, physical health
care services, and support services.
? Through the newly created Office of
Strategic Management, designed to assist
with creating, communicating, executing,
and sustaining strategic initiatives within the
Department, ADMHS will improve in
communication, measurement of outcomes
for care, and enhance staff development
through quality improvement,
communication, evaluation, and training
plans.
Continue collaborative efforts to transform
organizational culture with ongoing outreach
and involvement in program development to
staff, clients, families, and community-based
providers, resulting in improved client
outcomes.
? Develop capacity to measure and evaluate
systems, programs, and individual outcomes.
? Provide structure and establish a framework
for care and recovery by development of
defined long-term organizational strategic
plans.
Mental Health Inpatient Services
? Complete planning of Consolidated Mental
Health Treatment Center to provide for
additional inpatient beds in Santa Maria in
conjunction with Marian Medical Center.
? Improve client outcomes and reduce lengths
of stay through the expansion of the crisis
service system through the SB 82 awarded
funding.
? Increased access to inpatient care by
improved utilization management of the PHF
reducing lengths of stay and stepping down
level of care as quickly as possible.
Mental Health Outpatient Services
? Establish evidence-based practices,
delivered through specialty teams at all
adult and children’s outpatient clinics, to
individualize services based on unique
needs.
? Equip all outpatient adult clinics with fully
developed co-occurring services to serve
individuals with serious mental health,
substance use, and medical conditions
through a comprehensive system of
recovery and resiliency.
? Expand community care resources by
increasing the number of homeless shelter
and board and care bed resources.
? Enhance communication and collaboration
with CBO providers to review and update all
outpatient service contracts to define and
improve clinical client outcomes.
? Expand forensic programming and
homeless services Countywide to improve
continuity of care, divert individuals from
jail, and reduce acute hospitalizations.
Mental Health Community Services Programs
? Integrate the principles of MHSA into all
outpatient programs and services that
includes adherence to established evidencebased
practices delivered through specialty
teams at all adult and children’s outpatient
clinics.
? Implement a crisis stabilization unit and crisis
residential facility in the South County.
? Transform access and assessment services
provided by CARES clinics into mobile
assessment teams in all three regions.
? Expand the MHSA innovations programs to
transform the justice alliance program into a
forensic system of care and expand services
to the homeless in each geographic region.
Alcohol and Drug Program
? Further integrate substance abuse services
with the outpatient MHSA-funded programs.
? Implement State approved, expanded Medi-
Cal services.
Administration and Support
? Continue to refine hiring and training
strategies for Medi-Cal and CalFresh staff to
continue meeting critical State mandates.
? Implement a Tele-working Plan that will allow
employees to share space and reduce the
need for future expansion of brick and mortar
space.
Public Assistance and Welfare to Work
Activities
? Complete implementation of the Expanded
Subsidized Employment and Family
Stabilization Services initiatives as required by
State law which will include a review of new
procedures and the establishment program
measures in newly created mandates.
? Initiate a quality assurance campaign with line
staff aimed at reducing case errors and
improving our accuracy rates in areas such as
Income and Eligibility Verification System
(IEVS) processing as noted in recent audit
findings.
? Increase outreach to CalFresh recipients
nearing eligibility renewal deadlines, which will
help reduce the number of eligible recipients
who wind up getting dropped from the
program.
Medi-Cal Eligibility
? Develop plan for seamless coordination with
State and local entities to create a quality
experience for our residents when applying for
public assistance.
Protective Services for Children, Adults,
Disabled
? Complete the implementation of Katie A. case
management with ADMHS.
? Implement a unified, family friendly, and childcentered
Resource Family Approval (RFA)
program.
? Successfully implement all new IHSS policies
and procedures for program recipients and
providers.
? Incorporate the principles of the Safety
Organized Practice (SOP) program into child
welfare social work practice
Case Management & Collections
? Continue to improve in Federal Performance
Measures by exceeding goals set by the State.
This will be accomplished by continuing
ongoing efforts to analyze impediments to
performance and prioritizing efforts on
Federal Performance Measures where the
greatest impact can be achieved; as well as
assessing annual State goals while setting
higher internal goals when feasible.
? Continue to identify emerging trends in
technology developments and work
organization, and then assess how these
changes can be employed to improve the
organization’s performance.
? Outreach to employers to improve information
and enhance speed of processing wage
assignments, which account for about $19
million (67%) of child support collections
annually.
? Achieve cost savings and efficiencies in the
management of process service.
? Continue to work with the Courts and Clerk-
Recorder-Assessor to develop electronic file
sharing protocols.
? Assess options for alternate cash collection
procedures.
Administration & Support
? Ensure a high level of fiscal accountability and
oversight in relation to the granting of funds
for program purposes and reporting on
outcomes to ensure the effective and efficient
use of tax payer dollars; compliance with
State, local, and other accounting and
reporting requirements; and adherence to the
will of California voters and Proposition 10.
Program Evaluation and Research
? Provide greater access and transparency to
interested parties by publishing data, results,
and outcomes on an ongoing basis on the
Commission’s website and other direct
communications venues.
? Revise current set of program indicators that
track results so that they are easier to gather,
better to communicate, and more accurately
reflect, the desired results that are hoped to
be achieved.
? Increase the ability within First 5 and the
broader community to measure outcomes and
results on a longitudinal basis.
Children's Wellness and Support
? Invest in evidence based programs and
strategies serving children and families who
are most in need.
? Promote, improve, and create systems of
evaluating outcomes and results within the
social service and educational system serving
children age 0-5 to allow for increased
longitudinal measurement of program success
and to better inform future strategies.
? Implement a new strategy within First 5, in
partnership with other funders and providers,
to create increased capacity and parental
access to high quality preschool and childcare
services.
? Explore and create new communications and
revenue generating strategies to support
healthy child development, kindergarten
readiness, and increased public support for
efforts to meet the needs of 0-5 year olds.
Administration & Support
Administrative staff will assume primary
responsibility for data entry and updating the
Department’s new weights and measures
database. Internal procedures will be
implemented that will shift this workload from
inspectors to Administrative Office Professionals
(AOPs), allowing inspectors to increase time spent
on activities requiring licensing. This shift will also
allow the Department to provide better customer
service by having business profiles and invoices
updated in a more timely manner.
Administrative staff will train agriculture
businesses in the use of two online systems:
CalAgPermits for pesticide use reporting and the
Phytosanitary Certificate Issuance and Tracking
(PCIT) system for requesting Phytosanitary
certificates. Administrative staff will contact
interested businesses and will conduct training
either over the phone, at the Department’s
facilities, or at the business location. The trainings
will allow the agriculture industry to take
advantage of more efficient technologies while
allowing biologists to increase time on activities
requiring licensing.
Agriculture
The Department will review the fees it charges for
Phytosanitary certification and recommend any
adjustments to achieve full cost recovery. This
review is necessitated by the increasing demand
for inspections to certify exports of agricultural
products and rising labor costs. The industry’s
increased use of the PCIT program to submit
certification applications electronically will result in
efficiencies to the department that will help
minimize any fee increase.
The Department will look for opportunities to
partner with the Public Works Department,
Community Services Department (Parks), and
General Services with regard to the control or
eradication of specific noxious weeds on Countymaintained
property. The Department’s weed
management specialist will communicate with
Public Works staff to identify areas where a
combined effort would benefit both departments.
Efficiencies in the use of staff and equipment are
expected.
The Department will develop compliance focused
pesticide and pest prevention education/outreach
services for pesticide and pest prevention
programs.
The Department will continue to provide local
support for State invasive pest eradication projects
and public outreach efforts.
Weights & Measures
The Department will inspect 100% of businesses
that use point-of-sale (scanner) systems and
expand upon package inspection services.
The Department will continue to develop a
working partnership with the District Attorney’s
office. The Deputy Sealer will regularly
communicate with staff from the District
Attorney’s office to explore serious consumer
protection violations that might lead to
prosecution. Often, these are situations that are
found to occur Statewide and involve several
counties working together to develop a case.
These cases result in a more effective and efficient
use of County resources with far-reaching impacts.

Administration & Support
? Convert all microfiche records of historic
permit records and provide online access and
research of these records for customers and
staff.
? Conduct a comprehensive fee study for cost of
services associated with all work performed by
staff so that billing practices and
methodologies are consistent.
? Update and restart the department training
program which was discontinued during the
recession.
? Develop a plan for succession for key
management and supervisory positions.
? Develop Public Records Act (PRA) request
process that will streamline research and
response, and document all requests.
Responding to PRA requests often requires
extensive staff time with a short turnaround.
The Department will evaluate its records and
create a more efficient process.
Permitting
? Review and update the procedures and
oversight mechanisms for the permit
compliance program countywide. This will
ensure projects are built according to
approved plans and that conditions
implementing the County’s Comprehensive
Plan are completed.
? Complete the damage assessment manual for
the Building and Safety Division in
coordination with County Emergency
Operations. The manual will provide
procedures for organizing, conducting and
reporting post-disaster activities. Any
necessary ordinance changes will be brought
to the Board of Supervisors for consideration.
? Conduct simulated disaster training sessions to
test current procedures and update current
documentation for conducting damage
assessments following natural disasters. This
project will ensure the Department remains
ready to assist its constituents in the postdisaster
recovery process.
? Fully integrate onshore permitting and
petroleum into Energy and Minerals.
? Continue building on the cooperative
relationship with the Division of Oil, Gas and
Geothermal Resources (DOGGR) and the
Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) to facilitate more efficient permit
processing for both oil and gas development
and remediation projects.
Coastal Mitigation
? Administer the Coastal Resource Enhancement
Fund Grant Program by conducting the
competitive grant cycle process. The grants
fund acquisition of coastal properties for
recreation and conservation purposes as well
as various coastal projects.
? Oversee grants funded through the Coastal
Resource Enhancement Fund to ensure that
the projects comply with their contracts and
provide expected public benefits.
Code Enforcement
? Prepare Ordinance Amendments to Santa
Barbara County Codes under the purview of
Planning and Development such that
enforcement practices and billing of
enforcement costs are consistent and fair.
Long Range Planning
? Complete the 2015-23 Housing Element Update
and submit it to the State Housing and
Community Development Department for
review by February 2015. This update focuses
on providing housing opportunities for
residents and workers of the County,
particularly for below market and special
needs residents.
? Complete the Disadvantaged Communities
Update to the Land Use Element and the Fire
Hazards Update to the Safety Element which
are also required to be updated by February
2015.
? Complete adoption of the Energy and Climate
Action Plan to reduce the County’s
greenhouse gas emissions consistent with
State Law.
? Complete the update of the winery ordinance
to streamline the permitting process through
the clarification of standards and addressing
neighborhood impacts.
? Complete the local adoption hearings for the
Gaviota Community Plan and the Eastern
Goleta Valley Community Plan.
? Complete the Coastal Development Permit
and California Public Utilities Commission
applications for the railroad crossing at Santa
Claus Lane.
? Complete Hollister-State Street streetscape
plan that will enhance the aesthetics and
increase the economic vitality of the area.
? Complete Mission Park to Mission Canyon
Multi-modal Improvement Plan that will
provide for safer pedestrian, bicycle and
vehicle circulation while preserving the cultural
resources of the area.
? Complete the Los Alamos Pedestrian-
Circulation-Parking Plan that will provide safer
routes to school and enhance the parking and
streetscape of the business core, resulting in
increased economic vitality.
? Complete Planning Commission and Board of
Supervisor hearings to update the Isla Vista
Master Plan and submit the plan to the
California Coastal Commission for certification.
? Pursue grants to fund additional long range
planning work prioritized in the work program.
This will potentially provide for additional
funds to work on Board and community
priority projects.
Administration & Support
? Develop training courses associated with the
disaster recovery process and Public Works
disaster response.
? Complete fee study of Transportation
Encroachment Permits.
? Explore outreach opportunities to the various
target audiences in the community such as
Facebook and other social media outlets.
? Streamline and improve Board letter process
and quality control.
Transportation
? Continue to work on addressing deferred
maintenance backlog and long term funding
stability.
? Complete the Orcutt Transportation
Improvement Plan (OTIP) update and take the
Goleta Transportation Improvement Plan
(GTIP) Administrative update to the Board for
approval upon approval of the Goleta
Community Plan (GCP).
? Continue to seek new funding sources and
new methods and processes to help perform
the mission of the Division with limited
resources.
Surveyor
? Increase number, completeness, and
consistency of dataset available to the general
public and professional surveyors using an
interactive Geographic Information System
(GIS) as the primary customer service tool.
? Lead the Division through anticipated
organizational changes and implement
Department’s budget plan.
? Provide mandated surveying services to
County Government, survey professional and
general public, as required by the California
Government Code, California Business and
Professions Code, and Santa Barbara County
Code.
Water Resources/Flood Control
? Secure 10 Year Maintenance Regional General
Permit to allow creeks and debris basins
maintenance, to reduce flood hazards.
? Monitor water supply / drought issues closely;
support CEO as needed.
? Integrate new Flood Control Property
Database / Viewer into division operations.
? Initiate Water Supply Alternatives Study as
directed by the Board for future water supply
options for the County.
Resource Recovery & Waste Management
? Certify EIR for the Resource Recovery CT
Project proposed at Tajiguas Landfill.
? Negotiate contract with vendor for the
Resource Recovery CT Project proposed at
Tajiguas including preparation of necessary
documents and review of financial and
technical information.
? Construct the next liner phase at the Tajiguas
Landfill.
Administration & Support
In the next fiscal year, the Administration and
Support division will complete projects and
explore new opportunities to improve
Departmental operations, staff training, and
program implementation.
? Implement training workshops to improve
customer service and relations and provide
professional training opportunities for staff.
? Continue to improve and enhance monitoring
for all Federal programs, including HOME,
Community Development Block Grants
(CDBG), and Emergency Solutions Grant
programs (ESG).
? Update and provide revisions to the Park
policies manual and begin the development of
a Community Services Department policies and
procedures manual.
? Provide oversight and direction in the
development of capital and deferred
maintenance improvements, including the
completion of the Arroyo Burro Restroom
project, paving of Jalama Beach parking area,
and ADA improvements to Miguelito Park.
? Expand the online reservation system to allow
visitors to plan special events such as
weddings, and develop an online cancellation
process which will create greater efficiencies
for securing the facility of their choice.
Parks & Open Spaces
The Parks division will improve public access and
user experience at County parks.
? Advance technologies to provide more
simplified check-in and cash management
processes at our camping facilities.
? Complete the new Arroyo Burro Restroom.
? Design and upgrade the Arroyo Burro
Boardwalk for increased public safety.
? Complete the new Live Oak Shower &
Restroom Facility by December 2014.
? Complete the new Cachuma Lake Marina Café.
? Complete the design of various facilities at
Cachuma Lake including the water treatment
plant, sewer lift station #2, additional
overnight accommodations (cabins and yurts),
and electrical upgrades at RV hook up sites.
? Design and upgrade the Bodger Road public
viewing area of the Lompoc Valley.
? Work with Vandenberg Air Force Base and the
Pacific Railroad to obtain permits, design, and
replace the only fresh water supply line to the
Jalama camping park.
? Design and replace the Jalama Beach
restrooms to better serve the public.
? Design upgrades to Jalama Beach Park to
include affordable cabin accommodations and
provide additional facilities for the public.
? Complete the environmental review of the
Waller Park Master Plan.
? Implement a Countywide safety inspection
program for County parks and open spaces to
ensure health and safety of park visitors.
Housing & Community Development
The Housing and Community Development division
will continue to administer various Federal, State,
and local funding sources to provide public
services for eligible populations, including
homeless services, affordable housing, public
infrastructure development and renovation, and
community-wide energy-building efficiency
services.
? Implement a new affordable housing
monitoring program to enhance staff’s data collection and inspection circuit of affordable
units as required for U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
regulatory compliance.
? Continue administration and disbursement of
funds to the Pescadero Loft project in Isla
Vista. This project consists of 33 affordable
rental units, 11 designated as HOME units, and
10 disabled access units. The project will assist
formerly homeless individuals and families.
? Administer and disburse funds to the Casa de
las Flores project in Carpinteria. This project
consists of 42 affordable rental units and will
provide permanent housing targeted to
farmworkers and their families.
? Continue management of the Countywide
Homeless Management Information System
(HMIS) to collect data and evaluate the quality
of services provided to homelessness
assistance and prevention programs.
? Continue emPowerSBC outreach/education,
workforce development, energy advising, and
financial incentive services to the Tri-County
and pursue future funding contracts to extend
and enhance services.
Community Support
Arts
? Organize and promote a series of plein-air
painting events in parks, in partnership with
the SCAPE (South Coast Artists Painting the
Environment) artist group and County Parks,
with a goal to launch an exhibition of works
from SCAPE artists for the public galleries in
Santa Barbara and Santa Maria in Nov. 2014-
Feb. 2015.
? Complete “Percent for Arts Project” public art
tapestry installation in the Public Defender
Building.
? Organize and promote an exhibition in Fall of
2014 in memory of the late Barry Berkus,
showcasing the County’s Berkus Family
Collection juxtaposed with emerging young
artists from the Tri-Counties.
? Continue to partner with the Santa Barbara
Bowl Foundation to promote arts outreach to
rural and underserved communities and
institute a grant reporting system by Spring of
2015 to measure the direct impact of
Community Arts Grants on communities.
Libraries
? Establish quarterly budget reports from all
three County library zones.
? Explore the development of a marketing
identity for the County library system.
? Continue to explore the feasibility of
establishing a Los Alamos Library branch.
Administration & Support
? Manage the A-C office effectively by
submission of timely budgets that:
o Include the resources necessary to carry
out the duties of the office;
o Recruit and hire well-qualified staff;
o Conduct a recruitment for a new class of
Accountant-Auditors for the new Auditor
Training and Development Program;
o Encourage staff performance;
o Support staff training;
o Provide modern technology;
o Promote employee health, wellness, and
quality of life.
Audit Services
? Focus on completing mandated audits,
training staff, and continue to provide
enhanced reporting to the Board of
Supervisors.
? Complete projects to assist departments in
improving processes.
? As resources exist, perform audits to increase
contractor monitoring.
Accounting Services
Applications Development and Systems
? Implementation of the Property Tax System
will be the division’s top priority.
? Maintain and enhance the 65 applications in
the A-C that serve multiple departments and
County agencies.
? Deploy a web-based Countywide time capture
system.
Property Tax Administration
? Distribute an estimated $768 million in
property taxes to local agencies.
? Complete implementation of the RDA
dissolution process.
? Go-live on new property tax system
(Aumentum) and implement necessary
subsystems needed to supplement the new
system.
Payroll Operations
? Payroll will continue to work with Human
Resources Benefits division in reviewing the
evolving requirements of the Affordable Care
Act, and work on implementing methods of
tracking and reporting of the statistical data
that is required.
? Payroll will work with the Auditor Controller
Systems division on developing a more
efficient method of scanning payroll
documents that are completed and submitted
by County employees to make changes to their
paychecks. Optical Character Recognition
(OCR) technology is being used to recognize
employee identification numbers, as well as
type of form, which eliminates the need for
payroll staff to manually scan and name each
document.
Financial Accounting and Customer Support
? Continue to seek out improved efficiencies and
controls in the processing of claims and
general ledger transactions.
? Validate, process, and record all annual general
ledger accounting transactions including a
high volume of deposit entries, journal entries,
and claim payments.
? Respond to customer service requests in a
timely and efficient manner.
Advanced and Specialty Accounting
? Provide accounting support/training, grant
compliance, and review of the Northern
Branch Jail project.
? Support and enhance the County’s contract
review process.
? Assist departments and agencies in the
complex allocations of inter-agency revenues
and taxes.
? Research and establish new allocation
procedures related to the Affordable Care
Act/AB85.
? Report timely and accurate information on
Sales Tax, TOT, and financial information to
the State for Special Districts.
Financial Reporting
? Prepare timely and accurate financial
documents that include the County’s
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report,
County Budget, Cost Allocation Plan, and a
variety of financial reporting and compliance
documents to State Agencies.
? Provide the Board of Supervisors, CEO, and
management with the financial information
necessary to make decisions that impact
services to the community.
? Implement significant new GASB reporting
pronouncements.
? Continue to transform the budget process
with the CEO to include:
o budget workshops
o a five-year financial forecast
o a two-year operational plan
o a one-year legally required adopted
budget
Elections
? Conduct the election canvass and certify the
election results by the 28th day following the
November 2014 General Election. Through
voter outreach and support, materially
maintain or increase the voter turnout rate
related to the last comparable election.
? Increase service levels by expanding and
improving information available on the
Elections website, such as providing redacted
copies of Campaign Financial Disclosure filings.
? Maintain or increase the number of
participants in the Student Poll Worker
Program by performing community outreach
to local high schools with the goal of
maintaining or increasing the number of
participants related to the last comparable
election. The Student Poll Worker Program
promotes civic awareness and educates high
school students about the election process by
allowing them to serve as poll workers on
Election Day.
Clerk-Recorder
? Increase the number of users that submit
documents for recordation using the
electronic recording delivery system known as
SECURE (Statewide Electronic Courier
Universal Recording Environment), creating
cost and processing efficiencies to both users
and the County. E-recording documents
through this system reduces courier and
postage costs to the submitters while also
allowing for faster notification that documents
submitted have been recorded or rejected.
Benefits to the County include automation of
the cashiering, scanning and return mail
functions, while also creating the ability to
better measure productivity at each stage of
the recording process.
? Increase the number of customers paying for
daily recording fees through the use of the
County’s online payment collection system.
Customer benefits include flexibility for
payment from multiple bank accounts, access
to accounting data, and the ability to generate
custom reports. It also creates efficiencies for
the County by eliminating the need to handle
and tender paper check payments.
? Complete an assessment of archived records,
maps, and microfilm, to identify items in need
of restoration. As the custodian of records, the
Clerk-Recorder is responsible for archiving and
preserving document recordings and vital
records. This assessment will review records
dating back to 1850, and identify those in need
of restoration.
Assessor
? Complete 100% of all secured and unsecured
assessment work items by close of the annual
tax roll (July 1) to create the assessment roll,
which becomes the base upon which local
property taxes are levied, collected and
distributed to the cities, County and special
districts to fund government services.
? Perform timely resolution of assessment
appeals within the statutory timeframe while
adequately defending the disputed roll value
at risk.
? Complete review of all parcels subject to
Section 51 of the Revenue and Taxation Code,
which require property values to be enrolled at
the lesser of factored base value or market
value as of the January 1st tax lien date, by
June 30th as part of the assessment roll.
Central Services
? In an effort to expand the Local Vendor
Outreach Program and increase local vendor
participation rates, we will increase efforts to
target local vendors for bidding opportunities
and educate them on how to do business with
the County.
? The Department will continue to focus on
strategic planning, team building, performance
management, and succession planning to
ensure that County and Departmental goals
are achieved.
Capital Improvements
? Northern Branch Jail (AB900 & SB1022) –
Establish accounting frameworks for billing
and continue to meet all of our State and
County milestones. We will bid out and begin
construction of the facilities.
? Complete the design of and build the Cuyama
Pool to appropriate specifications, with an
anticipated completion date prior to the 2016
swimming season.
Facilities & Land Management
? Successfully integrate the Facilities Condition
Assessment Report from the County
consultant into our deferred maintenance and
capital project planning.
? Complete reclassification of several
departmental positions to improve customer
service and provide opportunities for
employee growth within the department.
? Continue to work on improvements to the
Real Property software to improve customer
service and facilitate improved tracking of
leases and agreements.
? Evaluate the facilities work order automation
project.
Fleet Operations
? Work with County departments to continue to
improve fleet “right sizing” by reducing the
total vehicles owned by the organization and
ensuring that the vehicles being used are the
appropriate size for the job being performed.
? Continue efforts towards achieving the goal of
billing for 75% of mechanic labor hours on work
orders. Monitor billable labor hours at all shop locations and make adjustments as needed
based on prudent business decisions.
Information & Communications Technology
? Complete a five year plan for the
communications network, covering the
planned use of fiber, leased lines, wireless,
public safety microwave network, and radio
technologies.
? Replace the Octel voice mail system with high
availability clustered NEC UM8700 voicemail
servers. The replacement will provide high
availability and disaster recovery. We will
install a primary, secondary and tertiary
system server. The secondary server performs
an automatic failover if the primary fails. The
secondary server provides for high availability
by allowing us to perform maintenance on the
primary server without taking the system
down. The tertiary server is for disaster
recovery at a remote site and is a manual
failover.
? Redesign the Countyofsb.org internet site to
provide enhanced mobile device support.
? Update Countywide IT strategic plan with
wireless services component and inclusion of
technology coordination policies.
? Complete the replacement of our antiquated
core computer infrastructure addressing
storage, server, and data center network
components.
? Replace the Santa Barbara Computer Room
Uninterrupted Power Supply (UPS).
? Complete a five year Countywide strategic
plan for the public safety microwave radio
communication network.
Administration & Support
? The TTCPA will continue to analyze the
feasibility of refunding prior year debt
issuances. Potential savings from this
refinancing would be achieved through lower
interest rates.
Treasury
? County revenues are currently processed
utilizing paper deposit tickets which are
manually entered into the TTCPA cashiering
system. A file is then created and uploaded to
the Auditor-Controller financial system. The
Treasury Program will evaluate and analyze
the cost/benefit of developing an electronic
deposit ticket. This enhancement will serve
County departments and agencies. It will also
facilitate the recording of revenue into the
County’s financial system in a timelier manner.
Tax & Collections
? In early FY 2014-15, the TTCPA will implement
the new Property Tax System including: data
conversion, systems interfaces, functional
design and user testing. It will take a
significantly longer period for full system
implementation to maximize the efficiencies
and outcomes of the new system.
Public Assistance
? A detailed study of the operating costs of the
Public Guardian will be performed to evaluate
and revise base fees as appropriate.
Compensation for the Public Guardian is based
on reasonableness commensurate with the
value of the service provided which include:
the costs of referral, investigation and
assessment, charges for conservatorship of
the person and conservatorship of the estate.
Support: Other Governments & Organizations
? Continue the current level of support of
$1,000,000 to the Children’s Healthcare
Initiative. Move the Human Services
Commission from Community Services to
General County Programs.
Reserved & Committed Funds
? Continue to fund the Northern Branch Jail
Operations fund in the amounts of $4,600,000
in FY 2014-15 and $6,100,000 in FY 2015-16.
? Fund capital/infrastructure projects based on
identified needs, priorities, and available
funding sources.
? Identify County deferred maintenance projects
in the General Services, Public Works, and the
Parks Division of Community Services
Department and develop a long-term funding
plan to address these needs.
? Continue to build the County’s Strategic
Reserve.
Ancillary Services
? Continue to support the Central Coast
Coalition on Homelessness and the South
Coast Gang Task Force projects at the current
level of funding.
Northern Branch Jail Project
? Complete the construction documents for the
Northern Brank Jail project and secure State
approval to proceed with the construction
phase. Initiate reimbursement of State eligible
expenditures.
? Complete prequalification of eligible prime
contractors and major trade subcontractors,
award a construction contract, and commence
construction of the Northern Branch Jail.
Discretionary Fund Balance Components
The information below describes the fund balance
accounts on the following page:
Capital: Provides one-time funds to support
unexpected and unbudgeted capital projects that
arise during the fiscal years.
Roads: This fund balance account supplements
other Roads revenues for additional maintenance
funding. As identified in the Public Works Road
Maintenance Annual Plan, additional funding is
needed to prevent further deterioration of our
road infrastructure. These funds provide only a
portion of what is needed and a comprehensive
long-term funding plan for deferred maintenance,
including the Roads fund, is planned to be
developed in FY 2014-15.
Litigation: This contains funds for outside counsel
and potential litigation settlements not covered by
the County Liability Self-Insurance Fund, giving the
County the ability to address unforeseen
settlements without negatively impacting the
adopted Operating Budget.
Salary and Benefits Reductions: Contains savings
set aside from FY 2011-12 concession savings which
will fund negotiated salary increases in FY 2014-15.
Deferred Maintenance & Repair: Designated for
the backlog of deferred maintenance and repairs
at County roads, buildings and parks.
Audit Exceptions: This reserve was originally
established in FY 2007-08 to address potential
audit exceptions in the Alcohol, Drug and Mental
Health Services (ADMHS) Department associated
with Cost Report Settlements and subsequently
was increased to include the non-General Fund
portion of the Public Health Department’s Multiagency
Integrated System of Care (MISC) program.
The projected balance of $2,200,000 at June 30,
2014 represents the remaining reserve for these estimated prior liabilities, primarily covering FY
2006-07 through FY 2008-09 MISC program. The
Strategic Reserve has been identified as the source
for the General Fund portion of the MISC liability,
currently estimated at $2,800,000. ADMHS is
subject to audit and potential adjustments for FY
2006-07 through the most recently completed
fiscal year, as these audits have not yet occurred.
Northern Branch Jail Operations: This fund was
established in FY 2011-12 to set aside General Funds
for the ongoing operations of the new Northern
Branch Jail, estimated to complete construction in
mid-2018. Each year an increasing amount of
General Funds will be set aside so that when the
jail is operational, the ongoing annual cost of
operations will be fully funded with a combination
of established annual General Fund Contribution
and use of funds from this New Jail Operations
fund.
Program Restoration: Designated to fund
departmental programs which are a priority for the
Board of Supervisors that would otherwise be
reduced or eliminated.
Contingency: Used to cover additional unforeseen
financial situations during the fiscal year that
cannot be covered by a department’s existing
budget.
Strategic Reserve: In FY 1997-98, the Board
established a goal of a $25,000,000 Strategic
Reserve. Subsequently, a Budget Policy was
established to have an amount equal to
approximately 30 days of operating revenue or
about $28,000,000 for FY 2014-15. The FY 2013-14
year end Strategic Reserve is currently projected to
be $24,500,000, after appropriation of $3,900,000
in SB1022 matching funds towards the expansion
of the North Branch Jail for an additional 228 beds
and $1,400,000 for the 2012-13 reimbursement of
cost settlements for ADMHS. The Strategic
Reserve target for FY 2013-14 was $26,700,000.
This balance will be adjusted based on the FY 2013-
14 year end results.
