Continue to make customer service the primary focus of County government while working to enhance
responsiveness, efficiency, and accountability including efforts to promote diversity, expand outreach and
partnerships.
? Work to maintain the long-term fiscal health and sustainability of our County.
? Maintain and enhance services provided to the most vulnerable residents of our County including continued
funding of the Children’s Health Initiative, implementation of recommendations from the Poverty Study and
initiation of a Child Welfare Safety Net Task Force.
? Promote the public safety of our County through maintaining and enhancing front line law enforcement services
and fire fuels reduction and response.
? Continue to invest in maintaining and improving our County roads and other infrastructure.
? Work to protect our open spaces and enhance recreational opportunities including permitting for the Santa Claus
Lane Beach Access Improvements and planning for regional bikeway improvements.
? Continue to work on the planning and implementation of both regional and local transportation enhancements
including the Highway 101 HOV Widening Project and establishment of Commuter Rail service from Ventura to
Goleta.
? Address the challenge of Climate Change by continuing to implement energy efficiency improvements and
sustainable practices in County building and facilities and partnering to promote sustainability and resiliency
Countywide.
? Move forward with implementation of the Resource Recovery Project to increase recycling, generate green
energy and ensure long-term management of our solid waste.
Monitor the Coastal Commission's review of the Goleta Beach Park permit.
? Continue to maintain a Second District office that is responsive to, and respectful of, all constituents.
? Continue to monitor the progress of the Goleta Valley Community Plan environmental review processes.
? Remain engaged in the progress of the San Marcos Foothills Park Management Plan.
? Monitor progress on the State St. /Hollister Ave. Corridor Improvement Plan.
? Meet and encourage partnerships with, and among, individuals and organizations (public, private, and
educational) committed to expanding and enhancing recreational, cultural, and educational opportunities for
youth and adolescents.
? As the Board’s liaison to the Community Corrections Partnership, remain engaged in the progress and challenges
posed by AB109/Realignment, and advocate for adequate funding for needed resources.
? Continue to advocate for the rights of our County’s most vulnerable constituents.
? Continue to work closely with Public Health officials and staff on issues concerning tobacco use, Affordable Care
Act implementation, and improved conditions and adoptions in animal services.
? Work with local business partners to enhance and develop business opportunities on the South Coast.
? Continue to ensure that environmental protections are in place within the County.
Continue to preserve public safety and make sure resources are prioritized to keep our community safe.
? Continue to promote fiscal responsibility so that we are using public resources efficiently and effectively.
? Continue to protect safety net services for our most vulnerable community members.
? Continue to provide timely, responsive, and professional constituent service that responds to issues important to
constituents.
? Continue to plan for the future by encouraging strong neighborhood and environmental planning.
Infrastructure maintenance will continue to be a high priority for Peter in the next fiscal year. He is committed to
pressuring the Board to fully fund their annual maintenance responsibilities for roads, parks, and public buildings, and
plans to address the over $300 million of deWork with Sheriff, Fire, and the County Executive Office (CEO) to review emergency dispatch operations and
implement any necessary changes.
? Work with Santa Barbara County Economic Vitality Team to create new economic development opportunities in
the Fifth District.
? Continue to work with Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services, Marian Medical Center and other partners to
develop one or more new mental health facilities in North County.
? Continue to work with our onshore oil producers to increase property tax revenue and high paying jobs to the
County.
? Continue to work with Supervisor Farr and staff on water capacity and recreation issues at Lake Cachuma;
develop new water conservation programs Countywide.ferred maintenance.
Continue to provide outstanding customer support to constituents, departments and Board offices.
Establish robust internal and external communications strategy.
? Continue to anticipate, communicate and mitigate risk.
? Ensure successful implementation of the ADMHS system change effort.
? Conduct in-depth departmental budget reviews with the Board of Supervisors.
? Identify funding options for capital projects including debt issuance.
? Complete the 5-year upgrade to the Multi-Jurisdiction Hazard Mitigation Plan.
? Implement workforce planning strategies to ensure the County can continue to “get the right people in the right
jobs at the right time” in order to deliver County services.
? Identify and implement key strategies for increasing employee engagement throughout the organization to assist in
retaining talent and improving County performance through its workforce.
? Implement a web-based onboarding system to maximize the efficiency of the hiring process and provide a positive
experience for new employees.
? Develop a strategy to stem and ultimately reduce the recent growth in current WC premium costs.
Maintain appropriate reserve balances to enhance financial stability.
? Develop a strategic planning process with multi-year implementation.
? Continue to anticipate, communicate and mitigate risk.
? Ensure successful implementation of the ADMHS system change effort.
? Continue activities of the drought task force.
? Fully implement the 2015 and 2016 Legislative priorities.
? Establish robust internal and external communications strategy, including public awareness of County services
and participation in the budgetary process.
? Identify funding options for capital projects including debt issuance.
? Conduct in-depth departmental budget reviews with the Board of Supervisors.
? Evaluate the County’s Retiree Medical Program including a revised funding plan.
? Enhance internal and external data management systems (Public Portal, CIP and Budgetary tools).
? Transition leadership of the Community Services Department to new director.
Complete the Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (THIRA) for the Operational Area.
? Complete the 5-year upgrade to the Multi-Jurisdiction Hazard Mitigation Plan.
? Utilizing funding from the Homeland Security Grant Program, continue the build-out of the Santa Cruz Island
Public Safety Communications Project.
? Maintain efficiencies and safeguards through sustained regulatory oversight of Oil & Gas activities throughout the
Operational Area.
? Sustain necessary training and exercise activities for the Red, White, and Blue EOC Response Teams.
? Provide excellent customer service when providing support to local jurisdictions and day-to-day activities at the
Emergency Operations Center.
? Complete required updates to departmental Continuity of Operations Plans (COOP).
? Participate in nuclear preparedness drills, exercises and outreach programs fulfilling our obligation as part of the
requirements of the Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant.
? Continue monitoring drought situation and active pursuit of emergency response, as needed.
? The Office of Emergency Management will be establishing a North County office in 2015 in partnership with the
City of Santa Maria which will serve as an additional training and exercise facility and outreach center for the
Operational Area.
Implement workforce planning strategies to ensure the County can continue to “get the right people in the right
jobs at the right time” in order to deliver County services.
? Identify and implement key strategies for increasing employee engagement throughout the organization to assist
in retaining talent and improving County performance through its workforce.
? Negotiate fiscally-responsible successor Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with: Deputy Sheriffs
Association, Sheriff’s Managers Association, Union of American Physicians & Dentists, Firefighters Local 2046,
Engineers & Technicians Association, Service Employees International Union Local 620, and Service Employees
International Local 721; as well as negotiating salary reopeners and/or equity adjustments within approved
financial parameters with: Service Employees International Union Local 620, Service Employees International
Union Local 721, Engineers & Technicians Association, and the Civil Attorneys Association. Implement a new
market-based management classification and compensation system designed to move management salaries to
market for similar public sector jobs in a reasonable amount of time, based on performance and achievement of
results, and in a fiscally prudent manner.
? Complete implementation of Project Paperless – an efficiency effort to convert employee personnel files to an
electronic format.
? Implement a web-based onboarding system to maximize the efficiency of the hiring process and provide a
positive experience for new employees.
Continue to advise and assist the Jail Project Team in the utilization of an Owner-Controlled Insurance Program
(OCIP) for the Jail Project which offers a potential cost savings of about $1 million.
? Reduce Risk Management costs through preventative measures, including regular detailed claim and trend
reporting to departments.
? Maintain focus on Workers’ Compensation pool of self insured claims for continued cost containment of these
claims.
? Develop a strategy to stem and ultimately reduce the recent growth in current WC premium costs.
Northern Branch Jail: Provide legal support to move forward: $96.1 million AB900 phase, to potential award of
construction contracts; and $43.5 million SB1022 phase, to schematic design and design development.
? Litigate against: 1) United Launch Alliance’s property tax appeals, where potential impact to County General Fund is
about $6.5 million; 2) civil rights and tort damages cases, including six already set for trial before March 2016; 3) State’s
FY 06/07, 07/08 and 08/09 audits of ADMHS Medi-Cal programs, which claim about $8.2 million of disallowed costs; and,
4) Fee-To-Trust decisions by Bureau of Indian Affairs for the “Camp 4” property.
? Psychiatric Health Facility (“PHF”): With misdemeanor defendants mentally incompetent to stand trial (“IST”), advise
and litigate to stop their placement at PHF sooner, when no longer compelled or authorized by law.
? Water: Provide legal support about: potential extension of 1963 Water Supply Agreement; proposed Bay Delta
Conservation Plan; and planning under the 2014 “Sustainable Groundwater Management Act.”
? Legal support for “land use” projects, including: Goleta Valley Community Plan; Isla Vista Master Plan; Gaviota Coast
Plan; Montecito Design Guidelines; Winery Ordinance Update; GPS Ventucopa Rock Plant; Resource Recovery Project
at Tajiguas Landfill; and Pacific Coast Energy’s Oil Drilling and Production Plan.
Northern Branch Jail Project: Continue intensive legal support: to move the $96.1 million AB900 phase forward to the
potential award of construction contracts; and to move the $43.5 million SB1022 phase forward to schematic design
and design development
United Launch Alliance property tax assessment appeals: Continue to defend against a multi-year series of property
tax assessment appeals, where the County General Fund’s share of the total disputed tax dollars would be about $6.5
million.
Federal civil rights and state tort litigation: Defend civil actions for damages against the County and its employees,
including six cases that already are set for trial between now and March 2016.
State audit of ADMHS Medi-Cal programs: Continue litigation of State’s SFY 06/07 and 07/08 audits, which involve
about $5.2 million of disallowed costs. Begin preparation for formal hearing on appeals and expected litigation of
State’s SFY 08/09 audit, in which State’s audit claims about $3 million due from the County.
Fee-To-Trust appeal for the about 1,428-acre “Camp 4” property: Pursuant to Board direction, protect the County’s
land use, regulatory, environmental and property tax interests by continuing appropriate administrative appeal and
litigation to challenge both the “Finding of No Significant Impact” and the Notice of Decision of intent to accept this
property into trust.
Resource Recovery Project: With this $60 million project’s proposed use of conversion technology to extend the life
of the Tajiguas Landfill by 20 years, continue significant legal support for: compliance with the California
Environmental Quality Act; proposed Joint Powers Agreement; and potential vendor’s contract.
Self-insured workers’ compensation “tail claims” litigation: Continue to reduce the County’s self-insured liability for
workers’ compensation injuries occurring before July 2010, by economically resolving the 24 remaining litigated cases,
which include some of the most costly and difficult to resolve.
Psychiatric Health Facility (“PHF”): With misdemeanor defendants found incompetent to stand trial (“IST”), within
existing resources increase support to ADMHS to end PHF placements sooner, when PHF confinement no longer
warranted.
“Laura’s Law:” If the Board chooses to implement “Assisted Outpatient Treatment Services,” provide legal support to
ADMHS for: their development of procedures; any necessary training; petition filing; and in-court advocacy for orders
authorizing and continuing assisted outpatient treatment.
Investigate and prosecute suspects accessing and distributing child pornography.
? Investigate denied firearm background checks which include prior convictions, court orders, and mental health
adjudications.
? Work collaboratively with countywide partners to provide outreach and education to abate human trafficking.
? Reduce sexual exploitation among youthful offenders through the creation of Girls’ Court, a multi-agency
collaboration designed to target females at high risk of exploitation and recidivism.
? Establish a Real Estate Advisory Team of real estate professionals with the goal of identifying trends in order to
deter fraudulent activity.
? Reduce automobile theft and insurance fraud through the formation of a multi-agency task force.
? Successfully prosecute both medical providers and employers who commit Workers’ Compensation fraud.
? Upgrade IT to include a web-based case management system, court interface, and desktop scanners.
Develop focus group to identify new case management improvements to ensure final product meets all
department needs, including simplicity of use and comprehensive detail of information and reporting.
? Upgrade servers, server storage unit, and current 20-year-old case management database system to a new webbased
interface. The case management upgrade will provide improved technology for data entry and retrieval, as
well as provide detailed case reporting, and ensure evidence based reporting.
Take a proactive approach toward reducing sexual exploitation among youthful offenders through the creation
of Girls’ Court. It is a District Attorney led, multi-agency collaborative effort designed to target youthful offenders
who are sexually exploited or at high risk of exploitation and recidivism. Collaboration between the District
Attorney, Probation, Alcohol Drug and Mental Health Services, law enforcement agencies, Public Defender, Child
Welfare Services, and community-based organizations will identify those at high risk. Participants will receive
programming and services specific to their unique needs under supervision of the Santa Maria Juvenile Court.
? Reduce automobile theft and automobile insurance fraud through the formation of a new task force in
collaboration with the Santa Maria Police Department. The District Attorney has received grant funding from the
Department of Insurance for the investigation and prosecution of automobile insurance fraud. The joint goal is to
make the County roads safer and ensure a reduction in these crimes.
? Continue to successfully manage witness safety and availability in gang violence cases.
? Investigate and prosecute suspects within the community who are accessing and disseminating child
pornography.
? Investigate denied firearm background checks which include prior convictions, court orders, and mental health
adjudications.
? Utilize grant funding for a Victim Advocate who will provide services to human trafficking victims and work with
countywide partners to provide outreach and education to agencies who interface with at-risk youth.
? The Real Estate Fraud unit will continue to work on the establishment of the Santa Barbara County Real Estate
Fraud Advisory Team, which will consist of real estate professionals who will assist the unit in identifying real
estate fraud trends and practices in the County of Santa Barbara.
Increase enrollments of offenders and their families to the Affordable Care Act and connect out of custody
offenders to case plan specific services.
? Complete the implementation of Motivational Interviewing, a goal-oriented and client-centered counseling style
for eliciting behavior change by helping clients to explore and resolve ambivalence, including the certification of
staff proficiency and quality assurance review to ensure fidelity with the model.
? Increase community understanding of, and access to, the many aspects of probation services through effective
community outreach and the use of technology and social media.
Focus Area: Providing Quality Information and Technology Systems Support for Departmental Operations
? Virtualize all Probation Web and File Servers to reduce maintenance cost and increase fault tolerance.
? Convert treatment and chronos modules in the Department’s case management system to the latest vendor
update.
? Complete implementation of Department of Justice (DOJ) Smart Justice System.
Focus Area: Providing Quality Staffing for Departmental Operations
? Review the Department’s Administrative Policy Manual and develop process to ensure ongoing updates.
? Enhance officer safety through increased and effective training.
Focus Area: Providing Quality Support Services and Financing for Departmental Operations
? Implement workflow within the Revenue Recovery Unit related to Franchise Tax Board Court Ordered Debt
collections referrals for adult offender victim restitution accounts that are delinquent by 90 or more days.
Successfully maintain Departmental efficiency through appropriate staffing of the Los Prietos Boys Camp and
program to meet service level and facility needs through a staffing reduction from a 52 bed to a 40 bed maximum
population.
? Increase rehabilitation of approximately 100 juvenile probationers committed to LPBC by ensuring that 90% will
successfully graduate from the program.
? Through the effective use of alternatives to detention, maintain an average daily population of the juvenile
detention and treatment facilities at or below staffed capacity (120).
? Ensure that LPBC and SMJH remain compliant with the recommendations of PREA.
? Increase the opportunity for female specific programming and interventions for youth in the SMJH and at the
ARRCs and evaluate the program effectives and fidelity with evidence based models.
? Increase programming hours of wards beyond Title 15 minimum standards and to greatest degree possible within
available resources and staffing.
? The Santa Maria Juvenile Hall will improve consistency and collaboration among stakeholders in responses to
positive and negative behavior issues and reduce reliance on room time and separation of youth through a
formal response plan in addressing negative behavior and issues to ensure consistency between policy and
practice.
Focus Area: Providing Evidenced Based and Effective Programs and Services for Juvenile Offenders and Their Families
? Assess and evaluate Santa Barbara County’s data to determine if racial and ethnic disproportionality exist in the
juvenile justice system.
? Implementation of a Comprehensive Commitment Program for females in the Juvenile Justice System including
the evaluation the effectiveness of female specific programming used by Santa Barbara County Probation
through an evaluation conducted by University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB).
Focus Area: Providing Evidenced Based and Effective Programs and Services for Adult Offenders
? Increase the use of medication assisted treatment, detox, Secure Continuous Remote Alcohol Monitoring
(SCRAM), and outpatient treatment in lieu of incarceration for the severely addicted.
? Increase the fidelity and availability of evidence-based program slots in the community by completing
assessments and evaluations on all adult programs and identify use of evidence-based models and fidelity to the
model.
? Refine the implementation of the Violation Sanction Matrix and begin focusing on the development of Incentives
to enhance the protocol.
Represent court-appointed clients in all matters where there is no legal impediment to doing so
? Process all resentencing petitions for Proposition 47 applicants expeditiously
? Implement our new case management system and integrate it with the systems used by our other justice
partners
? Collaborate with the Community Corrections Partnership, the Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council, and
community providers to improve the functioning of our Adult and Juvenile justice systems
Expand use of volunteers to meet non-core functions, freeing support staff to focus on higher-priority matters.
? Continue successful implementation of 2011 Criminal Justice Realignment (AB 109) through collaboration with the
Courts, Sheriff, Probation and defense attorneys to find and place clients in appropriate alternative sentencing
programs. Through this collaboration, each agency is able to serve a different segment of the jail population to
achieve the best outcome for individual clients.
? Increase departmental efficiency through analysis and evaluation of business practices to achieve the maximum
benefit from the implementation of a new case management system.
Expand the Volunteer Attorney program to enable staff attorneys to focus on higher-priority core tasks.
? Investigate creation of a post-Bar fellowship program to provide additional in-depth support to the attorneys on a
cost-effective basis.
? Expand use of outside speakers and experts on various legal, ethical, and trial practices topics to provide high
quality training to the attorney staff at minimal cost to the County.
? Continue partnership with other Public Defender Offices to participate in web-based legal education and to
require attorneys within the office to provide continuing legal education to other attorneys in our office on a
regular basis.
? Continue to collaborate with the Courts, Mental Health, Probation, Sheriff, District Attorney, and various
community organizations to improve the functioning of the Therapeutic Courts. These court programs have
proven to be successful at rehabilitation, reducing recidivism, enhancing public safety, and helping individuals to
become productive members of the community. This helps reduce jail overcrowding and saves the County
money.
Work with school districts to identify areas where outcomes in the juvenile court can be improved by increased
collaboration between the two agencies.
? Work with the Truancy Program to encourage both minors and parents to recognize the importance of
participating in school programs.
Grand Jury: The Santa Barbara County Grand Jury will continue its major role of: government oversight;
investigation into citizen complaints; and determination of whether evidence presented by the District
Attorney is of a sufficient nature to warrant a person to stand trial in court when a Criminal Grand Jury is
impaneled.
? Pretrial Services: Begin using the Virginia Pretrial Risk Assement Instrument (VPRAI) to determine arrestee’s
probability of appearing at the next scheduled hearing and likelihood of reoffending if released on their own
recognizance. The Department will explore additional possibilities for supervised pretrial release through
partnerships with Probation and the Sheriff’s Department in employing electronic monitoring, alcohol
monitoring, GPS Tracking, Home Visitation, and substance abuse testing.
? Enhanced Collections: The Enhanced Collections Unit will investigate using a new Interactive Voice Response
(IVR) system that will interact with the Court’s new case management system to enable better collection
methods for the County and Court.
? Conflict Defense: Continue to protect the rights and liberties guaranteed by the Constitutions of California
and the United States by providing defense of indigent defendants when the Public Defender has declared
there is a conflict of interest.
2015-17 Objectives
Functions of the Civil and Criminal Grand Jury
The Santa Barbara County Grand Jury will continue its three predominant functions:
? Government oversight;
? Investigation into citizen complaints;
? Determination of whether evidence presented by the District Attorney is of a sufficient nature to warrant a
person to stand trial in court when a Criminal Grand Jury is impaneled.
Pretrial Services
? Begin using calibrated VPRAI in determining arrestee’s probability of appearing at the next scheduled hearing and
likelihood of reoffending if released on their own recognizance.
? Consolidate supervision of different pretrial units under one senior pretrial services supervisor.
? Standardize practices, procedures, and opportunities for pretrial release countywide.
? Explore additional possibilities for supervised pretrial release through partnerships with Probation and the
Sheriff’s Department in employing electronic monitoring, alcohol monitoring, GPS tracking, home visitation, and
substance abuse testing.
Enhanced Collections
Court Special Services will begin the development of a written Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the
County that implements and enhances the collection of court-ordered debt and other monies owed under a court
order.
The Enhanced Collection Unit is looking into the cost and benefits of a new Interactive Voice Response (IVR) system
that will interact with the Court’s new case management system to enable better collection methods for the County
and Court. The former IVR system is no longer supported by the vendor and is not functioning properly.
Monitor investigative costs more closely to ensure consistency in approval of payment and recommend caps on
the authorized expenditures.
? Establish guidelines for various investigative expenses and expert witnesses by reviewing other counties’
practices.
Continue to implement recommendations identified in the 2012 Citygate Deployment and Departmental
Performance Audit Report to enhance critical emergency service delivery.
? Address longstanding capital projects backlog.
? Explore Dispatch Center improvements and options.
? Participate with State and local Fire, EMS and Law officials to develop active shooter protocols and training for all
first responders.
? Continue contract helicopter service at Santa Barbara Airport for Red Flag or High Fire Danger days.
Continue to follow Citygate recommendations to enhance critical emergency service delivery.
? Address the longstanding capital projects backlog.
? Explore Dispatch Center improvements and options.
? Update Department Strategic Plan.
? Enter into a Memorandum of Understanding with the City of Goleta to construct and staff new Station 10 in
Goleta.
? Continue succession planning efforts and update the Career Development Guide to ensure sworn personnel have
a guide/roadmap to strengthen their leadership, emergency operations, and management skills.
? Develop an outreach program to explore new avenues for attracting and recruiting female firefighters through
Allan Hancock and other local colleges.
? Reorganize Finance/Logistics Sections.
Review, perform a time study and update Fire Prevention inspection and permit fees.
? Identify hazardous fuel reduction projects in the State Responsibility Areas (SRA) to implement pending CEQA
guidelines.
? Ensure that Local Responsibility Area defensible space inspections comply with Public Resources Code 4192 and
mirror inspections done in the State Responsibility Areas.
Develop and provide a large scale emergency incident command training to all Chief Officers and Executive Team
members.
? Participate with State and local Fire, EMS and Law officials to develop active shooter protocols and training for all
first responders.
? Purchase a reserve ladder truck and replace the Hazardous Materials Response Vehicle.
? Continue contract helicopter service at Santa Barbara Airport for Red Flag or High Fire Danger days.
? Strengthen the Fire Department’s Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) and Paramedic programs through
enhanced training programs, administrative oversight and a continuous quality improvement (CQI) program.
Replace current outdated Records Management System.
? Implement Smart Justice application to allow access to state-wide criminal justice data while in the field.
? Replace Live Scan system to maximize the ability to acquire finger and palm prints.
? Successfully bid and break ground for the Northern Branch Jail.
? Replace outdated Jail Management Systems to allow for future growth in the Jail system.
? Initiate a selection process to choose the successor vehicle to the Ford Crown Victoria patrol vehicle, which is no
longer manufactured.
? Enhance coordination and enforcement efforts with Homeland Security and other partnering agencies in the
interdiction of panga boat smuggling along the Santa Barbara County coastline.
Research best practices for Records Management Systems and replace current outdated system, to conform to
updated technologies and become more efficient in preparing, processing, and disseminating reports.
? Implement Smart Justice application for the department to allow Law Enforcement access to state-wide criminal
justice data while in the field.
? Replace Live Scan system with current technology to maximize the ability to acquire finger and palm prints for
comparison with Stat database.
Go out to bid and break ground for the Northern Branch Jail.
? Research best practices for Jail Management Systems and replace current outdated system to conform to current
technologies and allow for future growth in the Jail system.
Initiate a selection process to choose the successor vehicle to the Ford Crown Victoria patrol vehicle, which is no
longer manufactured.
? Enhance coordination and enforcement efforts with Homeland Security and other partnering agencies in the
interdiction of panga boat smuggling along the Santa Barbara County coastline.
? Develop and implement an on-line citizen reporting tool. This web-based reporting system will leverage limited
resources and help make crime reporting efficient.
? Develop and implement the WAVE Radio system, funded by a Homeland Security Grant, that allows deputies to
utilize cell phone technology to tie into the County radio system.
Continue to implement “best practices” for security in the Courts, including good communication with Courts
personnel and the District Attorney’s Office.
Coordinate with our community medical service providers across the County to align medical services delivery and
capacity and to ensure access for those with existing health care coverage and those newly enrolled in health
care coverage.
? Increase vaccination rates in schools and expand immunization related education.
? Develop a new emergency and non-emergency ambulance service agreement for advanced life support and
prehospital care.
? Develop and implement improvements in the Animal Services program by building on the program strengths and
the recommendations of the American Humane Association comprehensive assessment and establishing and
implementing standards and expectations for all Animal Services classifications.
? Prepare for emerging disease response (Ebola, Measles, etc.) with development of protocols, an information
phone line, and regular communication with health care partners.
? Collaborate with all Interagency Policy Council (IAPC) departments to provide a safety net of services.
Implement International Classification of Diseases 10 (ICD-10) diagnosis coding by the mandated federal deadline
of October 1, 2015. The project has and will include software installations, staff training, workflow changes, and
testing.
? Finalize the department’s Strategic planning process; developing a plan focusing on priorities and goals through
the engagement of staff and stakeholders.
? Develop plans, evaluate, and implement a more robust safety and infection control program for staff, clients, and
patients to ensure proper immunizations, training, and the availability of protective equipment.
? Commence the migration of the Department’s Electronic Health Record (EHR) from General Electric’s (GE)
Centricity to GE’s all-in-one Centricity Practice Solution (CPS). This effort will allow the department to position
itself with GE’s go-forward product for EHR.
Continue to work with community medical service providers across the County to align medical services delivery
and capacity and to ensure access for those with existing health care coverage and those newly enrolled in health
care coverage.
? Ensure achievement of Level III Patient Centered Medical Home accreditation for all health care centers.
? Continue to define and expand implementation of the Electronic Health Record to provide electronic
communication among PHD, its referral providers, and hospitals (health information exchange).
? Integrate Behavioral Health services into the primary care programs at additional health center sites.
? Complete a successful HRSA Service Area Competition (SAC) application for federal funding to continue support
of the provision of comprehensive primary care services to our underserved communities.
Continue efforts to ensure all eligible indigent patients are screened and enrolled in health care coverage
including the expansion of outreach into marginalized target populations such as homeless, limited English
proficiency, migrant farm workers, and others.
? Continue to expand and redefine the Benefits and Referral Center to improve relations and communications with
referral providers in the community.
Implement a new computer system for the Public Health Laboratory that will decrease time recording test
specimens and recording testing results. Information between healthcare providers and the laboratory will be
streamlined through the automated system.
? Increase integration of services and response to various sexually transmitted diseases to maximize our efforts
with a population at risk for multiple conditions. Partner delivered patient therapy is one strategy of response to
be implemented.
? Implement changes in the Child Health and Disability Program (CHDP) in collaboration with CenCal Health, the
State Department of Public Health and the federal government which are also making changes in their programs.
? Increase vaccination rates in schools and expand immunization related education.
? Expand quality education on cervical cancer detection to medical providers.
Expand response to potentially hazardous waste sites in the Certified Unified Program Agencies (CUPA) program
to assure all sites are properly inspected and the safety and health of residents is maintained.
? Enhance analysis of data of emergency service response to inform community health decision making and better
serve the community.
? Develop a new emergency and non-emergency ambulance service agreement for advanced life support and
prehospital care.
? Develop and test community specific evacuation, transportation, and sheltering plans for the North County and
South County in coordination with first responders, city government, and Emergency Medical Agency providers.
Develop and implement improvements in the Animal Services program by building on the program strengths and
the recommendations of the American Humane Association comprehensive assessment and establishing and
implementing standards and expectations for all Animal Services classifications.
? Continue to build an appreciative culture by focusing on positives and strengths with staff and volunteers
through written and verbal communications, facilitated meetings, and celebration of successes.
? Expand efforts of Project PetSafe to encourage responsible pet ownership and vaccinations, licensing, spay and
neuter, and micro-chipping of pets.
Alcohol and Other Drug Program
? Development of Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) services in Isla Vista
? Establishment of Intensive Outpatient Treatment (IOT) services in every region of the county
Administration and Support
? Creation of a comprehensive behavioral health system that integrates mental health services, Alcohol and Other
Drug (AOD) services, physical health care services and support services
? Develop the capacity to measure/evaluate systems, programs and individual outcomes with clinically driven data
Mental Health Community Services Program
? Implement crisis stabilization units in North and South County and a respite residential program in South County
Mental Health Inpatient Services
? Complete planning of a Consolidated Mental Health Treatment Center to provide for additional inpatient beds in
Santa Maria.
? Improve client outcomes and reduce lengths of stay through the expansion of the crisis service system through SB
82 awarded funding.
Mental Health Outpatient Services
? Establish evidence-based practices delivered through specialty teams at all adult and children’s outpatient clinics.
? Expand Forensic Programming and Homeless Services Countywide
? Expand partnership with law enforcement to co-respond in the field to collectively address those in crisis.
? Collaborate with Interagency Policy Counsel Departments in the delivery of safety net services.
Enhance service to clients with complex needs, continue the multi-year process to create a comprehensive and
integrated behavioral health system that includes mental health services, substance abuse services, physical
health care services, and support services.
? Create, execute and sustain strategic initiatives within the Department through continual measures of outcomes
of care, program evaluation, and enhance training opportunities.
? Enhance collaborative efforts to transform organizational culture with ongoing outreach and involvement in
program development to staff, clients, families, and community-based providers, resulting in improved client
outcomes.
? Enhance capacity to measure and evaluate systems, programs, and individual outcomes.
? Provide structure and establish a framework for care and recovery by development of defined long-term
organizational strategic plans.
Improve client outcomes and reduce lengths of stay through the expansion of the crisis service system through
the SB 82 awarded funding.
? Increased access to inpatient care by improved utilization management of the PHF reducing lengths of stay and
stepping down level of care as quickly as possible.
? Complete planning of a Consolidated Mental Health Treatment Center to provide for additional inpatient beds in
Santa Maria.
? Increased access to services by the creation of additional housing options within the community to allow for
restoration of competency on an outpatient basis, when clinically appropriate, rather than extending inpatient
lengths of stay.
Establish evidence-based practices, delivered through specialty teams at all adult and children’s outpatient clinics,
to individualize services based on unique needs.
? Equip all outpatient adult clinics with fully developed co-occurring services to serve individuals with serious
mental health, substance use, and medical conditions through a comprehensive system of recovery and
resiliency.
? Expand community care resources by increasing the number of homeless shelter and board and care bed
resources.
? Enhance communication and collaboration with Community Based Organizations (CBO) providers to review and
update all outpatient service contracts to define and improve clinical client outcomes.
? Expand Forensic Programming and Homeless Services Countywide to improve continuity of care, divert
individuals from jail, and reduce acute hospitalizations.
Integrate the principles of MHSA into all outpatient programs and services that includes adherence to established
evidence- based practices delivered through specialty teams at all adult and children’s outpatient clinics.
? Implement a crisis stabilization unit and crisis residential facility in the South County.
? Reduce length of stay within psychiatric health facility through development of appropriate community supports
and housing.
? Transform access and assessment services provided by CARES clinics into mobile assessment teams in all three
regions.
? Expand the MHSA innovations programs to transform the justice alliance program into a forensic system of care
and expand services to the homeless in each geographic region.
? Utilize MHSA housing funds to create permanent housing units.
? Develop strategies to expand safe and stable housing options within Santa Barbara County for complex clients.
Further integrate substance abuse services with the outpatient MHSA-funded programs.
? Implement State approved and expanded Drug Medi-Cal services.
? Increase the opportunity for female specific programming and interventions for youth in the Santa Maria Juvenile
Hall and at the ARRCs.
? Coordinate and facilitate the Pew-MacArthur Results First Initiative which is designed to help assess the costs and
benefits of intervention options available to the criminal justice system and allow for the use of data to make
decisions based on proven results.
Refine hiring and training strategies for staff to continue meeting critical State mandates. Refine business
processes to ensure timely and accurate benefit determinations are made. Evaluate new employee training,
CalFresh business processes, and Benefit Service Center (BSC) call center infrastructure to identify opportunities
for improvement.
? Establish a contract with Transition House to enhance Family Advocacy Services in our Santa Barbara location.
Respond to abuse of elderly and dependent adults by working with the Multi-Disciplinary Team of public agencies,
and establishing a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Public Guardian. Work with the Human
Trafficking Task Force to serve child victims of commercial sexual exploitation. Work with community partners to
improve the CalFresh utilization rate.
? Incorporate Safety Organized Practice principles into Child Welfare Services (CWS) social work. Expand Family
Drug Treatment Court program to South County.
? Collaborate with Inter-Agency Policy Council (IAPC) Departments to provide a safety net of services.
Achieve a structurally balanced budget by maximizing revenues and controlling costs.
? Assess our training modules to support trainees in their employment success and in providing excellent customer
service.
Complete comprehensive review of the CalFresh program delivery design through the CalFresh Utilization
workgroup so that more of the County's low-income residents can obtain and retain the food aid they need.
? Continue expanding our Family Advocacy Services program by establishing a new contract with Transition House
for our Santa Barbara location.
? Implement all required components of the Workforce Investment and Opportunity Act, including the
establishment of new Board and service delivery system.
Focus on refining business processes to ensure timely and accurate benefit determinations are made and
customer service is improved.
? Pursue additional infrastructure solutions to improve the customer experience for an estimated 150,000 annual
calls to the Benefit Service Center.
Implement a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between APS and the local Public Guardian program for
coordination of services regarding the investigation and disposition of suspected elder and dependent adult
abuse.
? Implement a qualitative case review process for CWS to examine the continuum of Child Welfare services using a
framework focused on safety, permanency, and well-being.
? Fully develop the countywide APS Multi-Disciplinary Team (MDT) on Crime by bringing together those public
agencies that can directly impact the discovery and investigation of crimes involving dependent and elderly adults
in order to remediate injury and convict criminal offenders.
? Fully incorporate the principles of the Safety Organized Practice (SOP) program into CWS social work practice.
? Improve Family Reunification outcomes for CWS clients through the expansion of the successful Family Drug
Treatment Court program to South County.
? Coordinate development of local interagency protocols with the Human Trafficking Task Force for the provision
of services to children who are victims of commercial sexual exploitation.
Strengthen partnerships and build referral systems to community providers; provide staff with more in-depth
knowledge of county programs and processes to better assist customers when referring them to other county
agencies; help other departments better understand how CSS can help their customers; implement electronic
filing system with Courts and Clerk-Recorder-Assessor.
? Expand outreach activities to better inform community of resources available to them through CSS, such as
reaching out to new parents at hospitals, increasing the number of high schools that receive presentations, and
appearing at more community events.
? Focus on early intervention strategies as key to improving performance: in-house process and DNA services;
engaging both parents in the process; signing stipulations; setting expectations; getting the case on track from
the beginning to create a dependable routine for the customer. Take advantage of new data being provided by
State to monitor case management activities. Continue process improvement and technology enhancement
strategies.
? Collaborate with all interagency policy council departments to provide safety net of services.
Strengthen partnerships and build referral systems to community providers who can help our customers.
? Educate staff in changing regulations and provide more in-depth understanding of county programs and
processes to better assist customers referred to other county agencies for services.
? Identify contacts in other departments so that customers receiving services in multiple departments will be
efficiently led through the system.
? Reach out to other departments to help them better understand what Child Support Services can do for their
customers.
? Implement an electronic filing system with Courts and Clerk-Recorder-Assessor.
? Expand outreach activities to better inform the community of the resources available to them through Child
Support Services, such as reaching out to new parents at hospitals, increasing the number of high schools that
receive presentations, and appearing at more community events.
? Collaborate with Social Services to give Child Support information to applicants who do not qualify for cash aid.
? Focus on early intervention strategies as a key to improving performance: in-house process and DNA services;
engaging both parents early in the process, working with them to agree on child support amounts and sign
stipulations; setting expectations and following up immediately when a payment or court date is missed; getting
the case on track from the beginning to create a dependable routine for the customer.
? Take advantage of new data being provided by State to monitor activities related to case management.
? Continue process improvement and technology enhancement strategies to improve performance and overcome
technical barriers.
Continue to invest in high level of fiscal reporting and accountability.
? Promote evidence based strategies that help children become ready for kindergarten and report on investment
outcomes and impacts through a robust evaluation system.
? Leverage First 5’s funding and impact through partnership, collaboration, and capacity building of our funded and
non-funded partners to empower them to be leaders in the 0-5 serving social and educational sector.
? Proactively plan for anticipated decreasing revenue in ways that preserve First 5’s impact in the long-term.
? Leverage First 5 funds and secure additional funding to build the long term capacity of the 0-5 serving sector so
that their impact can last beyond the life of First 5 funding.
? Implement new communications strategies that help parents and key stakeholders understand their key role in
supporting the healthy development of children in the first five years of life.
? Expand the number of high-quality preschool and child care spaces.
Support the First 5 Children and Families Commission in their key role of overseeing Proposition 10 expenditures
in accordance with the priorities detailed in First 5’s strategic plan.
? Explore opportunities to decrease administrative operating costs in response to anticipated decreasing revenue
while preserving as much as possible First 5’s programmatic impacts.
? Ensure a high level of fiscal accountability and oversight in relation to the granting of funds for program purposes
and reporting on outcomes to ensure the effective and efficient use of tax payer dollars; compliance with State,
local, and other accounting and reporting requirements; and adherence to the will of California voters and
Proposition 10.
Provide greater access and transparency to interested parties by publishing data, results, and outcomes on an
ongoing basis on the Commission’s website and other direct communications venues.
? Revise current set of program indicators that track results so that they are easier to gather, better to
communicate, and more accurately reflect, the desired results that are hoped to be achieved.
? Increase the ability within First 5 and the broader community to measure outcomes and results on a longitudinal
basis.
Invest in evidence based programs and strategies serving children and families who are most in need.
? Promote, improve, and create systems of evaluating outcomes and results within the social service and
educational system serving children age 0-5 to allow for increased longitudinal measurement of program success
and to better inform future strategies.
? Implement a new strategy within First 5, in partnership with other funders and providers, to create increased
capacity and parental access to high quality preschool and childcare services.
? Explore and create new communications and strategies to increase revenue within the system serving 0-5 year
olds and their families to support healthy child development, kindergarten readiness, and increased public
support for efforts to meet the needs of children in the early years.
? Leverage First 5 funds and secure additional funding to build the long term capacity of the 0-5 serving sector so
that their impact can last beyond the life of First 5 funding.
? Implement new communications strategies that help parents and key stakeholders understand their key role in
supporting the healthy development of children in the first five years of life.
? Expand the number of high-quality preschool and child care spaces.
? Fully implement the new program to provide scholarships to parents who cannot currently afford high quality
preschool and child care services.
Adapt the current grower outreach, “Characteristics of a Good Applicator,” to train other types of pesticide
handlers such as structural pesticide businesses, maintenance gardener businesses, and greenhouse applicators.
The training provides pesticide handlers with scenario based education that focuses on situational awareness and
making a safe pesticide application.
? Assure staff is prepared to become certified through the U.S. Department of Agriculture Export Services program
as Accredited Certifying Officials for the U.S. Department of Agriculture and provide phytosanitary certification
services to the local agricultural industry in order to export their local agricultural products to other countries.
? Ensure additional staff members attain the Class “B” commercial driver’s license, in order to drive the
Department’s Weights & Measures program heavy capacity weight truck for livestock, winery and vehicle scale
inspection program.
? Achieve 100% pesticide use reporting by the agricultural and pest control industry directly into the CalAg System.
Administrative staff will work to ensure that 100% of the agricultural and pest control industry are making the
transition to entering their pesticide use reports into the CalAg permit system directly.
Also, the Administrative staff will work with the agricultural industry to ensure they are entering inspection data
directly into the Phytosanitary Certificate Issuance & Tracking System.
Adapt current grower outreach, “Characteristics of a Good Applicator,” to train other types of pesticide handlers,
such as structural pesticide businesses, maintenance gardener businesses, and greenhouse applicators. The training
provides pesticide handlers with scenario based education that focuses on situational awareness and making a safe
pesticide application.
Improve customer service for the Cuyama Valley growers, by scheduling appointments for issuance of 2015 Restricted
Material permits at the Cuyama Valley Family Resource Center.
In January 2015, the Agricultural Commissioner began scheduling monthly agricultural stakeholder roundtable
meetings. The meetings are intended to share information about local and statewide issues that are currently
impacting our agricultural industry. Agriculture stakeholders from each commodity group throughout the County are
invited along with State and Federal political representatives.
Participate in the first Spray Safe Event held in Santa Barbara County. This event is a commitment to safe farming
which was developed by growers and applicators to ensure worker safety and to protect the public health.
Collaborate with the citrus industry and growers to continue our outreach and education on the Asian Citrus Psyllid
(ACP) pest that vectors the Huanglongbing (HLB), the devastating disease of citrus trees.
Fill current vacancies with full time Agricultural Biologists, and emphasize training and retention efforts for all
positions to maintain core service levels and succession planning.
Acquire the required licensing as Agricultural Biologists, and assure that staff is prepared to become certified through
the U.S. Department of Agriculture Export Services program as Accredited Certifying Officials in order to provide
phytosanitary certification services to our local agricultural industry so that they can export their local agricultural
products.
Prepare and train department staff for the November 2016 Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant Emergency Response
Exercise.
Complete and implement development and testing of the CalPEAT’s statewide pesticide use enforcement data
management system by 2017.
Survey businesses, which include agricultural processing plants and wineries, to increase the number of businesses
that qualify for the County Wholesale Packer Program.
Establish an additional staff member with a Class “B” commercial drivers license, currently the department has only
one staff member with a Class “B” license. The license is required to drive the Department’s heavy capacity weight
truck which is used in the livestock, winery and vehicle scale inspection program.
Replace the aging 20-gallon Liquified Petroleum Gas (LPG) prover unit to a newer 25-gallon prover unit in order to
ensure appropriate testing of LPG meters.
Explore other resources and venues for developing broader outreach to educate the public on the Weights and
Measures program and how it affects everyone’s daily lives through their consumer protection programs.
Complete Community Plans currently in process:
o Eastern Goleta Valley Community Plan Update
o Gaviota Community Plan
o Isla Vista Master Plan
? Implement key measures of the 2015-23 Housing Element:
o Evaluate and adopt modifications to the Design Residential zone district standards to encourage and
incentivize the provision of affordable, special needs, and senior housing.
o Provide up to 35% density bonus for qualifying projects in the coastal zone consistent with State law.
o Amend the Zoning Ordinances to incorporate Reasonable Accommodation Policy standards to address the
needs for persons with disabilities.
o Evaluate and adopt modifications to the Zoning Ordinances to allow combined emergency shelters, single
room occupancy projects, treatment facilities, and temporary housing with a ministerial permit in some
zones.
? Complete conversion of microfiche permit records for online access.
? Ensure continued success of the Department through recruitment, development, and retention of staff.
Convert remaining historic microfiche records for online access.
? Begin conversion of paper file permits to digital records for online access for customers and staff.
? Continue department training program, focusing on newly hired staff.
? Continue succession planning actions for key management and supervisory positions.
? Evaluate use of credit cards for online and direct permit and invoice payments.
Review and update the procedures and oversight mechanisms for the permit compliance program Countywide.
This will ensure projects are built according to approved plans and that conditions implementing the County’s
Comprehensive Plan are completed.
? Implement electronic plan check to enhance customer service.
? Conduct simulated disaster training sessions to test current procedures and update current documentation for
conducting damage assessments following natural disasters. This project will ensure the Department remains
ready to assist its constituents in the post-disaster recovery process.
? Provide feedback to permitting staff from post-approval observations in the field to improve conditioning of
projects.
? Continue building on the cooperative relationship with the Division of Oil, Gas and Geothermal Resources and the
Regional Water Quality Control Board to facilitate more efficient permit processing for oil and gas and
remediation projects.
? Continue building on the cooperative relationship with the Federal Bureau of Safety and Environmental
Enforcement and Bureau of Ocean Energy Management to ensure that offshore operators maintain permit
compliance for the protection of human health and the environment.
Administer the Coastal Resource Enhancement Fund Grant Program, including preparing the annual status report
and conducting the 2016 competitive grant cycle process.
? Execute various Coastal Resource Enhancement Fund grant agreements with grantees who are awarded CREF
grants.
? Monitor grants awarded to outside agencies funded through the Coastal Resource Enhancement Fund to ensure
that the projects comply with their contracts and provide expected public benefits.
Bring package of liens for unpaid enforcement costs on longstanding violations to the Board of Supervisors for
consideration.
? Pursue additional enforcement resolution options for longstanding complex enforcement cases.
Complete local adoption hearings for the Gaviota Community Plan, the Eastern Goleta Valley Community Plan,
and the Isla Vista Master Plan and submit the plans to the Coastal Commission for review and certification.
? Complete adoption of the Winery Ordinance update.
Complete the Hollister–State Street streetscape plan.
? Complete the Santa Claus Lane Project, a master plan for streetscape improvements, safe beach access, and
parking improvements to enhance recreation and business opportunities along Santa Claus Lane.
? Begin implementation phase of the County’s Energy and Climate Action Plan, including the initiation of high
priority measures and tracking of greenhouse gas reductions to monitor the effectiveness of the plan.
? Begin implementation of the 2015-23 Housing Element, including a series of zoning ordinance amendments to
ensure consistency with State law and modifications to the Zoning Ordinance to encourage affordable special
needs and senior housing projects in the Design Residential zone.
? Complete adoption of the Conservation Element amendments addressing changes through the State rulemaking
process regarding important minerals.
? Conduct public outreach, prepare draft ordinance, and environmental review to streamline permitting for
agriculture and other uses on agriculturally zoned properties.
? Complete adoption of revised Montecito Design Guidelines to ensure the guidelines are responsive to emerging
design issues.
? Manage the Alternative Fuels grant project, including attending regional task force meetings. Complete a
regional plan which addresses alternative fuels infrastructure permitting, deployment, maintenance, inspection,
and incentives.
? Manage the Coastal Resiliency (Phase I) grant project, a multi-jurisdictional collaboration to model sea level rise
and potential hazards. Complete a Coastal Hazard Vulnerability Assessment and develop policies and programs to
mitigate impacts from coastal hazards.
? Complete the consistency rezoning of rural lands still under Ordinance 661 to appropriate zone districts in the
Land Use and Development Code. This project will eliminate the need for individual property owners to pursue
consistency rezones when applying for discretionary land use permits.
? Complete adoption of a countywide outdoor lighting ordinance, building upon work in recent community plans.
? Conduct research, public outreach, and ordinance development to address short-term vacation rentals.
? Complete the Airport Land Use Compatibility (ALUP) project to amend the Comprehensive Plan and Land Use and
Development Code to achieve consistency with the ALUP.
? Complete a Sign Ordinance update to comprehensively update the standards, consider new sign materials and
technologies, and clarify permitting requirements.
? Prepare and submit a Scenic Highway Designation application to Caltrans for a segment of Highway 101 through
Gaviota.
? Prepare and submit an application to the US Census Bureau to designate Eastern Goleta Valley as a Census
Designated Place prior to the next decennial census (in 2020).
? Pursue grants to fund additional long range planning work prioritized in the work program.
? Conduct research and public outreach for update of the Circulation Element.
? Complete California Coastal Commission certification process for the Summerland Community Plan.
Strategic Planning for actions if the 2014-15 Winter remains dry
? Address State Water Project issues with input from the CEO and Board of Supervisors
? Complete Water Supply review to determine available options
? Certify the Tajiguas Resource Recovery Project EIR
? Create Joint Powers Authority to oversee the Tajiguas Resource Recovery Project
? Complete the design of the Laguna County Sanitation District Master Plan
? Prepare for and implement in a timely manner the additional funding the Board has designated to deferred
maintenance
? Continue pursuing partnerships with the private sector to determine and utilize cost effective pavement
preservation strategies to maximize the use of funds
? Implement the new permits accounting system with tracking controls and create metrics for effectiveness
? Continue working with UCSB on developing internship program to increase number, completeness, and
consistency of dataset available to the general public and professional surveyors
Initiate and complete fee study of Transportation Encroachment Permits and County Surveyors Office.
? Complete implementation of credit card process for Transportation Encroachment Permits.
? Review the structure of the Public Works Administration & Finance Division and recommend changes as needed.
Complete the reorganization of the Maintenance road yards. Develop practices and metrics for success in the
yards and begin the process of measuring them and implementing changes as needed to meet goals.
? Implement the new permits accounting system with tracking controls and create metrics for effectiveness.
? Complete an asset management plan that includes robust databases and procedures for tracking and maintaining
backlog for hardscape and culverts in a similar way to roadways.
? Prepare for and implement in a timely manner the additional funding the Board has designated to deferred
maintenance; specifically for Roads. Continue pursuing partnerships with the private sector to determine and
utilize cost effective pavement preservation strategies to maximize the use of these additional funds.
? Continue to seek new funding sources and new methods and processes to help perform the mission of the
Division with limited resources.
Provide mandated surveying services to County Government, survey professionals and general public.
? Perform County Surveyors Office fee study and implement new schedule.
? Continue working with UCSB on developing internship program to increase number, completeness and
consistency of dataset available to the general public and professional surveyors using the Interactive GIS
Surveyor Information System customer service tool.
? Manage County Surveyor’s budget to insure the division finishes with a positive balance at the end of the fiscal
year.
Address Drought issues with leadership and technical competence.
? Monitor water supply / drought issues closely; support CEO as needed.
? Address State Water Project issues with input from the CEO and Board of Supervisors.
? Strategic planning for actions if the 2014-15 Winter and Spring seasons remains dry.
? Continue towards completion of the Lower Mission Creek Project construction below US 101.
? Complete Water Supply Alternatives Study as directed by the Board of Supervisors for future water supply
options for the County.
Certify EIR for the Resource Recovery Project proposed at Tajiguas Landfill.
? Negotiate contract with vendor for the Resource Recovery Project proposed at Tajiguas including preparation of
necessary documents and review of financial and technical information.
? Create a joint powers authority for the administration of the Resource Recovery Project proposed at Tajiguas
Landfill.
? Complete installation of Isla Vista Street Lights.
Complete the design of the Laguna County Sanitation District Master Plan.
? Continue to implement technologies that allow the division to be more effective and innovative.
? Continue to engage and participate in legislation that effects the Division.
Complete construction of new restroom and boardwalk at Arroyo Burro Beach.
? Complete Coastal Development permit process for the Goleta Beach project.
? Complete schematic for beach access and public facilities at Santa Claus Lane.
? Cachuma Lake objectives; complete design of water and wastewater treatment plants, sewer lift station #2, and
installation of new vacation rental cabins.
? Jalama Beach objectives; provide affordable accommodations for the public and refurbish restrooms.
? Engage 100 County cultural nonprofits in the American for the Arts “Arts and Economic Prosperity V” study
defining the economic impact of nonprofit arts and cultural organizations and their audiences in Santa Barbara
County.
? Facilitate certification of eligible families for the remaining three units at Preserves at San Marcos.
? Provide Casas de las Flores $1.2 million in HOME funds to construct 42 units of housing for low-income
farmworkers and their families in the City of Carpinteria.
? Develop with County Continuum of Care (CoC) agencies a coordinated entry system and develop system-wide
performance measures. Renew existing 14 CoC projects for a total of $1.48 million in grant funding.
? Increase coordinated energy efficiency assistance to low and moderate income residents.
In the next fiscal year, the Administration and Support division will complete projects and explore new opportunities
to improve Departmental operations, staff training, and program implementation.
? Implement training workshops to improve customer service and relations and provide professional training
opportunities for staff.
? Expand the online reservation system to allow an online cancellation process which will create greater
efficiencies.
? Update and provide revisions to the Park policies manual and begin the development of a Community Services
Department policies and procedures manual.
? Provide oversight and direction in the development of capital and deferred maintenance improvements.
? Continue to improve and enhance loan, compliance and fiscal monitoring for all Housing and grant programs,
including HOME, Community Development Block Grants (CDBG), and Emergency Solutions Grant programs (ESG).
The Parks division will improve public access and user experience at County parks.
? Continue to provide revisions to the Park policies manual and development of a Community Services Department
policies and procedures manual.
? At Cachuma Lake, Parks will do the following;
o Complete the design of various facilities at Cachuma Lake including the water and wastewater treatment
plants, sewer lift station #2 and electrical upgrades at RV hookup sites.
o Complete installation of new Vacation Rental Cabins at Cachuma Lake.
? At Jalama Beach, Parks will do the following;
o Design and replace the Jalama Beach restrooms to better serve the public.
o Design upgrades to Jalama Beach Park to include affordable accommodations and provide additional
facilities for the public.
o Work with Vandenberg Air Force Base and the Pacific Railroad to obtain permits, design, and completely
replace the only fresh water supply line to the Jalama camping park.
? Complete construction of the new Arroyo Burro Restroom.
? Design and upgrade the Arroyo Burro Boardwalk project for increased public safety.
? Complete design of the Santa Claus Lane Beach Access.
? Complete the environmental review and construction of the Point Sal access road improvements.
? Implement a County-wide safety inspection program for County parks and open spaces to ensure health and
safety of park visitors.
? Advance technologies to provide more simplified check-in and cash management processes at our camping
facilities.
The Housing and Community Development division will continue to administer various Federal, State, and local
funding sources to provide public services for eligible populations, including homeless services, affordable housing,
public infrastructure development and renovation, and community-wide energy-building efficiency services.
? Continue to improve and enhance monitoring for all Federal programs, including HOME, Emergency Solutions
Grant (ESG), and Community Development Block Grants (CDBG).
? Continue the implementation of the Santa Barbara County Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) to
collect and analyze client, service, and housing data for individuals and families served by homeless assistance
and prevention programs County-wide.
? Develop guidelines for the monitoring of General Fund homeless assistance grants for Shelter Operations and
Warming Centers. Continue monitoring of HCD’s Emergency Solutions Grant and Continuum of Care Programfunded
projects.
? Facilitate certification of eligible families for the remaining three affordable units at Preserves at San Marcos.
? Continue the Lunch and Learn series and develop other methods of getting information out to a broader segment
of the community to maximize participation of eligible individuals and families in the affordable housing program.
? Continue to monitor owners of affordable units and rental properties to ensure compliance and address noncompliance
promptly, ensuring the maximum number of affordable units remain available to the community.
? Continue affordable housing monitoring as required for U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) regulatory compliance.
? Continue administration and disbursement of funds for programs and projects that were approved by the Board
of Supervisors and in progress such as Casa de Las Flores in Carpinteria and the Solvang Senior Apartments.
? Pursue structural and technological efficiencies in delivery of continued program services in collaboration with
the State, increase number of participating contractors and completed projects, assist with implementation of
new County energy and climate goals, and pursue future funding contracts to extend and enhance services (i.e.
commercial properties).
Arts
? Organize and engage 100 County cultural nonprofits in the Americans for the Arts “Arts and Economic Prosperity
V” study defining the economic impact of nonprofit arts and cultural organizations and their audiences in Santa
Barbara County.
? Continue to partner with the Santa Barbara Bowl Foundation to promote arts outreach to rural and underserved
communities and advocate for increased arts education opportunities. Revise Community Arts Enrichment (CAE)
grant application based on increased (doubling) funding support from Arts Subsidy to maximize community
impact and community engagement.
? Develop a Public Art plan for the North County Jail Project Percent for Art funds through the ad hoc committee of
major stakeholders, County Art in Public Places and the Arts Commission.
? Redesign website and increase online presence and traffic to the Arts Commission’s website. Employ more social
media to engage a more diverse audience.
? Developed a 3-5 Year Strategic Plan for the Arts Commission.
Libraries
? Establish quarterly budget reports from all three County library zones.
? Explore the development of a marketing identity for the County library system.
? Continue to explore the feasibility of establishing a Los Alamos Library branch.
Shelter Services
? Continue to provide funding for shelter and warming centers.
Finishing the implementation of the Property Tax System will be the Department’s top priority.
? Continue documentation for Office of Inspector General (OIG) audit of HCD to further reduce audit disallowance
costs.
? Deploy a web-based Countywide time capture system.
? Enhance features of the new financial and budget public portal.
? Plan for the administration of the consolidated RDA Oversight Board and RDA dissolution process.
? Provide accounting support/training, grant compliance, and review of the Northern Branch Jail project and the
STAR project.
? Maintain and enhance the 65 applications in the A-C that serve multiple departments and County agencies.
? Distribute an estimated $800 million in property taxes to local agencies annually.
? Manage biweekly payroll process for approximately 4,500 employees.
? Validate and record 126,000 transactional documents, an average of almost 500 per day, which include claim
payments, vendor changes, general ledger accounting transactions, budget entries, deposit entries, and journal
entries.
Finishing the implementation of the Property Tax System will be the Department’s top priority.
? Continue documentation for Office of Inspector General (OIG) audit of HCD to further reduce audit disallowance
costs.
? Deploy a web-based Countywide time capture system.
? Enhance features of the new financial and budget public portal.
? Plan for the administration of the consolidated RDA Oversight Board and RDA dissolution process.
? Provide accounting support/training, grant compliance, and review of the Northern Branch Jail project and the
STAR project.
? Maintain and enhance the 65 applications in the A-C that serve multiple departments and County agencies.
? Distribute an estimated $800 million in property taxes to local agencies annually.
? Manage biweekly payroll process for approximately 4,500 employees.
? Validate and record 126,000 transactional documents, an average of almost 500 per day, which include claim
payments, vendor changes, general ledger accounting transactions, budget entries, deposit entries, and journal
entries.
Focus on completing mandated audits, training staff, and continue to provide enhanced reporting to the Board of
Supervisors.
? Complete projects to assist departments in improving processes.
? As resources exist, perform audits to increase contractor monitoring.
Applications Development and Systems
? Finishing the implementation of the Property Tax System will be the Department’s top priority.
? Deploy a web-based Countywide time capture system and enhance the system with overtime and leave
management capabilities.
? Build an interactive public website that features County financial related information including a public portal for
the County Budget.
? Extend our current strategic plan for application maintenance and development to 5 and 10 year periods.
? Maintain and enhance the 65 applications in the A-C that serve multiple departments and County agencies.
Property Tax Administration
? Distribute an estimated $800 million in property taxes to local agencies annually.
? Plan for the administration of the consolidated RDA Oversight Board and RDA dissolution process.
? Implement necessary subsystems to better interface with the new core Aumentum property tax system and
create more efficient processing.
Payroll Operations
? Manage biweekly payroll process for approximately 4,500 employees.
? Continue to work with the Human Resources Benefits Division t0 review the evolving requirements of the
Affordable Care Act, and work on implementation methods which track and report the required statistical data.
? Participate in constant improvement of technology supporting time coding, payroll calculations, and reporting.
Financial Accounting and Customer Support
? Validate and record 126,000 transactional documents an average of almost 500 per day, which include claim
payments, vendor changes, general ledger accounting transactions, budget entries, deposit entries, and journal
entries.
? Continue to seek out improved efficiencies and controls in the processing of claims and general ledger
transactions.
? Validate, process, and record all annual general ledger accounting transactions including a high volume of deposit
entries, journal entries, and claim payments.
? Respond to customer service requests in a timely and efficient manner.
? Provide expanded FIN trainings to the organization.
Advanced and Specialty Accounting
? Provide accounting support/training, grant compliance, and review of the Northern Branch Jail project and the
STAR project.
? Support and enhance the County’s contract review process.
? Assist departments and agencies in the complex allocations of inter-agency revenues and taxes.
? Report timely and accurate information on Sales Tax, TOT, and financial information to the State for Special
Districts.
? Continue documentation for Office of Inspector General (OIG) audit of HCD to further reduce audit disallowance
costs.
? Implement a revenue allocation and tracking tool for processing revenue transactions.
? Document revenue streams as a system and utilize tools to increase the reliability of information used to create
forecasts and predictions for Sales Taxes, Transient Occupancy Taxes, Realignments Revenues, and Court Fines &
Fees.
Prepare timely and accurate financial documents that include the County’s Comprehensive Annual Financial
Report, County Budget, Cost Allocation Plan, and a variety of financial reporting and compliance documents to
State Agencies.
? Provide the Board of Supervisors, CEO, and management with the financial information necessary to make
decisions that impact services to the community.
? Implement significant new GASB reporting pronouncements.
The Assessor will complete 97% of all assessment work items by close of the annual tax roll, which becomes the
base upon which local property taxes are levied, collected, and distributed to cities, the County, and special
districts to fund government services.
? The Assessor will initiate the process of updating and modernizing the Assessor Property System with an
anticipated completion date of FY 2019-20.
? Elections will conduct the 2016 Primary and General elections as well as a 2016 Retirement Board election.
? Elections, through voter outreach and support, will materially maintain or increase the voter turnout rate related
to the last comparable election.
? The Clerk-Recorder will record 70,000 official documents per Fiscal Year and index 100% the same day.
? The Clerk-Recorder will attempt to increase the number of marriage ceremonies performed through community
outreach and the continued remodeling and of the Wedding Balcony in the Hall of Records.
Prepare, monitor, and execute a FY 2015-16 Budget in support of the Department’s FY 2015-16 goals and
objectives.
? Provide administrative support in the timely recruitment of new staff as attrition occurs to minimize impact on
service levels and ensure business continuity.
Elections will conduct the 2016 Primary and General elections as well as a 2016 Retirement Board election.
? Elections, through voter outreach and support, will materially maintain or increase the voter turnout rate related
to the last comparable election.
? Continue to increase service levels by expanding and improving information available on the Elections website.
? Establish efficient processes and procedures for the implementation of VoteCal, a statewide voter registration
database. VoteCal is also utilized for Conditional Voter Registration, and will allow voters to register to vote and
vote on the same day, up to and including Election Day.
? Continue to research new vote tabulation systems with a goal to acquire and implement a new system by 2017.
The Clerk-Recorder will record 70,000 official documents per Fiscal Year and index 100% the same day.
? Increase the number of users that submit documents for recordation using the electronic recording delivery
system known as SECURE (Statewide Electronic Courier Universal Recording Environment), creating cost and
processing efficiencies to both users and the County. E-recording documents through this system reduces courier
and postage costs to the submitters while also allowing for faster notification that documents submitted have
been recorded or rejected. Benefits to the County include automation of the cashiering, scanning and return mail
functions, while also creating the ability to better measure productivity at each stage of the recording process.
? Increase the number of customers paying for daily recording fees through the use of the County’s online payment
collection system. Customer benefits include flexibility for payment from multiple bank accounts, access to
accounting data, and the ability to generate custom reports. It also creates efficiencies for the County by
eliminating the need to handle and tender paper check payments.
? The Clerk-Recorder is in the process of replacing master microfilm for the official records for the period of
recording from 1959-1974. The project will result in film that will last 200 years, data entry for this historic index
and creation of a database to search and access the records digitally.
? The Clerk-Recorder will attempt to increase the number of marriage ceremonies performed through community
outreach and the continued remodeling and of the Wedding Balcony in the Hall of Records
The Assessor will complete 97% of all assessment work items by close of the annual tax roll, which becomes the
base upon which local property taxes are levied, collected, and distributed to cities, the County and special
districts to fund government services.
? Perform timely resolution of assessment appeals within the statutory timeframe while adequately defending the
disputed roll value at risk.
? Complete review of all parcels subject to Section 51 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, which require property
values to be enrolled at the lesser of factored base value or market value as of the January 1st tax lien date, by
June 30th as part of the assessment roll.
? The Assessor will initiate the process of updating and modernizing the Assessor Property System with an
anticipated completion date of FY 2019-20.
Northern Branch Jail (AB900) and STAR (SB1022) facility - continue to meet all State and County milestones.
? Successfully integrate the Facilities Condition Index Report from the consultant into deferred maintenance and
capital project planning.
? Complete the Countywide IT strategic plan update.
? Complete a five year Countywide strategic plan for the public safety microwave radio communication network.
In an effort to expand the Local Vendor Outreach Program and increase local vendor participation rates, we will
increase efforts to target local vendors for bidding opportunities and educate them on how to do business with
the County.
? The Department will continue to focus on strategic planning, team building, performance management, and
succession planning to ensure that County and Departmental goals are achieved.
? Continue to analyze and evaluate Countywide purchasing system upgrade ensuring integration with County’s
financial system and reporting requirements.
Northern Branch Jail (AB900 & SB1022) –Establish accounting frameworks for billing and continue to meet all
State and County milestones. We will bid out and begin construction of the facilities.
? Complete the design of and build the Cuyama Pool to appropriate specifications, with an anticipated completion
date in the fall winter of 2016.
? Successfully integrate the Facilities Condition Index Report from the consultant into maintenance and capital
project planning.
Successfully integrate the Facilities Condition Assessment Report from the County consultant into deferred
maintenance and capital project planning.
? Complete reclassification of several departmental positions to improve customer service and provide
opportunities for employee growth within the department.
? Continue to work on improvements to the Real Property software to improve customer service and facilitate
improved tracking of leases and agreements.
? Evaluate the facilities work order automation system.
Continue efforts towards “Right sizing” the County’s vehicle fleet, right sizing the total number of vehicles
operated by the County and always procuring the most efficient vehicle possible for the vehicle’s intended use.
Complete the Countywide Information Technology Strategic Plan update including new technology coordination
policies.
? Complete a five year Countywide strategic plan for the public safety microwave radio communication network.
? Develop support for wireless devices including printers, cameras and environmental monitoring devices on the
County network.
? Upgrade environmental controls and power supplies for the North County Computer Room to support additional
computing infrastructure.
Northern Branch Jail Project (AB900 & SB1022)–Establish accounting frameworks for billing and continue to meet
all State and County milestones. We will bid out and begin construction of the facilities.
? Continue delivery of AB900 project within the $96.1 m total project budget.
Continue to meet all of our State and County milestones.
? Continue delivery of the SB1022 project within $43.6m total project budget.
? Receive State approval of preliminary plans in the fall of 2015.
? Proceed to bid by the fall of 2016.
Continue to meet all of our State and County milestones.
Working closely with the Auditor-Controller’s office the TTCPA will complete the roll-out of the new property tax
system during its first year of go-live. It will take a significantly longer period for full system implementation to
maximize the efficiencies and outcomes of the new system.
County revenues are currently processed utilizing paper deposit tickets which are manually entered into the
TTCPA cashiering system. A file is then created and uploaded to the Auditor-Controller financial system. The
Treasury Program will evaluate and analyze the cost/benefit of developing an electronic deposit ticket. This
enhancement will serve County departments and agencies. It will also facilitate the recording of revenue into the
County’s financial system in a timelier manner.
Working closely with the Auditor-Controller’s office the TTCPA will complete the roll-out of the new property tax
system during its first year of go-live. It will take a significantly longer period for full system implementation to
maximize the efficiencies and outcomes of the new system.
? Identify and implement business process improvements to the manual bankruptcy procedures.
Maintain the current level of support of $1 million to the Children’s Healthcare Initiative.
? Fund the Northern Branch Jail Operations fund in the amounts of $6.1 million in FY 2015-16 and $7.6 million in FY
2016-17.
? Support the Central Coast Coalition on Homelessness and the South Coast Gang Task Force projects at the
current level of funding.
? Fund the Strategic Reserve to the targeted level, per Board policy
? Establish additional maintenance funding, per Board policy
Continue to fund the Northern Branch Jail Operations fund in the amounts of $6,100,000 in FY 2015-16 and
$7,600,000 in FY 2016-17.
? Fund capital/infrastructure projects based on identified needs, priorities, and available funding sources.
? Identify County deferred maintenance projects in the General Services, Public Works, and the Parks Division of
Community Services Department and develop a long-term funding plan to address these needs.
