Office of the Public Defender and Office of the District
Attorney:
Both Offices will receive FY 2013 State Realignment funding allocations once the State determines the exact formula. These will be specific to assist the offices with handling and processing of PRCS revocation hearings. It should be noted that PRCS revocations have also increased, most significantly in the last three months. Staff resources may need to be analyzed to determine whether adequate revocation hearing caseloads are being maintained.
Constitutional Protection Initiative:
According to the State’s revenue estimates, counties should anticipate $842.9 million to implement Realignment in FY 2013. It is estimated that the County will receive between $24 million and $26 million based on preliminary formulas. The Governor’s initiative to protect the revenues that fund the Realignment Program is currently gathering signatures to get on the November 2012 ballot.

Assessment Appeals
A challenge on the horizon for the department is that
workloads continue to remain high, particularly in the
areas of Assessment Appeals and records. In
Assessment Appeals, for example, while appeals
applications have decreased from a high point of nearly
13,000 in 2009-2010, there are still more than 10,000
applications expected during the current tax year. While
the next tax year might see a further drop to 8,000
applications, this level is still much higher than the
historically 3,000-4,000 range.
Technology Projects
At the same time, the department is advancing two
important technology projects. The projects include
implementation of a new Agenda Management system
and a new Assessment Appeals system. Both projects
will require a significant amount of dedicated staff time
and effort from all levels of the department to ensure
successful completion.
Records Management
The department serves as an official repository of
County records dating back to 1865. These records have
been maintained over the centuries in a variety of
formats, making retrieval of these records very difficult.
The department has taken incremental steps to address
this problem by converting into electronic format small
numbers of the total 5 million document images in the
their repository. In 2011, the department contracted
with a specialized document management services
company to index and image files containing records on
the County's Roads dating back to the 1850s.
This approach has proved to be fast, efficient, and costeffective.
At this same time, the department partnered
with the Information Services Department to upload
indexed and imaged files to the County's Sharepoint
software platform, where those images currently reside
in an accessible and searchable electronic system. Using
a specialized document management firm for scanning
and indexing of paper records, and uploading the
converted electronic files to Sharepoint through the
Information Services Department has worked extremely well and is an easily scalable solution for the
department's overall document conversion needs. The
department has a need to continue this work with its
remaining records.
In order to successfully absorb high workloads, while at
the same time move our technology projects forward,
the department continues to identify areas to
streamline work, shift existing department resources in
and out of the areas of most need, and rely on the
dedication of hard working staff. In the end, the
department recognizes that the hard work necessary
will be well worth the effort, in order to do our part in
making the County a better place and in providing the
best possible service to County residents. Redevelopment Agencies were dissolved on February 1,
2012, pursuant to the California Supreme Court's
decision in California Redevelopment Association et al.
v Matosantos et al., and replaced with successor
agencies to administer the orderly and expeditious
wind-down of former redevelopment agencies. The
Dissolution Act created "successor agencies" and
"oversight boards" to continue to satisfy enforceable
obligations and administer the dissolution and wind
down of each dissolved RDA. The Oversight Board of a
successor agency consists of seven members appointed
by/representing the County, cities, school districts,
community colleges and special districts. There are nine
RDAs in Santa Clara County - San Jose, Milpitas, Santa
Clara, Sunnyvale, Campbell, Morgan Hill, Cupertino,
Los Gatos, and Mountain View.
There are significant financial implications for the
County as the revenues which will return to the County
over time should exceed $80 million, as the enforceable
obligations of the successor agencies are satisfied. The
County Executive and County Counsel created a special
team to coordinate and manage the wind-down
process. This team has been active in coordinating the
oversight board appointments for the County,
educating the staff appointed and preparing for and
debriefing after oversight board meetings.
Santa Clara County Government 101 Academy is a new
program facilitated by the Office of Public Affairs to
increase public awareness of County roles and services.
The inaugural course is underway with subsequent
courses to be offered in FY 2013. The goal of the
Academy is to develop a well-informed group of
residents who can share what they learn about County
government with others. The Academy provides a
comprehensive look at key programs and operations.
Participants have the opportunity to visit county
facilities, interact with key officials and gain answers to
questions they may have. The Academy provides a basic
foundation of knowledge about the County and
promotes engagement and participation in advisory
boards and commissions and volunteer opportunities.
The 10-week Academy enrolls approximately 35
participants proportionately from the County
supervisorial districts. During FY 2013, efforts will be
made to expand the reach of the program by creating
mini-training videos that share some of the information
from Academy sessions on the County's website. New Budget Development System to be adopted by the
County Executive's Office of Budget and Analysis. The
County has used a stand-alone software program called
"Budget Reporting and Analysis Support System"
(BRASS) since 1991. As BRASS aged, support for the
system has become more difficult. Also the separation
of the budget system from the County's primary
accounting system (SAP) makes integration
complicated.
In FY 2011 a decision was made, and funding
appropriated, to transition from BRASS to a budget
system synthesized into the County's current SAP
accounting system. This new program is called "Public
Budget Formulation" (PBF). In addition to the benefits of
PBF being integrated into SAP, PBF has enhanced
functionality and analytical tools unavailable in BRASS.
PBF will also cost less on an ongoing basis as a
component of SAP compared to the stand-alone BRASS
system. PBF was initially planned for use in this current
budget cycle; however, full implementation has been
delayed to ensure all reporting requirements are
properly configured. PBF is currently partially
implemented, with full implementation scheduled for
FY 2013. The cumulative effects of massive workload increases
related to the residential market crash, and the time
spent resolving an unprecedented number of
assessment appeals have created a large, growing
backlog of revenue-generating activities jeopardizing
the Office's ability to close the 2012-13 assessment roll
in a timely manner.
The Office is diverting an enormous amount of revenue
production hours to activities that do not generate new
revenue. Sixty percent of these hours are utilized to
resolve statute-mandated assessment appeals
resolutions (the number of appeals resolved increased
by 59 percent over the previous year). The Department
is preparing cases to defend existing roll values at the
expense of enrolling changes of ownership and new
construction. Furloughs and PAAMS development
needs consume additional production hours. Consequently, the Department has experienced the
following reductions in new revenue generating
activities over the prior year:
¦ Audits - 8 percent reduction (average assessed value
$1.8 million per audit).
¦ Change in Ownership - 12 percent reduction
(average assessed value $147,028 per unit).
¦ New Construction - 14 percent reduction (average
value $317,055 per unit).
Additionally, the Office anticipates continued real
property roll growth in the coming year. As of March 1,
2012, real property roll growth was 2.73 percent, a
significant increase compared to the same period last
year of 0.96 percent. This includes gross land and
structural values only. Last year, the Office partially
restored (increased) the assessed values of 45,773
residential properties that were previously reduced to
reflect modest market improvement. The Office
anticipates the residential market will continue to
improve over the next few years. Therefore, it is critical
to have the appropriate staffing level to appraise and
enroll these assessed value restorations.
Resources diverted to non-revenue generating
activities, combined with the Department’s need to
complete its mandated workload, have created
significant backlogs of undone activities. The situation
is serious. The rate of incomplete assessments alone has
doubled since FY 2009. This backlog has existed for two
fiscal years, and it is anticipated to remain constant for
the next two years until the market fully recovers, the
PAAMS system is fully operational, and furloughs are
eliminated. Public procurement functions continue to face a
momentous change in strategic positioning. The
movement is from a concentration on purchasing,
which is only one aspect of procurement, to a
management role embracing the entire procurement
process from the initial identification of need through
termination of the contract. The emphasis has shifted
from a limited “buy transaction” to supply chain
management, which includes the requirement
definition and disciplines such as supplier development
and strategic sourcing.
Over the past several years, the department has
adopted strategic sourcing principles and implemented
a centralized/decentralized model to provide
procurement services. Through this approach, the
County maximizes its purchasing power by aggregating
purchasing volume to establish large Countywide
contracts and negotiate greater price discounts.
Departments are able to purchase off the contracts
without going through Procurement, resulting in
streamlined processes and quick delivery of products
and/or services. The Department continues to strive to
move Procurement’s decentralized contracting
activities from reactionary, where they are responding
to the Departments’ calls for assistance, to a more
proactive and strategic approach to the acquisition
process.
In February 2012, the Board of Supervisors approved the
amendment of Board Policy Chapter 5 - Policies on
Soliciting and Contracting. The amended policy will
affect Procurement’s operations and workload due to
an amended Service Agreement authority, and new
approval and reporting requirements. The Department
is instrumental in implementing those new policies and
is a resource to the other departments in interpreting
the changes. Procurement currently needs to transform
operationally to address the revisions to chapter five (5)
of Board policy on contracting including the following:
¦ Further development of a formal, comprehensive
governance structure to support contracting
Countywide
¦ Directly participate in front-end review of major
acquisitions prior to initiation of an RFP
¦ Develop a formal, contract training and staff
development program in support of decentralized
contracting countywide
The Procurement Department has been engaged in an
intensive effort to lower risks and bring efficiencies to
purchasing throughout the County. These efforts have
focused on (a) developing standardized procedures,
policies and contracts for all County departments and
(b) training in solicitation methods for County staff
outside the Procurement Department. These efforts
have been conducted in close cooperation with County
Counsel and have required a significant time
commitment from Procurement staff, above and
beyond the day-to-day activities of County
procurement. Over the past year, our Office has been a valuable
partner in many important County initiatives and
activities that have a substantial impact on the County,
including the dissolution of redevelopment agencies,
the Rural Metro ambulance contract, the EPIC contract,
payday lending, AB 109 state prisoner realignment,
secure communities, implementation of Federal health
care reform, the Habitat Conservation Plan, Lehigh
Quarry, redistricting, and revising the County's
contracting policies. Our impact litigation section
continues its important work to recover funds for the
County in areas such as consumer protection by
litigating matters including lead paint and drug
manufacturing. Recently, this section's efforts have
contributed significant current and future financial
benefits to the County including the recovery of $8.6
million for the AB 3632 disallowance and the receipt of
over $1 million from the lead paint litigation.
Assessment Appeals Board
Due to recent real estate market conditions, the County
has experienced a fourfold increase in the volume of
assessment appeals filed annually. In response to this
situation, on April 13, 2010, the Board approved the
creation of a third Assessment Appeals Board and
added two new Value Hearing Officers.
The Office of the County Counsel provides legal support
to the three Assessment Appeals Boards, the two Value
Hearing Officers, the Assessor's Office, and the Clerk of
the Board. Last fiscal year, the Office added one
unclassified attorney to provide additional legal support
in this area. The position was unclassified because the
County expected the increased volume of appeals to
subside in 2011. However, that did not occur and, in
addition, the magnitude of the disputed value has been
so significant that the Office is spending more time
reviewing each appeal. In the absence of a waiver of
time, the County must resolve each appeal within two
years or accept the applicant's opinion of value. Since
the high volume of appeals continued through 2011, the
County has until the end of 2013 to resolve these
appeals. Therefore, it is not possible to eliminate the
attorney dedicated to assessment appeals at the end of
2012 as had originally been planned and the Office
needs this position to be converted to a classified
position.
Whistle-blower Program
In April 2010, the County launched the 24/7 Whistleblower Program to provide the public and County
employees the ability to submit a confidential report
regarding suspected fraud, misuse or waste of County
resources or funds, or any perceived improper activities
by County officials, employees, and contractors.
The Office of the County Counsel administers this
program and manages the receipt, acceptance,
investigation, documentation, and monitoring of
reported complaints. Many complaints are investigated
by attorneys in the Office. If a complaint is sustained,
the Office may provide legal advice regarding actions
required to address the situation, including any changes
that are designed to prevent a recurrence of the event.
In addition, the County Counsel's Office also submits
semiannual status reports to the Board of Supervisors.
From April 2010 through October 2011, the County
received 172 contacts via the Whistle-blower Program.
Of these, 150 were determined to be Whistle-blower
complaints and the remaining 22 concerned items such
as pending or completed court matters or comments
regarding Board agenda items. Of the Whistle-blower
complaints, 95 or 63% concerned personnel matters
and only six matters concerned financial
mismanagement. These financial matters have been
referred to the County's Independent Management
Auditor.
Due to the volume of complaints received, the
administration of the 24/7 Whistle-blower Program is
utilizing a substantial amount of departmental
resources. If the trend continues or increases, the
department may find it difficult to administer this
program with existing resources as has been done to
date.
California Redevelopment Agency (RDA)
Dissolution
In late 2011, the California Supreme Court upheld ABX1
26, which dissolved RDAs statewide, but did not uphold
ABX1 27, which would have allowed RDAs to continue
operations by paying the State specified funds in FY
2012 and beyond. When California's FY 2012 budget
was first released by the Governor's Office, RDAs statewide began to take various legally-questionable
actions in an attempt to protect the tax increment
revenue they had been receiving.
The Office of the County Counsel anticipates it will take
a substantial amount of attorney time to address these
actions and has recently added one attorney and one
paralegal to work on this item. However, as events
progress it may become necessary to add further
resources to address issues related to the proper wind
down of RDAs. Voter Outreach and Education
In January of this year, ROV contracted with four
community based organizations for six months to
register over 7,500 new voters, provide voter education,
and encourage voter participation by conducting
outreach to more than 40,000 citizens in under-
represented groups such as immigrant and low-income
communities, 18 to 25 year-olds, and senior citizens.
Top-Two Candidates Open Primary Election
The June 5, 2012 Presidential Primary Election is the
first Top-Two Primary Election. Under the “Top-Two
Candidates Open Primary Act,” all candidates running
for Voter-Nominated Offices, regardless of their party
preference, will appear on the single combined ballot,
and voters can vote for any candidate from any political
party. Voter-nominated offices are state constitutional
offices, state legislative offices, and U.S. congressional
offices. The “Top-Two Candidates Open Primary Act”
requires that only the two candidates for Voter-
Nominated Office who receive the highest and second-
highest numbers of votes cast at the primary shall
appear on the ballot as candidates at the ensuing
General Election.
Vote-by-Mail
ROV continues to run one of the most successful Voteby-Mail programs. The number of Permanent Vote-by-
Mail (PVBM) voters is currently over 68% of the
County's 758,829 registered voters. The department will
expand options for returning Vote by Mail ballots by
providing more Vote-by-Mail delivery sites throughout
the County on weekends and Election Day. Ballot return
locations are set up at city halls and the County
Government Center where thousands of ballots have
been received. During 2010, five elections were
conducted; including one special all-mail ballot
election. In 2011, the ROV conducted two special allmail
ballot elections and the November consolidated
election. Demand and Speed of Change Push Transformation
In less than two years, there have been many positive
and unplanned environmental factors that have greatly
impacted the Information Services Department (ISD),
Information Technology (IT) initiatives Countywide,
and the County as a whole. The challenge is managing
positive and necessary change while maintaining daily
operations. There are many parallel, complex efforts
underway.
Greater overall transparency and visibility to resource
dependencies has been established for large and
complex projects, opportunities to collaborate and
consolidate are being revealed, and partnerships are
forming, but all of these activities need to be closely
monitored and managed. Currently, the organizational
structure to address these opportunities and challenges
easily and effectively is not in place. There is an
understanding of the demands, issues, change
management, and resources needed to make IT
transformation possible.
For the County to use IT as a catalyst for change and to
shift focus from infrastructure to value-added IT
business solutions, the County will need to make several
foundational investments. IT is critical and integrated
into every facet of County operations, and the demand
exceeds the current level of resources. Budget deficits,  growing business and technical needs, external client
demands, changing expertise needed from IT staff, and
more, are all contributing to drive change and transform
IT. However, if action is not taken, departments may
perceive a necessity to seek separate and "siloed"
approaches to business problems, sliding the County
back into a business as usual attitude.
The Center for Leadership and Transformation and IT
Rapid Transformation efforts have brought a wave of
good ideas and willingness to make change for the
better. These efforts uniformly emphasize the need for
the County to collaborate, share services, standardize to
reduce costs and simplify support, and consolidate to
reduce redundancy and refocus staff on value-added IT
business solutions.
Given the demands of daily operations and the existing
Countywide project portfolio, a phased approach will be
necessary to achieve these goals. Change of this
magnitude is iterative, and as some of the
foundational/structural needs are addressed, additional
stages will be recommended.
Defining IT Services and the Best IT Organizational Model
to Meet Goals/Objectives
Mid-year funding was allocated in FY 2012 to assist in
defining IT Services, then designing an IT organization,
job definitions, and duties to better meet the business
demands across the County organization. External
professional services are being researched to assist in
this effort. IT Governance and Project Portfolio
positions were allocated at the FY 2012 mid-year and
some existing resources will be reassigned to these
efforts to support the IT governance structure.
Common Directory/Software as a Solution (E-mail Cloud
Solutions)
A key technical and business decision is to establish a
County Common Directory, on which many value-
added IT business solutions and online applications
rely. Consolidating e-mail and office products across the
County will reduce redundancy, duplication, and
provide added collaboration capabilities across the
County.
ISD will work with departmental partners to develop a
plan to best leverage Countywide resources for the
training, implementation, and support of these
products. ISD plans to identify key levels and staff
within departments to join the SaaS team during
implementation and ongoing coordination. It is crucial
to keep communication, collaboration, and learning
continual as this will be a resource-intensive project
that may impact current work or operational efforts
within departments and may require consolidation of
some functional areas.
Integrated Workplace Management System (IWMS)
Software of this nature, currently used by the Santa
Clara Valley Medical Center Facilities Division, and now
being integrated into the Facilities & Fleet and Parks
Departments, supports and promotes the efficient and
coordinated management of the complete facilities/real
estate life cycle across the County. The initial focus is on
the Work Order system and Maintenance Management.
Land Management and Lease Management aspects are
still being reviewed. Implementing the software solution
has been a collaborative effort between HHS, FAF, Parks,
and ISD, with the potential to include: Roads & Airports,
Vector Control, the Social Services Agency, County
Communications, the Office of the Sheriff/Department
of Correction, etc. A shared service funding model is
being developed to support the ongoing operational
needs and future enhancements. This shared service
model provides a basis for other shared services and
demonstrates the cost principle that a shared service
versus "siloed" solutions is less costly and can provide
valuable Countywide information from one source.
Mobile Strategy
The need for managing mobile devices is rapidly
growing. The industry is changing quickly to provide
value-added, affordable capabilities that can address
the growing needs of the mobile workforce to access
information from anywhere, at anytime and with any
device. A cross-County team is working on a County
Mobile Strategy and identifying the associated support
technologies. Managing this effort in a consolidated
manner will reduce duplicative efforts and technologies,
provide for more rapid deployment and address the
variation of security levels required. This IT service area
will be assessed to determine the most cost effective
and efficient approach to manage, support and
integrate with new services and mobile applications.
Simplification of the ISD ISF Rate Development
Methodology
Each fiscal year, ISD Internal Service Fund 0074
establishes rates for services, products and other
offerings provided to internal and external customers.
The rate development process has grown in complex over the last several years. The department has relied
upon several different systems to produce its final rate
structure. The use of disparate systems has made it
difficult to provide an easily interpreted breakdown of
costs and budget to actual monitoring. In addition,
developing rates months in advance of actual usage has
inhibited the flexibility to address changing, real-time
technology issues and needs. Other departments such
as HHS and SSA are also in need of this capability to
track time and associate these costs with IT projects. In
FY 2013, ISD, working with the Office of Budget and
Analysis, the Management Auditor, and the Controller's
Office will create a prototype of its new rate
methodology for full implementation in FY 2014.
Current systems and interfaces to support this effort are
under review. Upgrades or modules may need to be
acquired to add to existing time tracking and reporting
systems, such as SAP and/or ChangePoint (the current
time tracking product within ISD). Emergency response issues are expected to arise with
the increasing use of voice over Internet protocol
(VOIP) based telephones, which may not provide
critical location information for 9-1-1 calls placed from
computers that are not at a fixed location.
Technical, operational and workload issues are
anticipated to result from the planned deployment of
new Next Generation 9-1-1 (NG9-1-1) systems and
services. NG9-1-1 networks will replace existing limited
9-1-1 voice circuit switching and data systems with
Internet Protocol (IP) based solutions that will enable
the public to place a "9-1-1 call" from any wired, wireless,
or IP-based device via voice, text message, image,
and/or video (including support for American Sign
Language users), and to provide other critical data to 9-
1-1 Call Centers. Systems will also allow 9-1-1 Call
Centers easy access to other data sources (telematics,
building plans, medical information, etc.), as they
become available. The new 9-1-1 reporting methods
made possible by NG9-1-1 will significantly increase the
demands on Communications Dispatchers, not only by
increasing the number and complexity of reports
received, but also by adding to their emotional impact
with the introduction of audio, visual and other
information to Dispatchers' current work environment.
Virtual and physical consolidation of 9-1-1 call
answering, dispatch and/or emergency medical
dispatch systems and/or services is being considered
between several local jurisdictions. Fleet Rightsizing
Over the past year, FAF worked with County
departments to reduce fleet and transportation costs to
the County. FAF is responsible for monitoring
compliance with Board Policy 3.52, the Comprehensive
Vehicle Policy, and to recommend appropriate vehicle
assignments that optimize the overall size of the County
Fleet. Following the Board’s adoption of the Policy, FAF
reduced the County fleet by 300 vehicles. Given the
average age and condition of the County fleet,
consistent investment in replacement vehicles is
necessary to avoid extraordinary operating costs. FAF is
reviewing vehicle leases and short-term rentals to
reduce replacement capital resources.
Fuel Services
FAF recommends annual departmental fuel budgets
based on expected usage, past miles driven and forecast
cost per gallon. Fuel costs continue to escalate. In light
of these rising costs, FAF works with departments to
reduce unnecessary vehicle idling and to consider
smaller, more fuel efficient vehicles. Future costs are
difficult to forecast as global fuel supply instability
creates market price uncertainty.
Greening the Fleet and Vehicle Operations
To meet the Board of Supervisors’ Climate Action Goals,
FAF installed ten electrical vehicle charge points at
County facilities using grant funds. Electric vehicle
chargers are available for both County and public use.
FAF continues to review new technologies and
promotes sustainable fleet operations by utilizing leadfree wheel weights and re-refined lubricants.
Capital Program Focus
Seismic Safety Construction Program - Valley Medical
Center
In late FY 2011, FAF was assigned oversight and
construction management of the Measure A bond
seismic safety construction program at Valley Medical
Center. The project includes the Bed and Service
Buildings and Downtown San Jose Health Clinic.
Property Management and Facility Planning
Issues
Vending Revenue
With recent policy changes, FAF is working with
vending machine operators to determine impacts. The
continuing loss of vending machine revenue is expected
to negatively impact the General Fund at some point
since those resources are used to fund cafeteria
equipment repair and replacement.
Cafeteria Operations
Changes in the economy have impacted the dining
patterns of Cafeteria patrons. County staff appears to be
brown bagging more often, having less discretionary
cash to eat out. However, FAF is working with the
operators to look for alternatives to attract more
business, and looking at other food vending models to
offer at least some level of food service at the larger
County facilities.
Future of Former City Hall
FAF, with the help of the Planning and Development
Department, is embarking on an alternatives analysis
for use of the Former City Hall property. The study is to
take a broad look at opportunities to develop the entire
Civic Center, to include both the private sector and
within the County, specifically, providing efficient
government services and consolidation of County departments from leased to owned space. This analysis
also affords the Board the opportunity to take a
strategic look at the best use of a number of properties.
Court Transfer
The final transfer of the remaining leased Court facilities
to the Administrative Office of the Courts and the sale
of the Los Gatos Courthouse are still pending. The
County must continue to pay for all Court leases,
maintenance, and utility costs until those actions are
completed, and once completed, the County will make
ongoing Court Facilities payments to the State. The
County will incur future, as yet undetermined, costs
related to these actions.
Facilities Operations Issues
Facilities Deterioration
As was expected, given the condition of County
facilities, FAF experienced an increase in demand for
on-call and emergency facility repairs over the past
fiscal year. Because funding preventative maintenance
has been half of the industry standard for the past
eleven years, the nearly 5 million square feet of facilities
maintained by FAF are entering a phase of accelerated
deterioration. The plant is on average nearly 40 years
old and has an estimated backlog of $500 million.
Facilities to be Added
In FY 2013, the County plans to fully activate an
additional 107,125 square feet of facilities that will
require maintenance, utilities, and clean and green
services. These include the Chaboya clinic, the San Jose
Medical Plaza, the Sig Sanchez Building in San Martin,
the Evidence Storage Facility and the Vehicle Evidence
Garage. Additionally, FAF will take over responsibility
for utilities management at the Tully Clinic. FAF is
recommending resources to support the additional
space in the FY 2013 budget.
Utilities and Energy Issues
The FY 2013 utility budget recommendation is based on
what has been spent this past year, a mild weather year.
In addition, the County like many others has greatly
benefitted from the dramatic reduction in natural gas
prices. If this trend reverses, the budget could be
severely impacted. All utilities rates are expected to
increase this next year. While PG&E and other
providers increase the percent of their power that
comes from renewable energy sources, customers will
be expected to pay the associated cost increase. The
cost of power will also have impact on the cost of other
utilities. Finally, fuel prices are dramatically impacting
solid waste management hauling costs.
Sustainability Implementation
There are more challenges than originally anticipated in
reaching the higher levels of waste diversion and
implementing the use of environmentally friendly
products in normal County operations. More education
and outreach is necessary, while finding resources to
support this effort in these uncertain financial times is
difficult.
Emergency Preparedness
Staffing Resources
In the event of a disaster, the smaller FAF staff creates a
gap in the County’s emergency logistics resources. Most
FAF staff is assigned to support the continuity of
operations for critical County facilities, leaving fewer
staff resources to occupy Unit Leader roles during
activation of the Emergency Operations Center (EOC). Declining Revenue
The most significant issue confronting the Library's
fiscal standing is the decline in growth of property tax
proceeds due to the loss of property values in several of
the communities served, and the annexation of
unincorporated parcels to cities outside the Library
District. Overall, property tax proceeds are projected to
increase at least 1.5% in FY 2013. This modest growth
will allow the current level of service to be sustained.
After the property tax roll closes on July 1, we will revisit
our revenue assumptions.
Additionally, the State of California has eliminated all
funding for public libraries. Since 1988 the State had
provided financial support to encourage universal
access to libraries for all Californians. Along with
literacy funding and a basic per capita allocation, all
State funding to support universal library access was
eliminated in the "trigger cuts" enacted in FY 2012. Due
to increased demand for service and State budget cuts,
Santa Clara County Library District is no longer able to
provide free library service to those people who live
outside the Library District, and began charging an
annual fee for library cards for non-District residents.
Increasing Demand for Service
The national trend is for increased use of public
libraries, despite the proliferation of computers at home
and at work, and increased access to the Internet. Santa
Clara County Library District is also experiencing high
usage with circulation of about 11 million in FY 2012.
New library cards were issued to 21,412 District
residents last year, bringing the total to 212,848 resident
cardholders or 52% of the District population. In
addition, 6,087 free non-District resident student library
cards were issued, and 4,698 cards were sold to non-
District residents. A concerted effort is made to add
materials to the collection in languages that reflect the 
diversity of the County, including Spanish, Chinese,
Vietnamese, Russian, Japanese, Hindi, Korean, German
and French.
The public is increasingly turning to our Library to
borrow eBooks. In 2011, there were 39,776 eBook loans,
a 206% increase from 2010 and a 1,363% increase from
2009. 32,543 Audio eBooks were borrowed in 2011, a
32% increase over the previous year and a 351% increase
from 2009. Labor Relations
In FY 2013, Labor Relations will be conducting contract
negotiations with five labor organizations that are
expected to yield $15 million in concessions. In addition,
during the latter part of FY 2013 we will be fully engaged
in labor negotiations with 23 other bargaining units
with contracts that expire in June 2013 and early FY
2014. A key focus of the negotiations will be the need to
redesign our current health benefit plans in order to
contain as well as reduce costs and mitigate long-term
unfunded liability obligations in our Other Post
Employment Benefits (OPEB) program.
Implementation of the Learning Management
System (LMS)
The Agency's Employee Development Department, in
conjunction with the Information Services Department,
is leading the expansion of Learning Management
System (LMS) software into a county-wide system
which will create training records for all employees, an
online course registration system, and on-demand
training courses. Called sccLearn, this is a new service
delivery area for ESA. In FY 2013, we expect to have
fully implemented the learning management system,
which is the engine for the County's e-learning
activities. This involves creating our own e-learning
content modules within a short time frame and
ensuring that appropriate technology and staffing are in
place.
Increased Retiree Population Served by ESA
Currently, there are 9,000 retirees in the County system,
most of whom are receiving post employment benefits
from the County. This is a 55% increase from nine years
ago. As a result, there has been a significant increase in
workload pertaining to retirees, particularly in the area
of administering retiree medical benefits.
Workforce Transition
As the current workforce ages, with the retirement of
the baby boomers, many experienced employees will be
taking with them a substantial level of institutional
knowledge. The County faces the challenge of both
short-term and long-term workforce planning,
analyzing the most critical areas of need and developing
strategies to mitigate the departure of long-term
employees. We must also continue to encourage the
younger generations to consider careers in the public
sector, and train and prepare the current workforce for
more responsible supervisory and leadership positions
within the organization. The California Rating Bureau and the California
Workers' Compensation Institute reported that average
medical expenditures on California work injury claims
continue to climb. The Rating Bureau indicated that
costs have increased 31.8% since the Workers'
Compensation Reforms of 2003 and 2004 and expect
costs will continue to increase over the next year. ABx1 26 Implementation
On December 29, 2011, the California Supreme Court
delivered its decision in the California Redevelopment
Association (CRA) v. Matosantos case, finding ABx1 26
(the Redevelopment Dissolution Act) constitutional
and ABx1 27 (the “Alternative Redevelopment Program
Act”) unconstitutional. As a result, all redevelopment
agencies (RDAs) will be dissolved under the
constitutional Dissolution Act. With the Court's
decision pushing back the dissolution date from
October 1, 2011 by four months, February 1, 2012
marked the day that hundreds of RDAs across the state,
including those in Santa Clara County, started winding
down their operations. The Dissolution Act dissolves
RDAs as of February 1, 2012 and creates “Successor
Agencies” and “Oversight Boards” to continue to satisfy
enforceable obligations of each former RDA, and to
administer the dissolution and wind down of each
dissolved RDA. The law specifically establishes
important roles for the County Auditor-Controller, the
State Department of Finance and the State Controller's
Office for the implementation of the dissolution
process.
Under this bill, property tax revenues that would have
been distributed to RDAs prior to their dissolution will
instead be deposited by County Auditors into
Redevelopment Property Tax Trust Funds (RPTTF)
created in the County Treasury for each dissolved RDA.
The County Auditor administers the RPTTF and
disburses twice annually from this fund, pass-through
payments to affected taxing entities, an amount equal to
the total of obligation payments that are required to be
paid from tax increment as denoted on the Recognized
Obligation Payment Schedule (ROPS), and various
allowed administrative fees and allowances.
Any remaining balance is then distributed by the County
Auditor back to affected taxing entities under a
prescribed method that accounts for pass-through
payments. The County Auditor is also responsible for
distributing other moneys received from the Successor
Agency (from sale of assets etc.) to the affected taxing
entities. Successor agencies in turn will use the amounts
deposited into their respective Recognized Obligation
Retirement Funds (RORF) for making payments on the
principal of and interest on loans, and monies advanced
to or indebtedness incurred by the dissolved
redevelopment agencies (H&S §34172(d)).  Under this legislation, the county Auditor-Controller is
responsible for the following activities and functions
which can be classified as one-time and ongoing.
One-time:
¦ Causing or performing an “agreed upon procedures”
(AUP) audit of each RDA being dissolved within the
county
¦ Establishing new Redevelopment Property Tax
Trust Fund (RPTTF) for each RDA
¦ Reporting
Ongoing:
¦ Calculating the amount of Property Tax Revenues
that would have been due the former RDA as Tax
Increment
¦ Administering the RPTTF, including deposits, distributions and reporting of related activities
¦ Distributing other monies received from the
Successor Agency (proceeds for asset sales and
unencumbered funds) and related reporting
With the vigorous implementation schedule and
extensive reporting requirements, the Department has
been appropriated with additional funding of $750,000
in FY 2012 for the one-time implementation costs,
especially for AUP audits. The additional costs for the
ongoing activities from FY 2013 onwards are anticipated
to be less significant.
Controller CLT Projects
The Controller-Treasurer Department initiated its
Center for Leadership and Transformation (CLT)
program as part of broader vision adopted by the
Finance Agency. CLT teams were formed to address
challenges which included but not limited to: (a) ways
to enhance revenue for the County General Fund, and
(b) improved processes that will reduce the cost of
delivery of services as well as make the workload
manageable for the existing staff. As a learning
organization, we will operationalize the mature projects
and start new ones with the same objectives - to
enhance the business processes aimed at cost reduction
or revenue generation.
The ePayable CLT team explored new ways to enroll the
vendors in the ePayable program that resulted in
meeting the FY 2012 revenue projections in April 2012,
leaving two additional months to bring more revenue to
the General Fund. For FY 2013, ePayable team will be
coordinating with the bank to implement an improved
process making it easier for the vendors to enroll into
the program and further enhancing the revenue.
The Payroll CLT team's objective was to reduce payroll
adjustments by improving the processes and allowing
the payroll team to focus more on analytical work, and
allow the payroll manager to focus more on strategic
planning. The team conducted surveys of all
department timekeepers and as a result will start
conducting quarterly meetings that will: promote open
communication; educate timekeepers regarding the
significance of the timekeeping process; provide
directions/standardization of policies; and encourage
sharing and promoting of best business practices. In
addition, the Payroll CLT will be developing an
interactive web site that will create interactive training
videos, will design and implement an interactive forum
for timekeepers to quickly receive feedback, and will
document Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) related
to both systems and pay practices.
Santa Clara Valley Health Plan
In FY 2012, the Finance Agency began providing
oversight to the financial management of the Santa
Clara Valley Health Plan (VHP). The Controller-
Treasurer staff is guiding VHP to develop a system of
internal controls, financial reporting system, cost
accounting and reporting system, budgets, rate reviews,
and revenue projections in VHP's efforts to transition
from VMC to a stand-alone enterprise-fund operation
under the County's Health and Hospital System.
New Bond Issuance for Technology Investments
The Santa Clara County Financing Authority Lease
Revenue Bonds, Series 2012 A Capital Projects
(SCVHHS Enterprise Core Healthcare Information
System project and various Information Technology
projects) are scheduled for issuance in late July 2012.
The total size of the bond issue will be approximately
$100 million, with the general assumption that
$70million will be allocated to the SCVHHS Enterprise
Core Healthcare Information System project, commonly
referred to as EPIC, as described in the
recommendations for Santa Clara Valley Medical
Center (SCVMC) in this document. An additional
$20million will be allocated to various Information
Technology projects as described in the
recommendations for the Information Services  Department in this document. A reserve fund and the
cost of issuance make up the balance of the total bond
issue.
Recommendations for funding both EPIC and various
Information Technology projects in the Information
Services Department assume receipt of bond funds. An
updated presentation to the full Board of Supervisors on
the bond issuance is planned for the May 22, 2012 Board
of Supervisors meeting. Economic Conditions and Impact on Property Tax
Collections and Refunds
The economic downturn and the decline in the real
estate market have continued to adversely affect
property tax revenues. The past few years have seen an
unprecedented number of negative supplemental
assessments and assessment appeals. A serious backlog
resulted from this downturn. Starting in FY 2011, the
Department created a Center for Leadership and
Transformation (CLT) team to attack the problem. The
team was composed of members of the Tax Roll Control
unit and the TCAS unit. Together they have significantly
improved the business processes necessary to complete
the roll corrections. Additionally, the TCAS unit is
looking for ways to re-engineer and automate the
remaining manual business processes. These
improvements will positively affect other manual roll
corrections. To date, the Department has reduced the
negative supplemental backlog by 66 percent and the
appeal backlog by 25 percent.
The pace of the economic recovery is uncertain, and is
likely to create additional roll corrections. The
Assessor's Office has requested additional staff to
respond to these demands. In turn the Tax Collector has
requested additional staff to respond to the expected
increase in work coming from the Assessor.
TCAS Improvements
A system enhancement initiative has been launched to
focus on critical needs that were not addressed in the
initial deployment of TCAS. The areas of focus are roll
corrections, payment processing, tax bill maintenance,
accounting, apportionment, and reconciliation. The
Board allocated $5.9million in FY 2012 mid-year to
provide funding for additional TCAS functionality. The
effort will span approximately 24-months and eliminate
many manual processes currently in place.
Electronic Interface with Assessor and Clerk of
the Board
In FY 2013, the Department is scheduled to work with
both the Assessor's Office and the Clerk of the Board's
Office in the development of electronic interfaces
between the departments. Currently, assessment
appeals and all assessed value adjustments (with the
exception of supplemental assessments) are sent in
paper form to the Tax Office for processing. The
electronic interfaces will facilitate the processing and
generation of accurate tax bills and refunds while
reducing the amount of paper documents and data
entry errors.
Disaster Recovery
For FY 2013, the Department has requested resources
to implement both an off-site and on-site redundancy
system. This will ensure the continuation of services for
customers, County departments, and Department
employees, should there be a disaster.Electronic Recording
The Santa Clara County Clerk-Recorder's Office has a
key role in the statewide effort to build a multi-county
electronic recording platform. Adopted by over a dozen
California counties and implemented in Santa Clara
County in 2011, the department is currently receiving
over 10% of documents for recordation electronically.
As the department aggressively expands the program in
FY 2013, these volumes are projected to increase to 30%,
improving service delivery to customers and increasing
operating efficiencies.
Obtaining Secure Offsite Records Storage Facility
The Clerk-Recorder's Office is fully responsible for
maintaining and tracking the inventory of microfilmed
official records and the Clerk-Recorder's original record
books. The Recorder's complete and official record
archive spans the years between 1848 and the present.
These official record books are housed in the West Wing
at 70 West Hedding Street. As mandated by state law,
the microfilmed records are stored in a secure offsite
facility. The department currently pays a contracted
vendor for this secure storage. Service providers for this
type of storage are limited and doing business with
outside vendors has been extremely problematic.
Storage and safekeeping of the original record books has
been problematic as well. Official record books stored in
the West Wing Annex, were damaged in the flood of
1995. The collection was moved to the warehouse at
Berger Drive for a number of years. Since the facility was
shared with other County departments, consistent
security was difficult to maintain. In 2007, the entire
collection was again relocated to the Lower Level in the
West Wing where a number of books were damaged by
an overhead water leak.
Since this emerging issue was identified last year, the
department has incorporated this project into the
Finance Agency Center for Leadership and
Transformation (CLT) and has identified resources to
move this project forward. Working with other County
departments, including Capital Programs and the
County Surveyor, the department has finalized facility
requirements and begun investigating different
locations for the purchase of the secure facility to house
the Clerk-Recorder's Office's entire records collection.
The project and facility should have no impact on the
County's General Fund as it will be funded by the special
funds specifically designated to the Clerk-Recorder's
Office. Traffic Collections
DOR is the designated agency for the collection of
delinquent court-ordered debt in Santa Clara County,
and in 2005, the collection of traffic fines was added to
the department’s justice collection service. All
delinquent court-ordered debt collection programs are
fully cost recovered from collected revenue.
In recent years, the Court has altered the traffic account
mix and the volumes that are referred to DOR by
establishing and adding several new account types (FTA-
Failure to Appear, Payment Plans, and Stays), and re-directing recalcitrant accounts to an out sourced
provider.
The Court and County agreed to proceed with
outsourcing plans as long as existing DOR traffic staffing
levels were sustained by the overall program growth. Per
statute, the constitution of a county’s court ordered debt
program requires joint County-Court agreement.
A group of unclassified codes (12) were created and
designated to accommodate the larger DOR traffic
program, to be filled incrementally as the referral volume
grows and reaches capacity. To date, 6 of these codes have
been converted to classified, and 6 remain on hold,
pending full implementation of stay accounts. By October
2012 these banked unclassified codes will expire, in
anticipation that the account volumes will then be stable.
DOR Expanded Hours
Beginning approximately September 2012, DOR will
provide early morning and evening hour services to the
public (7:30 am - 7:00 pm). This will be possible due to a
County-SEIU Departmental Agreement and Alternate
Hours Pilot Program which offers a 4/10 work-week to a
portion of DOR employees.
Public access to DOR in the early evening, as well as
during the day, will result in better customer service for
debtors who find it difficult to visit or call DOR during the
day and will also open evening hours for collectors to
make telephone contact with debtors. It is well known
that direct and personal contact is an essential
component of successful collections. Efforts such as this
improve customer service, enhance revenues, and may
provide a number of other personal and operational
benefits to the department and other staff. It is also
important to make changes which will help to maintain
DOR’s competitive edge with the private sector services,
as outsourcing has been a recent topic of interest related
to cost-benefit considerations.
Health Care Reform and Hospital Collections
DOR collects delinquent debt for the County hospital.
With the passage of national health care reform, we are
seeing changes in debt patterns and obligations, as well
as in the means by which medical debt may be collected
from both patients and insurance.
The hospital is working on several projects which should
have positive effects on medical debt collection by DOR.
These efforts include streamlined front-end information
gathering from patients, efficiencies in early identification
of special assistance and ability-to-pay programs for
patients, improvements in the debt compromise process,
and implementation of the EPIC system. One possible
effect may be greater collection success BEFORE referral
to DOR, thus over the long term, DOR referrals and
collections could decrease, though overall revenue
recovery will improve.
Statewide Justice System Changes
The California Realignment of Services plan will affect
every part of the criminal justice system, including DOR
which collects large portions of the County's delinquent
and non-delinquent court-ordered debt. DOR is
working closely with the Court and Probation
Department to identify anticipated impacts, including
caseload increases, process and procedural changes,
new service areas, additional system interfaces,
accounting and fund distribution requirements, etc.
DOR is paying particularly close attention to
ramifications to the Victim Restitution collections.
DOR Center for Leadership Transformation (CLT)
Projects
The Department of Revenue (DOR) has launched a CLT
project to “go paperless” in its CUBS Collections System.
The Department is now using a scanning application to
scan and read selected supporting paper documents to
CUBS. Going paperless will transform DOR's existing
paper-driven manual processes, significantly improving
efficiency by reducing research time and allowing staff
more time for collections. It will also reduce paper costs
and free up office space. The software application  ACUMEN is being installed and will allow DOR to score
collection accounts, balance workload, and provide
enhanced reporting capability, raising the effectiveness
and efficiency of the collection process. DOR is
becoming a public sector leader, being the first public
sector collection entity to use ACUMEN to transform
the collection processes. Public Safety Realignment
The Office of the District Attorney has a number of
important roles related to realignment, the State's effort
to reduce prison overcrowding, recidivism, and the
resulting costs. The Office's primary role is in providing
legal representation for the People of the State of
California in revocation hearings for Post Release
Community Supervision and Mandatory Supervision
offenders. Revocation hearings are now held weekly,
and it is anticipated that the volume of this work will
increase over time. This work volume will be monitored
to ensure that the Office retains sufficient capacity to
address it.
In addition, the Office must now review all charges
along with defendants' criminal histories to determine
eligibility for the sentencing options available under
realignment. The Office is committed to supporting this
new direction for California's criminal justice system
while continuing to ensure that the public safety of our
County's residents is preserved.
Legal Representation at Out-of-Custody
Misdemeanor Arraignments
In October 2011, the Board of Supervisors approved
funding for staff in the Offices of the District Attorney
and the Public Defender to ensure that arraignments of
out-of-custody misdemeanor defendants are staffed by
attorneys representing the People and the defendant.
The Office has worked closely with the courts and the
Public Defender's Office to implement this initiative,
which has allowed legal representation at such hearings
for the first time in the County's history.
After a successful pilot program in a single court, the
program is now being implemented in all misdemeanor
arraignments in San Jose, and is expected to begin in the
North and South County courts in May2012. The
District Attorney's Office has instituted a new "Open
Discovery" policy for these hearings, at which the
Office's attorneys bring their files to court and literally
leave them open for defense attorneys to review in
preparation for arraignment. This approach ensures
that critical information is available to all parties as
early as possible in the process, and it is designed to
move cases more quickly to a just resolution, reducing
bench warrants, custodial time, and costs.
Information Technology Improvements
The Office has made recent improvements in its
information technology capabilities and continues to
look for innovations that would add capacity to
Department staff by giving them access to more
information in more locations than previously possible.
The Office recently completed a significant upgrade to
its case management software and continues to make
strides toward the goal of a paperless approach.
A necessary part of that strategy (which has already
allowed the Department the ability to convert a law
library into usable space for staff) is to consider ways to
increase the mobile computing capability of staff. particularly for attorneys in court and investigators in
the field. The Office's IT staff works collaboratively with
ISD, along with other County and law enforcement
agencies, to ensure that system development progresses
smoothly, emphasizing usability, compatibility, and
security.
Case Management System
The Office of the Public Defender has an obsolete case
management system (Scales) and an aging
infrastructure. Computers run very slowly throughout
the offices. IT staff has informed management that
Scales has a lifecycle of approximately 24 to 36 months
before complete failure. The office suffered a complete
failure of our legacy system JLAN in August 2011 and
lost all case-related data prior to 2001. In January 2012
Scales suffered the failure of two hard drives. The
Information Services Department (ISD) is working with
the Office to embark on the procurement process to
replace Scales. The request for information will be
released in spring 2012. The request for proposal is
expected to be released in January 2013.
The Scales case management system provides the
backbone of the PDO/ADO workload structure.
Without this system, staff cannot track individual cases,
cannot inform lawyers and clients of upcoming court
appearances, and cannot maintain case files in
compliance with the rules of the State Bar of California.
Recognizing this situation as a “burning platform,” the Office has been working for the last two years with ISD
staff to determine the current business needs of the
organization, and, more importantly, to identify the
Office’s needs for the next five to ten years. These
features are critical: a robust case management system
with business intelligence capacity, document creation
and management features, compatibility with other
justice system partners where feasible, and paperless as
much as possible.
Immigration Attorney
Under the United States Supreme Court case of Padilla
v. Kentucky (2009) 130 S.Ct. 1473, criminal defense
attorneys are required to advise clients regarding the
immigration consequences of any guilty plea to criminal
charges. The significance of a guilty plea or a finding of
guilt following jury trial to noncitizen defendants is now
well recognized by the Courts. For example, the
consequences of a guilty plea might be deportation,
denial of naturalization or prohibition from obtaining a
green card or re-entry into the United States.
Immigration law is a specialized and complex practice,
and analyzing each scenario carefully and properly is of
paramount importance. The Public Defender Office has
been working with immigration law non-profit
organizations to obtain needed training and
consultation, with some success. PDO administration is
studying best practices throughout the state to meet
this newly developed mandate. It is likely that the Office
will need an immigration law specialist to stay abreast
of legal developments, provide training and consult with
attorneys on individual cases. Currently, staffing
limitations prevent the Office from retaining such an
attorney.
Public Safety Realignment – AB 109
The Public Defender anticipates expending significant
administrative and legal support resources in FY 2013
with the implementation of AB109, otherwise known as
“realignment.” Under the terms of AB 109, the Public
Defender is funded for one attorney and one clerical
support position for the purpose of representing
defendants in Court who return from State prison to
probation supervision and who allegedly violate the
terms of their release (“PRCS” clients). This allocation
does not cover the administrative time dedicated to
AB 109 issues, nor the handling of conflicts which may
require the referral of clients to the Alternate Defender
Office, ongoing training for attorneys and other staff
regarding continuing changes in the law, and data
collection. The Office will continue to monitor the effect
of the statute’s implementation on existing resources in
FY 2013.
 Since 2002, Pretrial Services has had a MOU with
Superior Court in which the department provides
criminal background record checks to Family Court,
which assists the Court in their decision making. This
MOU is approved annually and revenue from this
agreement fully supports four FTE positions within the
Office. This is a non-mandated function for the Office
and if the Court determines they must either reduce or
eliminate funding, it will be necessary for the Office to
delete up to four FTE positions; two Pretrial Service
Officer I/II positions and two Justice System Clerks I/II
positions. All of these positions are currently filled.
As of April 2012, the Office has not been informed that
the Court will discontinue supporting this program for
FY 2012 in the amount of $410,832, however, this is
subject to the State finalizing its budget. The Sheriff ’s Office provides law enforcement in the
unincorporated areas of the County. When cities annex
unincorporated parcels, the result is a reduction in
patrol areas for which the Sheriff ’s Office is responsible.
Because these changes are small and incremental in
nature, the Department is unable to reduce patrol
staffing to the remaining unincorporated areas. The
Sheriff ’s Office has contracts with numerous public
agencies for law enforcement services, and will
continue to pursue new opportunities for contracts.
Recruitment and Retention
Recruitment and retention of high-caliber law
enforcement professionals is a challenge, both in the
County and regionally. Currently, the number of Deputy
vacancies is approximately sixty-eight (68), and
vacancies are an ongoing challenge for the Department.
With an aging workforce, the Department is
anticipating many retirements in the next few years.
The Office of the Sheriff continues to develop new and
innovative methods to recruit top applicants.
Expansion of Regional Services
Since the opening of the Santa Clara County Justice
Training Center in 2005, the Department has been
working to expand the number of training classes, as
well as increase enrollment from outside agencies in the
Academy. The Sheriff ’s Office also maintains an outside
Firing Range that is used by the Sheriff ’s Office and
other law enforcement agencies for training and
mandated firearms qualifications. The Sheriff ’s Office is
developing the Range into a regional training center,
and plans to include a Situational Training Facility
which will be utilized by the Sheriff ’s Office as well as
other law enforcement agencies. The purpose of the
facility is to provide real world training for law
enforcement officers. State Realignment
The Governor’s 2011 Public Safety Realignment
proposal (AB109) transferred a number of services
currently provided by the State to the local government.
The most significant of the realignment proposals for
the Department of Correction was to assume
responsibility for offenders without any current or prior
serious or violent or sex convictions. This shift of
inmates is gradually increasing the jail population, as
well as impacting the jail’s ability to accept voluntary
revenue-generating inmates from other jurisdictions. Protective Custody Population
Protective custody is a classification that may be
assigned to inmates who are affiliated with a gang, have
committed certain violent crimes, whose case has a
high degree of notoriety, or who, for some reasons, have
been determined to be at risk of victimization. Over the
past several years, there has been a dramatic increase in
inmates requiring protective custody, primarily due to
affiliation with gangs. It is a challenge to provide the
physical segregation required for these inmates.
Physical and Mental Health of Inmates
In this decade, the percentage of inmates 55 years of age
or older has increased from 2% to almost 4%, and from
an Average Daily Population (ADP) of 88 to 180.
Additionally, individual inmates are experiencing
multiple health issues with significant pathology and
disabilities. There is a strain on the availability of
infirmary beds which must be triaged every shift to
accommodate the sickest inmates. This situation is
further constricted by the AB109 inmates, because
their length of stay is longer and many have chronic
physical and mental health issues.
Aging Jail Facilities
Both Main Jail South and Elmwood have very old
facilities that are in need of renovation or replacement.
The ongoing maintenance cost for these facilities is
increasing annually. Adding to this issue is the
increasing population of AB109 inmates who have
longer lengths of stay and therefore, add to the wear and
tear on the facilities. Muriel Wright Center – Temporary Closure
The Muriel Wright Center Ranch, in existence 1963,
serves young boys and girls committed by the Juvenile
Justice Court. Located in South San Jose, this juvenile
rehabilitation facility has a rated capacity of 64 beds and
a current operational capacity of 24 beds, twelve (12)
assigned to young boys ages 13 to 15.5 yrs and twelve
(12) assigned to girls ages 13 to 18 yrs.
Since 2006 the Department has realized improved
outcomes for youth with the adaptation of the
cognitive-based therapeutic model derived from best
practices found in the Missouri Model. In fact, in July of
2011, the Department was able to reduce the
operational capacity of the Muriel Wright Center from
48 beds to 24 beds due to budgetary reductions and a
diminishing need. Also, during this period, two
investigatory processes to serve the placement
population were embarked upon; the examination of
the potential to create a community care licensed
facility on the Muriel Wright Center campus, and an
effort to minimize the use of out-of-county and out-of-
state placements.
Both efforts resulted in the Department modifying its
placement practices and significantly increasing its
referrals to local community resources for wraparound
services, which enabled families and youth to receive
support within their homes and community. Within a
year of our pursuit in the two endeavors, the
Department realized over a 500% increase in the use of
wraparound services, thereby effectively addressing
both the need to serve youth locally and negating the
need to create a community care licensed facility.
Over this past fiscal year the census at the Muriel
Wright Center has fallen to record lows and has reached
levels which now make its operation fiscally impractical
to maintain. At the same time, the James Ranch census
had also been declining and is currently operating at
approximately 55% of capacity. This has led to an
opportunity to co-locate both populations on the same
campus. The planning includes relocating all existing youth within the Muriel Wright Center program and
placing all future committed youth at the James Ranch
as this facility has the rated capacity and the physical
structure to accommodate youth from the Muriel
Wright Center.
Because existing Muriel Wright Center staff will transfer
with the youth to the James Ranch, salaries and benefits
savings are not evident. Therefore, the Department is
reviewing the status of existing and future vacancies to
determine which positions can be temporarily
unfunded to produce General Fund savings.
Furthermore, the Department will identify savings from
its services and supplies budget as much of the clothing,
household supplies, etc., will be provided through the
James Ranch budget.
Implementing Evidenced-Based Practices
The Department has embarked upon providing services
that are based on Evidenced Based Practices. Training
on implementing evidence based practices are provided
to Probation employees as well as the tools necessary to
support better service to clients. Community based
service providers and other stakeholders associated
with the Adult and Juvenile Justice Systems will also be
trained on Probation’s paradigm shift towards the
delivery of evidence based services.
Public Safety Realignment – AB 109 Program
The Public Safety Realignment, the most significant
change in the criminal justice system in more than 30
years, was signed into law in April 2011. This legislation
shifted the responsibility of supervising specified
offenders being released from state custody back to
local counties for supervision in the community.
Additionally, this legislation changed the penal code
and sentencing laws to keep these offenders from being
committed to state prison.
A Community Corrections Partnership, consisting of
both criminal justice system partners and communitybased organizations, participated in the development of
Santa Clara County’s Implementation Plan. This cross-
system collaborative set forth an evidence-based service
delivery model to serve this new population. In addition
to a new fourth generation risk and needs assessment
tool, which effectively links offenders to appropriate
services and supervision, a Re-Entry Team was
established. This Re-Entry Team consisting of
Probation, Health and Behavioral Health professionals
engage with and assess offenders being released from
the California Department of Corrections and
Rehabilitation (CDCR) and/or County Jail custody to
develop individualized case plans that better prepare
offenders being released and transitioning back into the
community. These teams of professionals have visited
25 state prison facilities throughout California to assess
offenders.
Intensive supervision is being provided by Deputy
Probation Officers in the community at a ratio of 1:30.
This supervision includes the application of
motivational interviewing techniques, the use of
graduated sanctions for offenders, Cognitive Behavioral
Therapy, both mental health and substance abuse
treatment, as well as peer support groups, GED
preparation and educational/vocational training.
Additionally, the Probation Department has partnered
with other system partners to establish the Santa Clara
County Re-Entry Resource Center to effectively meet
the needs of offenders in the community. This
comprehensive approach to service delivery will
provide a one-stop center for offenders in need of
services and supervision. Caseload vs. Mandatory Furlough Days
The Medical Examiner-Coroner’s Office (MEC) is
mandated by law to adhere to the national standards
set forth by the National Association of Medical
Examiners (NAME), in the area of death investigation.
In 2011, there were 4,204 cases reported to the MEC, of
which 1,217 were under the jurisdiction of the MEC.
There are three (3) full-time Forensic Pathologists
currently assigned to the MEC that process those cases
(406 cases per Pathologist). As a result of labor
negotiations in Fiscal Year 2012, each Pathologist is
required to take 16 furlough days, resulting in being less
available to conduct autopsies, provide case reports
within national standard guidelines (i.e. homicide
cases), provide court testimony, and to meet/advise
families. This equals 48 days during which pathologists
are not available to perform their usual duties and be
available to cover other scheduled time off and
unplanned absences. These staffing issues have a
significant impact on the efficiency and effectiveness of
the MEC and reduce overall work output. The cost of processing toxicology and histology
specimens continues to increase due to the types of
tests processed and the level of scientific evaluation
needed to assess the samples. The MEC is looking for
ways to reduce these costs by seeking more cost
effective service providers, and avoid sending toxicology
and histology specimens to costly private labs
(whenever possible.) California Fostering Connections to Success Act
(AB 12)
In October 2008, the Federal government enacted the
Fostering Connections to Success and Increasing
Adoptions Act (PL 110-351). This law gives states the
ability to establish relative guardianship programs with
Federal financial participation of the costs. In addition,
this law makes Federal funds available for foster care,
kinship-guardianship, and adoption assistance benefits
to youths who meet certain conditions (e.g.,
employment and education-related requirements) until
the age of 21. The law provides California with an
unprecedented opportunity to access Federal funding
to improve the lives of our state's most vulnerable
youths.
Effective January 1, 2012, AB12 ensured that California
opts into the essential Federal funding opportunities to:
a) re-enact our existing Kin-GAP program to align with
new Federal requirements, and b) provide transitional
support to qualifying foster youths until age 21. The
ability to utilize Federal funds, to cover costs currently
borne by the State and counties, improves outcomes
and opportunities for young adults including
employment and housing success, reducing teen
pregnancy, decreasing reliance on public assistance, and
reducing other costly outcomes for young adults who
“age out” of foster care. Beginning January 1, 2012, DFCS,
DEBS, and the Probation Department partnered to
implement AB 12.
Wraparound
Effective July 1, 2012, Santa Clara County's Wraparound
Services will transition to a new funding model.
Historically, Wraparound Services have been provided
by primarily three providers who have delivered very
high level services, in home-based settings, to children
otherwise eligible for high level group home placement.
In the previous funding model, providers were funded at
the higher rate classification levels, and remaining funds
not utilized to cover actual cost of Wraparound Services
were reinvested into DFCS-approved and directed child
specific services by the providers. Under the new
funding model, the rate to providers will change (where
all providers receive a flat amount) and the County will manage the reinvestment dollars. This funding model
change requires issuing formal solicitations for the
services paid from reinvestment funds (currently
provided by one of the present contractors). As
transition to this new funding model occurs, it will be
critical that the current services continue until new
contracts are in place to prevent disruption of necessary
ongoing services for youths and families experiencing
high service needs. Center for Leadership and Transformation (CLT) –
Overpayment/Over Issuance and Debt Collection
To address the work of a current CLT effort in the Social
Services Agency, additional resources may be required
in the near future. In December 2011, two 10-person
teams began work on a CLT team effort to address two
issues: (1) how and why clients receive welfare
overpayments in any of the following programs:
CalFresh (formerly called Food Stamps), CalWORKs,
CalWORKs Employment Services, Refugee Cash
Assistance, the Cash Assistance Program for
Immigrants, and Foster Care, leading to a system of
“overpayment resolution,” and (2) how the current $98
million overpayment debt balance can be reduced
through collection of overpayments, write-off polices
for uncollectible repayment of General Assistance loans,
or other administrative remedies.
The teams are currently in the process of finalizing a
work plan to address the CLT project findings.
Preliminary findings indicate that the problems are
multi-faceted, involving a combination of standard
work processes, collection and CalWIN systems
software, and business analysis. Resources such as
additional Eligibility Examiners would be helpful to
review referrals, validate claims, and complete the
overpayment.
To automate work project credit entries (WPC),
additional resources are estimated at three full-time
employees including a system and business process
specialist, in addition to time and efforts from current
CLT team members, as well as six staff (Eligibility, Fiscal,
IT, Staff Development, and CalWIN Division) available
and dedicated to fully test system changes before
implementation.
Additional funding is also recommended for the County
to pursue separate service requests for CalWIN system
changes, which are otherwise required to be approved
by an 18 county CalWIN consortium and the vendor – a
lengthy prioritization process which could take several
years.
Healthy Families Program - FY2013 Governor’s Budget
The Healthy Families Program (HFP) provides health
coverage to children, up to age 19, in families with
income above the threshold to qualify for Medi-Cal but
below 250% of the federal poverty level (FPL).
The FY 2013 Governor’s Budget includes a proposal to
transition all children currently enrolled in HFP to the
Medi-Cal program (total transition). This proposal
would transition all enrollees over a nine-month period,
beginning in October 2012 or 90 days after the FY 2013
State Budget is adopted, whichever is later. The
projected statewide Medi-Cal caseload increase is 7.9%.
Locally, more than 32,000 cases require transition from
HFP to Medi-Cal (Family Based), with an additional
intake of approximately 600 new HFP cases per month. However, the Assembly has proposed an alternative
proposal to transition from HFP to Medi-Cal. The
alternative proposal transitions a subset of HFP
enrollees, those in the 100% to 133% FPL category
(partial transition). This proposal would start in
October 2012 or 90 days after the FY 2013 State Budget
is adopted, whichever is later. Under this scenario, in
Santa Clara County approximately 6,700 cases would
transition from HFP to Medi-Cal, with an additional
intake of approximately 100 new HFP cases per month.
The remaining HFP cases would transition in 2014
under Federal health care reform.
Start-up and ongoing funding has been proposed for
counties to support the HFP transition and the ongoing
Medi-Cal caseload increase. Funding levels would be
dependent upon the transition plan adopted (total or
partial transition from HFP to Medi-Cal). The Agency
has developed staffing and operations resource
scenarios to support both transition plans, and will
submit a proposal to the Board after the State takes
action.
Center for Leadership and Transformation (CLT)
The County's CLT is being utilized to facilitate and
implement an IHSS Business Process Redesign. The
purpose of the redesign is to improve the ability to
conduct timely assessments/reassessments, process
payroll and respond to customer inquiries. The CLT
team is assisting the business process redesign
subcommittees by focusing on workflow, staffing,
technology, communications, and training. The CLT
team will guide the subcommittees until full
implementation.
Seniors’ Agenda
Under the direction of Supervisor Kniss and Supervisor
Shirakawa, DAAS is undertaking the development and
completion of a Seniors’ Agenda to identify the priorities
and needs of the older adult population in the County of
Santa Clara. The vision of the Seniors’ Agenda is to have
a community wherein seniors and older adults are able
to fully participate, be supported in their homes,
protected from abuse, and have access to health and
social support in an integrated and coordinated
manner. In completing the Seniors’ Agenda, our aging
service partners and stakeholders have collaborated
with DAAS to gather census and health data, conduct
surveys and hold community forums to obtain input
from County residents.
Case Management, Information and Payrolling
System (CMIPS)
The State provides a statewide database and central
processing for In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) for
case management, payroll processing for Personal Care
Service Providers, producing statistical and financial
reports for counties and the State. The current system
(CMIPS I) is a twenty-seven-year-old Legacy application
that is obsolete.
The California Department of Social Services, with
technical assistance from the California Office of
Systems Integration, has designed and developed
CMIPS II to replace CMIPS I. CMIPS II will be hosted at
a central facility operated by the California Department
of Technology Services. The CMIPS II implementation
was scheduled for 2010 but was postponed due to
system development delays. Based on the revised
CMIPS II implementation schedule, Santa Clara County
is scheduled to begin implementation planning in June
2012 for a go-live date of December 2012. The change over to CMIPS II will shift IHSS provider payroll
processing responsibility from the counties to the State
(at the CMIPS II central facility). The Public Health Department engaged multiple
internal and external stakeholders to review the health
status and health trends within our County. This
process resulted in identification of three health
priorities, referred to as “winnable battles,” an
adaptation of the CDC’s winnable battle framework:
¦ Obesity Prevention: Increase healthy eating and
physical activity to prevent obesity and chronic
diseases;
¦ Tobacco Use Prevention: Decrease tobacco
exposure and use to prevent chronic diseases; and
¦ Injury Prevention: Promote safety and reduce
violence to prevent injuries.  These areas were chosen based on several factors,
including (1) impact on morbidity, mortality, disability
and quality of life; (2) Department’s collective ability and
capacity to make a significant impact in a three to five
year period; (3) the persistence of health disparities; (4)
potential to align with health care reform efforts; and (5)
alignment with the National Prevention and Health
Promotion Strategy.
The Public Health Department looks forward to the
following challenges and opportunities:
¦ How to sustain our strong Chronic Disease
Prevention work in the wake of elimination of
current Federal funding;
¦ How to launch a strategy for Injury and Violence
Prevention in the wake of competing County
priorities;
¦ Delivering a Latino Community Health Assessment;
¦ Initiating work on a Community Health
Improvement Plan;
¦ Launching a march towards National Public Health
Accreditation; and
¦ Building community and medical system resilience
and capability for Catastrophic Disaster response.

Several emerging areas of system of development are
planned for the current and next fiscal year:
School Linked Services (SLS) Implementation
In FY 2012, the Board of Supervisors approved a plan to
implement a new model of School Linked Services
(SLS). This plan will be implemented in FY 2013 and will
be administered by the MHD. This new initiative
involves 23 distinct entities comprised of ten school
districts and 13 service agencies or departments. The
plan will implement coordinated service delivery on
school campuses and in the community to students and
families of ten of the highest need districts in the county.
It is expected that the MHD will bring forward
additional requests and status reports as the SLS is
implemented in FY 2013.
Individual Education Plan (IEP) Related Services
Due to the repeal of AB3632 (which, delegated to the
counties the State’s responsibility for provision of
mental health services under the Federal Individuals
with Disabilities and Education Act) and the return of
responsibility for IEP-related mental health care back to
the 33 school districts of the County, the MHD
continues to work with providers and education
stakeholders to insure a smooth transition of this
responsibility. As the MHD proceeds with this
transition, there has been a need to reconsider how the
MHD will interface with the Special Education system.
This may result in modifications of contracted or
county operated services. The MHD plans to provide
updates and recommendations to the County Executive
and the Board of Supervisors regarding the status of
these particular services to the approximately 250
students currently served by MHD providers.
Crisis and Inpatient Services
The MHD has proposed to remove the current Crisis
Stabilization service provided through the Emergency
Psychiatric Service (EPS) from the Santa Clara Valley
Medical Center license in FY 2013. The plan is for the
program to remain basically as it is in terms of staffing,
but to be operated solely by the MHD. The program will
continue to provide psychiatric evaluations, but outside
of the hospital emergency room setting, thus allowing
for more programmatic flexibility. The MHD will be
exploring the feasibility of providing “psychiatric hold”
evaluation and crisis intervention programs in various
geographic areas of the county. Options will be
developed and presented to the Board of Supervisors
through the Health and Hospital Committee (HHC)
over the coming year. The Department has been challenged to find means of
providing health care services (to the inmate
population) that meet regulatory and accreditation
standards due to the increased census that has resulted
from the implementation of the Public Safety
Realignment AB 109 Program (AB109). Additionally,
the AB109 inmate population has created the need for
the Department to identify means of providing
preventative health care services as well as long term,
chronic care services to inmates sentenced to the Main
Jail under the AB109 program.
There has also been an increased demand for
comprehensive discharge planning or inmates released
from the Main Jail to insure that medically fragile
inmates are provided with appropriate continuity of
health care upon their re-entry into the community.

As with all agencies involved in providing health
services, DADS direction in the next few years will be
shaped by health care reform, which will affect its
reimbursement streams, integration with the primary
health care system, electronic health care record
keeping and main streaming of SUD clients under the
broader health care rubric. Changes in Medicaid rules
may have a major impact on reimbursement for
services, as the changes will render large segments of
the currently ineligible population eligible for public
insurance plans. Santa Clara County is participating in
the Medi-Cal/Waiver project. DADS has actively
pursued enrolling eligible clients into the LIHP (Low
Income Health Plan) because treatment for substance
abuse disorders will become part of the essential
benefits package in Affordable Care Act (ACA). The
Parity Act has not been fully implemented, as its
provisions will be eventually rolled into ACA.
The need for a reliable, caseload-driven source of
revenue has been an ongoing issue for DADS as an
agency. Almost 70% of clients in the Adult System of
Care are referred by criminal justice agencies, partly as a
result of the aggressive support of the courts for
treatment alternatives to incarceration. Much of the
criminal justice population receives SUD treatment
with County general funds, unlike a decade ago when
Substance Abuse and Crime Prevention Act (SACPA)
legislation provided funding to treat clients referred
from the court system. The mandate to provide
treatment to criminal justice-referred clients under
SACPA remained while the funding for treatment
evaporated. The effect of court-ordered treatment was
to divert resources away from voluntary clients to
criminal-justice clients.
Over the past several years, DADS has witnessed an
increase in demand for its services from voluntary
residents as well as those referred from other
departments such as Mental Health, Social Services,
Probation and the Courts without a corresponding
increase in funding to accommodate the rise in
demand. The increased demand for treatment has
occurred at a time when funding has either remained
unchanged or decreased. DADS responded to shrinking
funds by seeking grant dollars to purchase residential
treatment and transitional housing units for adult
clients. However, funding available through grants and
special funding streams are typically earmarked for
specific populations that meet relatively narrow
eligibility criteria, and many clients simply do not
qualify for services provided by specialized funding
sources.
Special funding was made available for specific criminal
justice populations such as those released under
California's Public Safety Realignment - AB109 plan for
FY 2011. The challenge for the DADS system will be to
create appropriate programs for the realignment
population that assist clients to return to the
community without significant criminal recidivism. To
accomplish this goal, DADS is partnering with several
county criminal justice agencies under the rubric of the
Multi-agency Plan (MAP), and in the Re-entry Resource
Center created specifically for AB109 residents.
The Youth System of Care (YSOC) is similarly
underfunded through Medi-Cal to cover the actual cost
of treatment. For FY 2013, the state has capped Minor
Consent Drug Medi-Cal funding, the result of which will
be to prevent future expansion of services. YSOC has
recently developed a brief therapy model for youth and
families for Valley Health Plan members that will
provide another means to provide much needed
services to youth and bring much-needed additional
revenues to DADS.
In spite of a challenging funding landscape, DADS has
pursued a number of innovative initiatives that hold
great promise for the future. DADS has been involved in
developing a presence in the County's ambulatory clinic
system, with a view to greater integration of behavioral
health and primary health care systems in the future. It
is exploring avenues for collaborating with the
Emergency Department and Hospital to identify and
treat patients who misuse or abuse alcohol and drugs.
DADS continues to invest in developing and
implementing new treatment and recovery approaches.
Examples include continuous monitoring plans for
adult clients, with a view to early detection and
treatment of relapse, client-directed clinical practice,
and data-driven management of the treatment system.


The Community Health Services Budget Unit is
comprised of Financial Support Services (now part of
the Patient Access Department), TB Refugee Clinic,
PACE Clinic and the Community Clinic grants.
Financial Support Services
The Patient Access Department will continue to
provide financial counseling assistance in the areas of:
Emergency Department, Express Care, Admitting,
Inpatient, Outpatient and Community Clinics. To
ensure that patients are financially cleared prior to
receiving elective services, a financial clearance center
pilot was established at Valley Health Center at Gilroy.
The pilot was successful, thus financial clearance
centers will be rolled out to two additional primary care
clinics in FY 2012. During the roll out for these two
clinics, the Center for Leadership and Transformation
will be utilized.
The Patient Access Department is moving toward a
pro-active and progressive model of completing the
front end processes, registration and financial
screening. Appointments for elective services will not be
confirmed until all required demographic and financial
information is captured, and payer/insurance
information is verified.
To support these efforts will require leveraging of
technology. Technology initiatives include: ¦ Better co-ordination between scheduling and
registration systems
¦ Creation of a patient financial database
¦ Implementation of a Quality Assurance tool
Federal Health Care Reform will require expanded
enrollment activities on the part of the Patient Access
Department. The first phase will include enrollment of
over 30,000 individuals in the Medicaid Coverage
Expansion (MCE) project.
TB Clinic
Emerging issues in TB include the fact that SCVMC's
patients are often uninsured or underinsured. More of
them are homeless as the economy becomes worse.
Obtaining medical services for their other medical
problems always remains a challenge.
Refugee Health Program
For refugee populations, the major issue is tying them
into ongoing care for the medical problems identified
through their initial exams. Refugees lose their Medi-Cal
benefits at eight months; dental care for adults is
virtually unavailable; mental health care for many of
refugees is a priority. Through a partnership with the
Centers for Survivors of Torture, on-site screening for
refugees who may be suffering from PTSD, anxiety and
depression is provided, which has been extremely
helpful for our patients.
PACE Clinic
For HIV/AIDS care, there has been an increase in
patients as people lose their healthcare insurance with
the loss of jobs. The Federal Health Resources and
Services Administration has become much more
stringent in reporting requirements, which the Department is hoping will be easier once the core HIS
project is implemented in FY 2014. There is an increase
in re-infection with TB, syphilis, and Hepatitis C
amoung PACE Clinic patients, all of which negatively
impact maintenance of optimal health for thouse
infected with HIV.
Many of the patients who are currently covered by Ryan
White grant funded programs qualify for the Low
Income Health Program (LIHP). Over the next year, the
clinic will continue an effort to transfer the patients to
LIHP, thus reducing the number of patients eligible for
coverage under Ryan White. It is too early to determine
the fiscal impact of these changes. The system of
comprehensive care provided at PACE Clinic will be
maintained as fully as possible. Economy Changes Behavior related to Healthcare
Santa Clara Valley Medical Center's (SCVMC) patient
population has grown 60% in the last decade, and is
projected to grow further with the passage of health
care reform. Nearly 1 in 2 of our adult paneled patients
has at least one chronic illness, and many of them have
multiple chronic diseases and social situations requiring
a greater intensity of service.
With the economy struggling to recover from a
recession, SCVMC will continue to be challenged by an
increasing demand for services by uninsured and
underinsured residents. People who have lost jobs have
also lost health insurance; as others struggle to make
mortgage payments, they may choose to forgo health
insurance and put off preventative or necessary primary
care or specialty health care services. Medications used
to control chronic disease may become unaffordable.
SCVMC's emergency department will continue to be a
vital resource for Santa Clara County residents.
Health Care Reform
Health Care Reform remains a significant issue for the
County, the Health & Hospital System and the nation.
The insurance and health care industries both will be
required to transform to meet the requirements of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. While a
Supreme Court decision (expected within the next few
months) could modify or negate portions of the Act,
other changes will go forward regardless of the decision.
For example, Medicare is beginning to withhold a
portion of payment and will only pay that withheld
portion if certain value metrics are met. This is called
the Value-Based Purchasing Program and starts at 1%
withholding the first year, with increasing withhold
amounts thereafter.
In addition, the "Bridge to Healthcare Reform" has
started in California through the Low Income Health
Program (LIHP). In 2014, persons enrolled in the LIHP
plus tens of thousands other people will become Medi-
Cal eligible and no longer be un-insured (depending on
the Supreme Court decision).
With this new coverage the population will be able to
choose among health plans and providers, and SCVMC
will need to compete for its patient population. The
Incentive Program (also known as the Delivery System
Reform Incentive Program) started in 2011 and is
helping SCVMC take the steps necessary to change its
systems to meet these new challenges.
Core Health Information Systems Project (EPIC)
In FY 2011-12, SCVHHS began the journey toward
automating all patient records in Mental Health, Drug
and Alcohol, Custody Health, Public Health, and Santa
Clara Valley Medical Center. This effort will have a
profound impact on residents of Santa Clara County
who receive care at any SCVHHS location, as well as for
the staff delivering care. The installation of the Epic
system will occur in waves beginning on May 4, 2013.
The installation will continue over the next 18 months
until all care locations are automated. Health
information will then be immediately available for staff
caring for the patient.
Currently, much of personal health information is only
available on paper. As paper is not often available at all
system access points in real time, this leads to caring for
patients without all of the necessary medical
information. This information gap frustrates our
patients and their providers, and requires repetition of
personal health information at all of our access points.
In the new system, not only will our staff have access to
the record, but the patient will also be able to access
their own information.
Furthermore, as multiple private providers in the
County use this system, we will be able to share (with
the patient's permission) across health care systems
(public and private) for the first time. The electronic
data will also offer the opportunity to track, trend, and
improve patient care and safety. Like most companies providing a service, health care
organizations nationwide are focused on the experience
of patients. Many patients have choices regarding where
they get their health care, and their choices are based on
recommendations from a provider, family, or friend, or
on their own experience with an organization.
Data shows that patients who think highly of their
health care provider are more likely to make difficult
lifestyle changes, and take medication as prescribed.
Patient experience really does improve the quality of
care. Medicare has recognized this and will begin in
2013 rewarding or penalizing institutions based on their
outcomes in both quality and safety.
SCVMC has collected patient experience data for nearly
a decade, and the data provides insight for improving
our focus. Collaboration with the California Association
of Public Hospitals' Safety Net Institute allows all public
hospitals to share learning and improve patient
experience. SCVMC has a program "Every Contact
Counts" that trains staff in patient experience data and
improvement strategies. The focus in the coming year
will be on noise, telephone access to SCVMC, and clinic
throughput time.
Budget Monitoring
SCVMC is expanding its monthly budget reporting and
analysis process. Continued and close monitoring of
budget performance will be a priority and will be
reported to the Board of Supervisors through the Health
and Hospital Committee. The Department submitted a one-time budget request
of $50,000 to create a Nuisance Abatement fund for the
purpose of having dedicated financial resources
available for abatement work in instances where
property owners are unresponsive to orders to remove
the violations from their property. The Department
desired to use the one-time funding as “seed” money to
get the program started. Any tax liens obtained from
non-compliant properties would eventually recoup
additional funding to add to the Nuisance Abatement
Fund.
While the County Executive’s Office agrees that public
nuisances should be abated when they create a public
health and safety issue, the up-front dedication of
General Fund monies is not a strategy that should be
pursued in this time of limited budgetary resources.
Instead, the Office of Budget and Analysis has discussed
with the Department the availability of the County
Contingency Reserve funding, which can be requested
on a case by case basis if egregious situations arise that
should be abated. The Department is in agreement with
this strategy.
Planning staff will have the ability to present the Board
of Supervisors with a Nuisance Abatement request
seeking authorization to have abatement work
performed by an outside contractor. Upon Board
approval, a court order can be obtained to have the
violations removed from the property. A contract for
abatement work can be executed and the contractor
work paid from funding appropriated from the
Contingency Reserve. Any tax liens that are recouped
on the property can be returned to the Contingency
Reserve. Martial Cottle Park is a 287.54 acre property located in
south San Jose, bounded by Branham Lane, Snell
Avenue, Chynoweth Avenue and Highway 85. The
project site is comprised of three parcels, of which one is
owned by the State of California (136.52 acres) and two
are owned by the County of Santa Clara (120.12 acres). A
30.9-acre site located at the southeast corner of the
project site remains as private property under the prior
owner’s retained Life Estate, as described in the
property transfer agreement between the County and
the Park donor. In the future, the Life Estate will become
part of the Park as the fourth parcel, but this area is
currently not included in the project.
The Donor’s vision for Martial Cottle Park is that it be
jointly developed, operated and maintained as a single
park unit. The establishment of the Park is intended to
provide recreational and educational resources that
honor the Donor’s intent to preserve and educate
visitors about Santa Clara Valley’s agricultural history.
The Park’s agricultural uses will be a component of
educational and interpretive programming about the
agricultural history of the Santa Clara Valley.
The main uses of Martial Cottle Park will include
recreational facilities and trails, educational and
interpretive programming related to the site’s cultural
and natural resources and agricultural production that
relates to the site’s history. Over half of the Park will be
in agricultural production capable of providing food for
local and regional markets using sustainable farming
practices. The Park’s agricultural facilities will include
on-site marketing opportunities for farmers, as well as
facilities for produce storage.
Recreational activities within the Park will be passive,
supported by a trail network through agricultural land
and through the enhanced seasonal wetlands, and by
picnic grounds and day use facilities. A visitor center, a
multi-use outdoor pavilion, grassy area, and picnic areas
will serve as community space for events and
gatherings.
The Board of Supervisors approved the Park Plan
project in February 2011. The California State Park and
Recreation Commission considered the environmental
findings and adopted the Park Plan project in March
2011. The Parks and Recreation Department is now
proceeding with Phase I implementation of the Park
Plan project, and plans to open the perimeter trail to the
public late in 2013, with full completion of Phase I
improvements in 2014. In the FY 2013 budget the
Department is requesting the addition of a Program
Manager II position to coordinate the overall
development of the park and to oversee future
operations.
Guadalupe River Watershed Mercury Total
Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) Project
The Guadalupe watershed has been on the impaired list
for mercury contamination for several years. A Total
Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) study is conducted once
a water body has been determined to be impaired
according to regulations issued by the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) under the federal Clean Water
Act. A mercury TMDL study for the entire San
Francisco Bay was approved by the State Water
Resources Board in 2007 and established standards for
mercury in fish tissue as well as source load standards
for the bay.
On June 18, 2009, the San Francisco Bay Regional Water
Quality (SFB-RWQCB) issued to Santa Clara County
two separate orders under Water Code section 13267
for technical reports regarding the potential erosion of
mining wastes into surface waters of the Guadalupe River Watershed from Almaden Quicksilver County
Park and the development of a coordinated monitoring
plan.
The Department complied with both orders by
submitting a technical report characterizing areas of
erosion in Almaden Quicksilver County Park and
completing a coordinated monitoring plan. The parties
named to develop and submit a coordinated
monitoring plan (Santa Clara Valley Water District, the
Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District, and the
Guadalupe Rubbish Disposal Company) also agreed to
share the costs of implementation of the plan. The
Board of Supervisors approved the cost sharing
agreement on November 9, 2010.
The next step is the development of project scope(s)
that are appropriate controls to contain any eroding
mining waste from entering surface waters inside
Almaden Quicksilver County Park. The coordinated
monitoring plan is also in the implementation phase,
and the consultant is currently in the process of
obtaining a permit to allow for the collection of fish at
several locations in order to test tissue as defined in the
plan.
Santa Clara Valley Habitat Conservation
Plan/Natural Community Conservation Plan
In 2001 and as part of the approval of a series of local
development projects, the United States Fish and
Wildlife Service (USFWS) and the California
Department of Fish and Game (CDFG), required the
County of Santa Clara, City of San Jose, Santa Clara
Valley Water District, and the Santa Clara Valley
Transportation Agency to undertake development of a
Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP) for Santa Clara
County. The HCP was undertaken so that local agencies
could address the cumulative and indirect effects of
future private and public sector development and
maintenance and operations projects on federally listed
endangered species.
Six local agencies known as the Local Partners
(County of Santa Clara, Santa Clara Valley Water
District, Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority,
and the Cities of Gilroy, Morgan Hill and San Jose)
have been working cooperatively with the FWS and
the CDFG to prepare the Santa Clara Valley Habitat
Plan (Habitat Plan). The Habitat Plan is a HCP under
federal endangered species law and a Natural
Community Conservation Plan (NCCP) under state
law, intended to provide an effective mechanism to
protect, enhance and restore natural resources in
specific areas of Santa Clara County while improving
and streamlining the environmental permitting
process for impacts on threatened and endangered
species.
The Habitat Plan evaluates the likely endangered
species related impacts of future public and private
sector development including County operations and
maintenance work. Currently, projects that need
endangered species-related permits from the State
and/or Federal wildlife agencies must undergo a lengthy
review process to obtain required permits to conduct
the specific work. An approved Habitat Plan would
provide a broad permit to allow specific covered
activities to take place over a 50-year term without the
need for individual project review and separate permits,
including projects such as bridge replacement, roadside
brush clearing, and park trail work.
The Draft Habitat Plan was released in December 2010
for public review. Comments have been received from
stakeholders, the public and elected officials since that
time. Local Partner staff have identified modifications
and refinements to the Draft Habitat Plan to respond to
concerns raised regarding the scale and cost of the Draft
Habitat Plan, size of the Reserve System, development
fees, equity of fees and other economic factors,
streamlining other permits such as the wetland
permitting process, public access and recreation in the
Reserve, and the formation of a new governing body to
implement the Habitat Plan. Local Partner staff and
consultants, in cooperation with the Wildlife Agencies,
are completing revisions to the Draft Habitat Plan to
produce a Final Habitat Plan that will be distributed for
public review and final adoption by the elected officials.
The Final Habitat Plan is anticipated for release in
Spring 2012. The Department’s Animal Care and Control Division
operates an animal shelter in San Martin that serves
unincorporated Santa Clara County from Stanford
University to the rural areas surrounding Gilroy. When
space is available, the Shelter also provides care for
animals from the cities of Morgan Hill and Gilroy. The
current animal shelter was built nearly 40 years ago and
typically operates at maximum animal capacity with
excess animals placed into foster care or with rescue
organizations.
The age, size, and design of the current facility
substantially impedes its animal sheltering capabilities.
The Shelter and its staff are currently unable to provide
the full array of modern animal shelter services, such as
a public spay/neuter clinic, a state-of-the-art clinic
equipped to handle complex animal medical and
behavioral conditions, free-roaming cat enclosures,
improved living quarters for dogs, and an inviting
destination for prospective pet adopters and Shelter
supporters.
In September 2011, the Board of Supervisors approved a
project to construct a new animal shelter and to
establish a Capital Building Campaign to raise donated
funds for its construction. With the help of benefactors
interested in funding the construction of a new shelter,
a modern, fully-equipped facility will enable the County
to provide residents a wide range of services at
affordable prices in a convenient location.
The programming phase for the new animal shelter
project is scheduled to be completed in December 2012.
At that time, the Department will work with
Administration and the Board of Supervisors to begin
the Shelter’s capital building campaign, starting with a
development plan.
City of San Jose Waste Tire Facilities
In November 2011, CalRecycle notified the Department
of Environmental Health that the City of San Jose
elected not to apply for grant funding to continue
inspecting its waste tire facilities. As a result, CalRecycle
requested that the Department assume oversight of
400+ waste tire facilities in the City of San Jose
beginning July 1, 2012.
The improper disposal of waste tires creates a fire
hazard, contributes to environmental blight, and
negatively affects the health of Santa Clara County
communities by harboring disease-carrying mosquitoes
and other vectors. The Department anticipates that
CalRecycle will provide approximately $400,000 to the
County to perform regulatory inspections at waste tire
facilities in San Jose. Following receipt of the grant, the
Department will return to the Board of Supervisors with
recommendations establishing an appropriate level of
staffing to implement the program.