The FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget attempts to address potential harm from State take-backs. Although the State is flush with new tax revenues, the majority will go to schools. The County could receive significantly more or less than projected upon State budget amendments. The Governor’s “May Revise” Budget was released on May 14, 2013. Of significant concern to counties is his proposal to redirect 1991 Realignment revenue from counties to the State. The CEO will monitor the eventual adoption of a State spending plan for 2013-14, and keep the Board apprised of any negative impact on the County budget and the public we serve. The State continues to manage its cash flow problems by delaying reimbursement to local government. Delays cause Shasta County to rely upon cash reserves and in some cases on short-term borrowing from the Treasury.

The 2013-14 Recommended Budget relies on use of fund balance carryover ($10.6 million) which results from a combination of spending reductions and revenue growth. Absent growth in our major discretionary revenues, future spending plans may require reductions in the level of General Fund support to Central Government and benefitting departments outside the General Fund.

The County has been proactive in meeting the challenges of funding retiree health insurance expense by funding two Other Post Employment Benefit Trusts. These irrevocable trusts are designed as a long-term investment with the objective of growth through regular payroll deposits and interest earnings. Other continuing concerns are benefit costs due to increases in health insurance for actives and retirees; workers compensation; and PERS retirement employer contribution rates. Through collaborative bargaining, the County’s labor force is now contributing the Employee Member Contribution to PERS (7 percent for Miscellaneous Employees, and 9 percent for Safety Employees). Changes to the retirement formulas will also yield future savings.
The Auditor Controller is a central service department that provides support services to county departments and select special districts. The A-87 Cost Plan is the mechanism to recover expenses incurred two years in arrears. The recovery of costs through the Cost Plan is reduced by the Board’s decision not to charge Special Districts for the Auditor’s costs, which reduces the Auditor’s recovery by $187,531. Several agencies are also exempt from A-87. The Board recognized that Special Districts had limited resources or ability to raise rates to cover these charges.The California Assessor’s Association, the California Department of Finance and the State legislature have been working with legislature to reconfigure appropriate funding for property tax administration. With the uncertainty of the State budget, the future of the funding is unknown.In FY 2011-12 the California Department of Agriculture, Division of Fairs and Expositions funding was eliminated from the state budget. With the loss of this funding the Intermountain Fair can continue to operate without General Fund support for two to three more years due to a significant fund balance.In December 2009 the board authorized a $2 million loan to Public Safety budget units to offset the loss of Public Safety Augmentation (Prop 172) revenue. A repayment plan was approved whereby one-half of any surplus Prop 172 receipts would be used to offset the loan. Accordingly, $1,629,801.60 has been repaid; the balance remaining on this loan is $370,198.40.The state will reimburse the County for construction expenditures only, in arrears and on a monthly basis. Additionally, the state will retain 5 percent of the conditional award amount, which is a little over $752,500, until the final project audit is complete, which the County is required to prepare within 90 days after completion of construction. The County will provide cash flow for the project, so the project fund will experience a negative cash balance and pay associated interest charges to the County Treasury. The County is responsible for all project cost and schedule overruns. County project costs through project completion are now estimated at $3.4 million (up from $2.5 million). Cost escalators included square footage increases to comply with code requirements and to accommodate Probation fiscal and administration functions. State reviews and delayed approvals extended the project timeline by over a year. Many costs were not eligible for state funding, including architectural design, construction management, County administrative costs, permits/fees/testing, non-fixed furniture/fixtures/equipment, and state Real Estate Due Diligence review work. State agreements do not absolutely require the state to provide the $15 million state funding needed to complete the project. The Probation Department, Public Works Department and County Administrative Office will work closely to mitigate negative financial impacts to the County during this valuable and important project.

Operating expenses will increase in the new facility. In December 2008, annual operating costs were estimated to increase by $413,000. That estimate has since been increased to $600,000. The County Administrative Office and the Probation Department continue to work to find the needed annual resources. Tobacco settlement payments are dependent upon cigarette sales volume. Receipts have declined 22 percent since FY 2009-10. The master settlement agreement report is received annually in April so we are not able to quantify what receipts to expect in the coming year.

The AOC’s timeline to commence construction of the New Redding Courthouse has been delayed until at least 2014-15. The County’s holding over in the Public Safety Building was extended to December 31, 2013; with the timing of the new courthouse still uncertain, the County will seek to amend the holding over in the Public Safety Building until December 2014. Future budgets will be impacted by the need to provide alternative office space for both Probation and Sheriff staff and operations during the construction of the new courthouse and the remodel of the existing courthouse.

Expenditures for the conflict public defense are difficult to predict due to the nature of the Court-ordered expenses in which the County has no discretion or control. FY 2009-10 saw indigent defense costs increase dramatically with the conclusion of one death penalty case. The defense costs for this one case alone exceeded three million dollars since FY 2005-06. The FY 2013-14 Requested Budget assumes no new death penalty cases. Should one or more new death penalty cases be assigned in Shasta County, then the cost of this budget could rise dramatically.The department has been assigned a very complex securities’ fraud case that has required the full-time commitment of one attorney and one investigator. Professional forensic accountant services were required in the defense of this case, as well as out-of-state expert witnesses. This case is being prosecuted by the state Attorney General’s Office. Because the department has never defended a white collar crime of this magnitude, the department received an additional General Fund allocation of $250,000 to fund several affected expenditure accounts such as Professional Investigative Services which were necessary to prepare for this case. The case went to trial in March of 2013 and is it is estimated it may conclude by May 2013, though it is difficult to predict.

The timing of payments to and from outside agencies often results in negative cash within the Public Safety Fund. Each of the departments has worked to stay current on billing for services and no grant funds are disbursed to outside agencies prior to receipt of the offsetting revenue. The Auditor-Controller changed the transfer-in of the General Fund contribution to the first of the month which has also helped improve the cash flow in this fund.

Sales tax revenue from Public Safety Augmentation (Proposition 172) is distributed to counties based on their percentage of statewide sales tax collection. In FY 2012-13, the County’s pro-rata share of statewide sales tax declined from 0.005211 to 0.004889, our lowest share in ten years. The final Prop 172 receipt is not received until August, but based on receipts to date it is projected to just make our target budget. Year-to-date receipts are just over 1 percent ahead of the prior year.

When receipts exceed the budget we have utilized one-half of the excess to repay a loan from the General Reserve to the Public Safety Fund in 2009. Accordingly, $1,629,801.60 has been repaid; the balance remaining on this loan is $370,198.40.

The balance in the Prop 172 Reserve at June 30, 2012 was $1,928,840. The CEO has authorized the use of $507,854 of the Reserve in the FY 2013-14 budget to offset additional operating expense for the new Juvenile Rehabilitation Facility.

General Fund and Proposition 172 revenues continue to stay flat or decline and constitute 79.2 percent of the District Attorney’s total revenues. The CCPEC approved FY 2013-14 funding augmentations in the District Attorney’s (and Public Defender’s) budgets as they will be responsible to staff nearly all revocation hearings beginning July 1, 2013 as part of the continued transfer of state responsibilities to counties; this will include all Mandatory Supervision, all Post Release Community Supervision, and most of state Parole's revocation hearings, as well as the Probation revocation hearings they have always staffed. The CCPEC augmented this revenue because the 2011 Realignment allocation the District Attorney (and Public Defender) receive from the state (which is separate from the CCP allocation) is only about half the amount necessary to fund one full-time attorney and does not include any funding for support staff, training, equipment, supplies, etc. The state and a nine-member CEO workgroup are currently working on new CCP and DA/PD permanent funding allocation methodologies for FY 2014-15 and beyond, as well as 2011 Realignment growth allocations (however, the state Department of Finance has the authority to make the final determination on the growth allocations). The Governor's 2012 November ballot initiative, called the Schools and Local Public Safety Protection Act of 2012, which included a temporary increase in the state sales tax rate and income tax for people earning over $250,000 annually in order to fund education and a Constitutional Amendment to protect realignment funding for counties, was approved by the voters on November 6, 2012. The Constitutional Amendment protects the state funding source for 2011 Realignment revenue which comes from Vehicle License Fees (VLF) in the statewide amount of $453.4 million ($300 million freed up by an additional $12 Vehicle Registration Fee (VRF) and $153.4 million that was previously dedicated to cities and Orange County for general purpose use) and 1.0625% of the state's sales and use tax (SUT) that would have ordinarily gone to the state general fund. Both of these funding sources, though now constitutionally protected, are not stable, as receipts are directly related to the health of the economy. The state has projected that the statewide revenue for 2011 Realignment will grow, as the AB109 population grows, through FY 2013-14, and will then decline slightly and stabilize in FY 2014-15 as the AB109 population stabilizes, should the realigned programs be successful in reducing recidivism. In order for the funding amounts to grow statewide the state would have to dedicate more of its SUT to the 2011 realigned programs, i.e., the 1.0625% would need to be increased. The District Attorney and his staff are to be commended for working proactively towards difficult budget solutions that protect public safety and the fiscal health of the County during one of the biggest shifts in public safety responsibilities in recent history.The Governor has proposed that counties assume responsibilities for the state’s Child Support Services program in Phase II of his Realignment Proposal. There is little information or detail available on Phase II of his Phase II Realignment Proposal. The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act will have some impact on the Child Support Program; however, the extent of the impact is still unknown. The state DCSS and the California Child Support Directors Association have formed a workgroup to analyze the effects of the federal health care reform legislation.General Fund and Proposition 172 revenues continue to stay flat or decline and constitute 65.2 percent of this Sheriff’s budget’s total revenues. The state and a nine-member CEO workgroup are currently working on new AB 109 permanent funding allocation methodologies for FY 2014-15 and beyond, as well as 2011 Realignment growth allocations (however, the state Department of Finance has the authority to make the final determination on the growth allocations). The Governor’s 2012 November ballot initiative, called the Schools and Local Public Safety Protection Act of 2012, which included a temporary increase in the state sales tax rate and income tax for people earning over $250,000 annually in order to fund education and a Constitutional Amendment to protect realignment funding for counties, was approved by the voters on November 6, 2012. The Constitutional Amendment protects the state funding source for 2011 Realignment revenue which comes from Vehicle License Fees (VLF) in the statewide amount of $453.4 million ($300 million freed up by an additional $12 Vehicle Registration Fee (VRF) and $153.4 million that was previously dedicated to cities and Orange County for general purpose use) and 1.0625% of the state’s sales and use tax (SUT) that would have ordinarily gone to the state general fund. Both of these

 funding sources, though now constitutionally protected, are not stable, as receipts are directly related to the health of the economy. The state has projected that the statewide revenue for 2011 Realignment will grow, as the AB109 population grows, through FY 2013-14, and will then decline slightly and stabilize in FY 2014-15 as the AB109 population stabilizes, should the realigned programs be successful in reducing recidivism. In order for the funding amounts to grow statewide the state would have to dedicate more of its SUT to the 2011 realigned programs, i.e., the 1.0625% would need to be increased. The Sheriff and his staff are to be commended for working proactively towards difficult budget solutions that protect public safety and the fiscal health of the County during one of the biggest and most challenging public safety changes in decades. The department is vigorously pursuing increasing state allocations. Their victim assistance program is recognized as a leader in claims processing and should be 100 percent funded by the state.


Due to the continuing decline in County discretionary revenue, as well as revenues dedicated to public safety, in FY 2008-09 the census in the Juvenile Hall was decreased to and has been held at approximately 30 minors.

Senate Bill (SB) 81, enacted in 2007, sent all low-level juvenile offenders housed at the state Division of Juvenile Justice (DJJ) back to counties, along with Youthful Offender Block Grant (YOBG) revenue of approximately $300,000 annually. SB 81 (Local Youthful Offender Rehabilitative Facility Construction 
Funding Program) also provided for a lease-revenue bond funding program for the purpose of constructing new local Juvenile Hall facilities. Shasta County applied and was awarded $15 million in state funding towards a new $18.5 million 90-bed Juvenile Rehabilitation Facility. County General Funds in the amount of $3.4 million have been budgeted in a new project budget (16902). The Groundbreaking was held on April 24, 2012 and the estimated opening is the fall of 2013. Funding for increased operational costs (now estimated to be an additional $600,000 per year, up from the original estimate of $413,000 per year) will come from Proposition 172 and Proposition 172 Reserves until ongoing revenue can be identified.

Finally, as part of the Governor’s Public Safety Realignment plan in FY 2012-13 the state began charging counties to house high-level juvenile offenders at DJJ at $24,000 per ward per year. Shasta County currently has no juvenile offenders incarcerated at DJJ. This is a new cost to counties and there is no identified funding nor did the state allocate funding.


General Fund and Proposition 172 revenues continue to stay flat or decline and constitute 20.3 percent of Probation’s total revenues. AB 109 and SB 678 revenue make up 48.3 percent of Probation’s total revenues. The state and a nine-member CEO workgroup are currently working on new CCP permanent funding allocation methodologies for FY 2014-15 and beyond, as well as 2011 Realignment growth allocations (however, the state Department of Finance has the authority to make the final determination on the growth allocations). The Governor’s 2012 November ballot initiative, called the Schools and Local Public Safety Protection Act of 2012, which included a temporary increase in the state sales tax rate and income tax for people earning over $250,000 annually in order to fund education and a Constitutional Amendment to protect realignment funding for counties, was approved by the voters on November 6, 2012. The Constitutional Amendment protects the state funding source for 2011 Realignment revenue which comes from Vehicle License Fees (VLF) in the statewide amount of $453.4 million ($300 million freed up by an additional $12 Vehicle Registration Fee (VRF) and $153.4 million that was previously dedicated to cities and Orange County for general purpose use) and 1.0625% of the state’s sales and use tax (SUT) that would have ordinarily gone to the state general fund. Both of these funding sources, though now constitutionally protected, are not stable, as receipts are directly related to the health of the economy. The state has projected that the statewide revenue for 2011 Realignment will grow, as the AB109 population grows, through FY 2013-14, and will then decline slightly and stabilize in FY 2014-15 as the AB109 population stabilizes, should the realigned programs be successful in reducing recidivism. In order for the funding amounts to grow statewide the state would have to dedicate more of its SUT to the 2011 realigned programs, i.e., the 1.0625% would need to be increased.

Additionally, on October 11, 2010, then Governor Schwarzennegger signed SB 678 (California Community Corrections Performance Incentives Act of 2009) which financially rewarded counties for reducing adult felony probationer recidivism by using evidence-based practices (the state shares the savings they realize from reduced prison commitments with counties). Our County Probation Department has been relatively successful with this program, has received over $1.5 million to date, and requests the addition of new staff to continue the departments hard work and success in this area. However, the revenue is declining, the adult felony probation population is also declining due to AB 109, and the legislation, as currently written, sunsets on December 31, 2014. The Chief Probation Officers of California statewide association is currently in negotiations with the state to attempt to stabilize and make the funding permanent.
 

As part of their two-year general fund reduction requirement, the California Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA) was directed to take a $12 million permanent reduction in its FY 2012-13 budget. While most of the CDFA’s general fund reductions went into effect last fiscal year, their Division of Measurement Standards continues to struggle financially. Counties have been notified that the state will not provide counties with funding for the Petroleum and Weighmaster programs as they have been doing for many years. The department has historically received approximately $8,000 annually for these activities.


The number and complexity of court-ordered probate cases has increased, which is reflected in the increase in expenditures over the previous fiscal year. Should it continue, staffing levels may also need to increase.

In past years, MHSA has been a target of budget solutions at the state level. MHSA funds are volatile and vary with economic conditions. They are projected to increase in the current budget year, but reserves will need to be augmented in future years to smooth variances in revenue from year to year. Beginning in FY 2013-14, the MHSA Plan will be reviewed and approved locally by the Board of Supervisors rather than a state commission. This is anticipated to increase administrative efficiency and allow for a more community-centered approval process.


There are immediate concerns relative to the Mental Health budget. Despite significant efforts to reduce costs for treatment of acute and long-term psychiatric conditions, the volume and severity of clients coming into the local mental health system has increased significantly over the past year and the cost of providing the most intensive services has also risen. An analysis of current expenditures indicates that those related to support and care of persons will exceed $11 million, or more than half of the total Mental Health expenditures in FY 2012-13. Mental Health expenditures in the “support and care" category are expected to surpass the current budget by more than $1.8 million.

HHSA staff have taken steps to identify and implement efficiencies and curb controllable costs such as holding essential but non-critical positions vacant and allocating costs to Mental Health Services Act programs wherever appropriate. However, those actions are not sufficient to sustain the Mental Health budget. For this reason, the Board of Supervisors approved a transfer of $1.19 million in 1991 realignment revenue from Social Services to Mental Health on May 7, 2013. Although Social Services is experiencing 1991 realignment growth and can sustain the $1.19 million transfer, cash flow is a continuing concern for Mental Health and Social Services due to the timing of reimbursements from the State and that some of the revenue received by Mental Health must be transferred to the Mental Health Services Act budget based on allowable services.

Additionally, the settlement of the Katie A. lawsuit makes mental health services for foster children an entitlement. Shasta County's child welfare and mental health systems have worked together with service providers to address the mental health needs of children, youth and families in the child welfare system for a significant period of time. Although this coordination is already occurring, further expanded services will be necessary to meet the court ordered requirements. Counties are currently in process of completing Readiness Assessment and Service Delivery Plan documents. These actions are designed to pull together people and information from the Child Welfare Service system, the Mental Health system and other stakeholders. The timeline for completion of these documents and their submission to the State Department of Health Care Services was May 15, 2013. A Fiscal Task Force Is meeting at the State level to continue to work on funding resources for mandated services.

Some children and youth previously served in the Healthy Families program are now eligible for Medi-Cal in FY 2013-14, due to a change in the eligibility criteria. This expansion of Medi-Cal eligibles and changes to the eligibility criteria for those most in need of mental health services in the Healthy Families program is expected to increase the number of children and youth eligible for services through county Mental Health departments. Some additional funding was provided under the 2011 realignment to reflect the expanded population, but it remains to be seen whether the additional funding is sufficient to meet the needs of the children transferred from the Healthy Families program.


The most pressing issue for Public Health at this time is the State’s approach to funding services under the expansion of Medi-Cal services as a part of health care reform. It is anticipated that the State will be responsible for the network of services to an expanded population including anyone having income below 138 percent of the federal poverty level. During the first three years of the Medi-Cal expansion, the federal government will reimburse for 100 percent of the cost of these services. During the years following, federal matching will fall to 95 percent and then decline each year ultimately to 90 percent. The State proposes to divert a portion of counties’ 1991 health realignment to pay for the State cost. While there is no match requirement initially, the State believes that people who are currently eligible for, but not enrolled in Medi-Cal, may apply for these benefits, increasing the State's current cost for services. Thus, the State is looking to capture additional revenue for the increased population. The HHSA is working with


the County Executive Officer and the California State Association of Counties to influence the State’s decision about health care reform implementation in order to keep as much in health realignment to stabilize and even augment the County’s prevention services.

From January 1, 2012 to December 31, 2013, Shasta County is participating in the CMSP Path2Health, a low income health program (UHP) authorized by the State's 1115 waiver and considered a "bridge to health care reform." This program is funded by a combination of CMSP revenue provided by the counties and 50% matching federal Medicaid funds. With the commencement of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) in January 2014, many clients who are considered "medically indigent” and covered under Path2Health will qualify for Medi-Cal coverage reimbursed 100 percent by the federal government.

Discussions are occurring between the State and counties regarding how to optimally implement Medi-Cal expansion. It is anticipated that the State will provide the network of services and cover the majority of CMSP’s current beneficiaries; however, a residual population of individuals would remain the


responsibility of CMSP. To fund this residual population, the State proposes to divert some 1991 health realignment funds to support its costs. However, during the first three years of the ACA expansion, the federal government reimburses for 100 percent of the cost of services to the expanded population. Therefore, the State would be diverting funds to pay for other State obligations. Discussions on this matter continue at the State and County level.




This is the twelfth full year of CCS operating under Public Health oversight and staff continues to closely monitor expenditures for both administrative and diagnostic and treatment services. As in previous years, these costs are somewhat unpredictable due to fluctuations in Medi-Cal client ratios and varying high-risk medical needs among CCS children. Therefore, due to the possibility of additional medical care costs, increased Medi-Cal caseload, particularly related to the implementation of Health Care Reform, and the decline in 1991 realignment revenues, Public Health bears the risk for any additional costs.


Through the 2011 Public Safety Realignment, responsibility for Alcohol and Drug program activities passed to the counties with a share of state sales tax to replace the state general fund contribution. Among the programs realigned is responsibility for Drug Medi-Cal, a federal entitlement. Because this entitlement can expand rapidly with health care reform and parity laws, it presents a financial risk to the County in future years. Restricting access to drug and alcohol treatment due to limited treatment dollars, on the other hand, may increase law enforcement costs, incarceration costs, losses to local businesses, and medical treatment costs due to injuries caused by intoxicated individuals. The HHSA is advocating for appropriate funding to support growing costs and will be monitoring how 2011 realignment will be structured into the future to protect County liability.


While this program was adopted by the voters, funding for this program was completely eliminated in FY 2009-10. SACPA laws are still in existence and the court can continue to allow offenders to participate in treatment services funded through other programs or self-pay.

Some issues surrounding 2011 realignment remain unresolved, including the impact of realigned responsibility for Drug Medi-Cal services. Since Drug Medi-Cal was realigned to counties, the counties have taken on a significant federal entitlement program, without guarantee that realignment funds will grow commensurately with program costs. Funds may have to be diverted from Perinatal and other mental health programs in future years to fund Drug Medi-Cal services should realignment revenues fail to fully support services, which could potentially escalate costs in other programs such as mental health and child welfare. 

As a result of State budget solutions, the Social Services fund continues to have cash flow issues. With implementation of 2011 realignment, which eliminated State funding to a number of programs and replaced funds with dedicated sales tax revenues, counties were left with two months of previously State expenditures to support while waiting for sales tax revenue to arrive. State funding was previously received in advance to assist counties with the extreme nature of entitlement payments. With this policy change, counties are now 'floating' costs until revenue is received, resulting in cash shortages in the Social Services fund that may persist into the future.


he HHSA is organized into a client-centered branch model that includes Regional Services, Children's Services, Adult Services, Public Health, and Business & Support Services to allow for more efficient and coordinated delivery of services to all of our clients. The HHSA continues to work closely with County Support Services in the county’s conversion to an Approved Local Merit System (ALMS) for personnel. This conversion will eliminate the need for two separate personnel systems within the HHSA and the County. Shasta County is one of several counties working directly with the County Welfare Directors Association, and the California State Association of Counties (CSAC), and CalHR to update and clarify personnel system regulations to make conversion to ALMS simpler. Ultimately, the ALMS will provide us with a more modern and efficient system and a significant level of local control over how classifications using social services funding mechanisms are designed, recruited, and maintained.

The budget for state funding is based on current year estimates. The OC management will closely monitor state funding and attempt to locate new revenue opportunities or decrease expenditures, as warranted.


The most significant threat to this budget lies in risk associated with growing caseloads in child welfare programs as well as changes to foster care due to legislative and court decisions. In previous years, group homes and foster family homes have received substantial, court-directed increases. Currently, a case has been filed on behalf of foster family agencies (FFAs) that, if successful, would increase payments to these agencies as well. Given the recent history of court decisions, it is likely that the FFA lawsuit will result in additional and retroactive county cost for children placed in foster family homes. Further, the legislature has approved the extension of foster care and adoptions assistance benefits in some cases to families with children up to age 21 years. This increase is being phased in over a three-year period, but it will add costs for care of children who would have otherwise “aged our of the system. Beginning in FY 2013-14, sales tax collected in excess of base allocations will be directed, in pail, to a $200 million statewide restoration of funding for child welfare services. With increased resources for


program services, more emphasis can be placed on activities to decrease the number of children placed in foster care and/or adoptive homes while continuing to maintain their safety as well as services to support children being placed in less restrictive settings, such as treatment services in foster care settings instead of group homes.

The mandatory Federal budget cuts known as the sequester will impact the Housing Authority budget. Much is still unknown on how the funds will flow in FY 2013-14. Management will be monitoring revenue allocations from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and adjust expenditure levels accordingly.


The County and municipalities supporting our Library System continue to face significant budget challenges. If non-governmental resources cannot backfill any financial loss and/or increased expenses, library programs may need to be cut and other cost savings strategies implemented.


The County’s Contingency Reserve is the source of funding for emergencies that may exceed amounts built into the budget on a unit basis. This account is used exclusively as a fund of “last resort" when all other options have been exhausted.

On January 3, 2012, the IHSS Governing Board approved a memorandum of understanding (MOU) between the Shasta County IHSS Public Authority and the California United Homecare Workers. The MOU provides for wages of $9.30 per hour and for health insurance to be provided to a maximum of 305 IHSS providers. The MOU will expire on December 31, 2013, and negotiations for a successor MOU are expected to begin sometime in fall 2013. In 2012, the state obtained final authorization from the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) for a Community First Choice Option (CFCO), increasing the federal cost sharing for IHSS wages and benefits from 50 percent to 56 percent. Since the county pays for one-third of the non-federal share of cost, the CFCO resulted in a two percent reduction in county cost (this savings is reflected in the Welfare Cash Assistance budget [BU 541]). Other counties currently in negotiation with IHSS providers have reported that the CFCO savings and how the savings should be spent has been a frequent topic at the bargaining table.

