The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget relies on use of General Fund/fund balance carryover ($8.8
million) which results from a combination of spending reductions and revenue growth. Absent growth in
our major discretionary revenues, future spending plans may require reductions in the level of General
Fund support to Central Government and benefitting departments outside the General Fund.The Auditor Controller is a central service department that provides support services to county
departments and select special districts. The A-87 Cost Plan is the mechanism to recover
expenses incurred two years in arrears. The recovery of costs through the Cost Plan is reduced
by the Board’s decision not to charge Special Districts for the Auditor’s costs, which reduces the
Auditor’s recovery by $216,938. Several agencies, such as the schools, are also exempt from A-87. The Board recognized that Special Districts have limited resources or ability to raise rates
to cover these charges.

The fund balance available in Accumulated Capital Outlay after adoption of the CEO’s recommended
budget will be approximately $8.5 million. Within the next five to ten years the County will undertake a
number of significant capital projects, including repurposing the old Courthouse and Courthouse Annex,
the Justice Center, and the old Juvenile Hall.Annual staff and operating costs for a 64-bed facility are estimated to start at $5.5 million in 2018 and
projected to increase by approximately three percent (standard inflation) per year. These costs are offset
by reducing the Jail budget by $1.1 million due to the transfer of the kitchen and laundry facilities, as well
as food costs for both facilities. Costs are further offset by transferring the Sheriff’s current Work Release
budget and related AB 109/2011 Realignment revenue. The County planned to fund the net increase of
$2.1 million per year from General Funds and Proposition 172 (Public Safety Augmentation) funds;
however, updated operational costs from September 2015 reflect a net increase of $3.1 million the first
year of operation. The Board will need to approve a funding source for the increase. Only a portion of the cost to enforce the County’s medical marijuana ordinance is contained in this budget
unit; included are appropriations for legal services for nuisance abatement hearings, and clean-up of
illegal grows. Not included is the cost of the staff dedicated to the enforcement; those costs are included
in the General Fund Transfer Out in the General Revenue Budget Unit (Building Inspectors, and
associated costs $286,222; Deputy Sheriff(s) $175,364).

The future of the Secure Rural Schools Act is unknown. The most recent authorization of the Secure
Rural Schools Act expired on September 30, 2013. On April 15, 2015, the Secure Rural Schools Act was
extended for two years; however, the future of the program is unknown after the two year extension.
Certain court fines and fees, which accrue to the Courthouse Construction Fund, were pledged for debtservice
on the bonds. When receipts are not sufficient, the General Fund must still make the debt-service
payment. When the debt is retired in 2023, any remaining funds in the Courthouse Construction Fund will accrue to the State. The CAO’s Office has worked with the Auditor-Controller to ensure the County’s
share of all the Courthouse Construction Fund is appropriately transferred to the General Fund.

Sales tax revenue from Public Safety Augmentation (Proposition 172) is distributed to counties based on
their percentage of statewide sales tax collection. The County’s pro-rata share of statewide sales tax for
public safety was just reduced to $0.004576 (down from $0.004782), the lowest share since its inception
in 1994. The final Prop 172 receipt is not received until August; year-to-date receipts are more than five
percent lower compared to this time last year.
The beginning fund balance in the Proposition 172 Reserve at July 1, 2015 was $7.1 million. FY 2015-16
and FY 2016-17 will draw down the reserve by $1.4 million each. The estimated ending reserve balance
at June 30, 2017 is $4.2 million. With the reduction in the County’s prorate share of the statewide sales
tax revenue it is doubtful that the reserve will be replenished in the near future.

In late 2015, the state DCSS, along with the Local Child Support Directors Association, embarked on a
task to update the state budget allocation methodology for LCSAs; the current methodology dates back to
the 2000s. It is likely Shasta County, along with other medium and small-sized local county agencies, will
experience a funding decrease, while the larger-sized agencies could receive more funding. A local share
of cost for this program, which has never had one, is also being discussed.

Some of the activities of the unit are performed at the request of the local court and fees may not always
apply or are waived. This is the second consecutive year that revenues are declining. The Sheriff’s staff
is closely watching expenditures without losing the ability to meet legal requirements of these services.

Although the Board of Supervisors approved additional funding (public safety general purpose funds and
Hatchet Ridge Community Benefit Fund) to support reopening the Burney Station and to fund Deputy
positions, there’s an ongoing challenge to fill the Deputy positions. Deputies assigned to and living in the
area of Burney are eligible to receive a resident deputy stipend of five percent.

SB678, the Community Corrections Performance Incentive Act of 2009 formula begins with a base of
$200,000 then counties are eligible for additional monetary performance incentive grants for reducing the
rate of the number of probation revocations to state prison. Unfortunately, Shasta County has a very high
rate and will only receive the $200,000 base allocation in FY 2016-17. A byproduct of receiving less
revenue is that there are fewer staff and contracted service providers to implement evidence-based
programs, processes, and services to reduce recidivism. To help offset this declining revenue, the local
Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) Executive Committee voted to allow Probation to use some of
its AB109 fund balance to fund eight positions. Even with the additional AB109 for this purpose, overall 

AB109 is declining in FY 2016-17 as there was a large one-time allocation to counties in FY 2015-16 to
help offset a major decrease for FY 2015-16. Due to the significant decline in SB678 for Shasta County,
Probation created a focus group in collaboration with its justice partners to determine the reasons for the
continued high return to prison rate and to create a plan to work together to rehabilitate offenders. This
collaboration is further challenged by the increased number of individuals being released from California
prisons to meet federal requirements to reduce California prison populations.

As previously mentioned, revenue received from clients is based on their ability to pay and can fluctuate.
HHSA will continue to monitor revenues and prepare a fee analysis to determine if a request to the court
will be made for a fee increase. For those mentally ill individuals who have been determined to be “gravely
disabled” due to their illness and who require specific care, placement, and treatment assistance,
additional resources are provided from the Mental Health budget (BU 410). HHSA is continuing to work
on preventative actions in both the Public Guardian and Mental Health programs to reduce
hospitalizations by placing clients in the lowest level of appropriate care.
Since the passage of Proposition 47, there have been increased demands from the courts for the County
to engage in restoring misdemeanants to competency to stand trial. On occasion, there have been
requests to perform investigations for LPS conservatorships for these misdemeanants. In addition, some
felons who cannot be restored to competency to stand trial are returned to Shasta County and the courts
have requested investigations for Murphy conservatorships. Both of these situations have required
substantial additional legal and investigative resources. 

The Department continues to lose funding from State Highway User Tax. This year, the department
expects that approximately $2.5 million in funding will be lost. The department is optimistic that the
funding will be restored in the future; however, it is not known when the funding will be restored.

Included in the FY 2016-17 budget request are costs to implement the Assisted Outpatient Treatment
Program, or Laura’s Law. The local implementation of a three-year pilot will require additional resources
in the Adult Services Branch, as well as Public Defender’s and County Counsel’s offices. Laura’s Law
allows for court-ordered assisted outpatient treatment for people with serious and deteriorating mental
illness with a recent history of psychiatric hospitalization, incarceration, or violent behavior and are
routinely refusing to participate in ongoing treatment.
Since March 2012, costs for acute hospitalization and Institutes for Mental Diseases (IMDs) have stayed
at high levels. Most of the IMD cost is ineligible for Medi-Cal reimbursement and, thus, must be supported
within department realignment funds. Efforts to mitigate costs in this area have been initiated and are a
strong focus of the HHSA, such as contracting with Board and Care providers to provide housing and
supportive services for clients to step down from higher levels of care.
Medi-Cal Cost Settlements for expenses incurred as far back as 2010 are still pending and have not been
included as part of this budget. Although $1.5 million in overdue cost settlement payments were received
during FY 2015-16, an estimated $1 million total is owed for prior years for costs above the interim rate
the state paid Shasta County. Payment for this is still held up by state negotiations with the federal
government regarding the State Plan Amendment that has a retroactive effective date of January 1, 2009.
Through 2011 Realignment, responsibility for mental health and alcohol and drug services passed to the
counties with a share of state sales tax to replace the state general fund contribution. These programs
include the Women and Children’s Residential Treatment, Drug Medi-Cal, Non-drug Medical, Drug Court,
Mental Health Managed Care, and Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment (EPSDT)
(mental health services for children). EPSDT and Drug Medi-Cal are both federal entitlements; however
the funding is pooled for all the above listed programs. Because these entitlement costs can expand
rapidly, it presents a financial risk to the County in future years, presents a risk to the sustainability of nonentitlement
programs, and potentially impacts the County’s ability to meet the Substance Abuse
Prevention and Treatment (SAPT) MOE level of spending. 2011 Realignment funding does not yet have a
permanent base funding amount allocated to individual counties, and the state hasn’t established
permanent methodology for distribution growth to counties. However, the state has been using growth in
the Behavioral Health Subaccount to pay for entitlement growth in Drug Medi-Cal before paying general
growth. This has caused significant variations in funding from one year to the next for many counties.
Shasta County has not been harmed to date, but this remains a strong concern. The department is
advocating for appropriate base levels of funding to support growing costs and will be monitoring how
2011 Realignment will be structured in to the future to protect County operations.
With the commencement of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), the Medi-Cal
expansion population’s treatment services, and the state’s expanded treatment benefits, cost
reimbursements are funded 100% by the federal and state governments through 2017 with no County
cost. During the years following, federal matching will fall to 95 percent and then decline each year
ultimately to 90 percent, eventually requiring a County share of cost. Although estimated to be a relatively
small County share of cost, over time this may also present a risk to providing entitlement services as well
as the sustainability of non-entitlement programs, and could potentially impact the County’s ability to meet
the SAPT MOE level of spending.
Intergovernmental transfer (IGT) revenue is included in the Budget request, and these funds may not be
available past federal fiscal year 2017 due to pending changes in Center for Medicare and Medicaid.

The Public Health Branch has started the process to achieve accreditation from the National Public Health
Accreditation Board. The accreditation process seeks to advance and standardize quality and
performance across public health departments. To receive accreditation a local health department must
meet a set of nationally recognized, practice-focused and evidenced-based standards. The development
of a Community Health Assessment, Community Health Improvement Plan, and specific Public Health
Strategic Plan, along with systems for Continuous Quality Improvement and Staff Development are
accreditation requirements.

With the commencement of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) in January 2014, many
clients who were considered “medically indigent” qualified for Medi-Cal coverage paid for 100 percent by
the federal government. During the years following, federal matching will fall to 95 percent and then
decline each year ultimately to 90 percent. A pressing issue for Public Health has been the state’s
approach to funding services under the expansion of Medi-Cal services as a part of health care reform
and the changes to 1991 realignment with approval of AB 85. Although, during the first three years of the
ACA expansion, the federal government pays 100 percent of the cost of services to the expanded
population, the state has diverted funds ($5.36 million) previously paid by Shasta County to CMSP to pay
for other state health care obligations. As a CMSP county, it is anticipated that Shasta would continue to
utilize their network to cover a residual population of individuals’ medical needs. In FY 2015-16 the CMSP
Board waived the counties CMSP participation fee. This may occur again in FY 2016-17 but won’t be
known until June or July of 2016.

CCS operates under Public Health oversight and staff continues to closely monitor expenditures for both
administrative and diagnostic and treatment services. As in previous years, these costs are somewhat
unpredictable due to fluctuations in Medi-Cal client ratios and varying high-risk medical needs among
CCS children. Therefore, due to the possibility of additional medical care costs, increased Medi-Cal
caseload, particularly related to the implementation of health care reform, and the decline in prior years of
1991 realignment revenues, Public Health bears the risk for the additional costs.

The California Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) was approved for an 1115 waiver from the
federal government in order to realign some Drug Medi-Cal responsibilities to counties, increase benefits
by offering a residential benefit to all adults, eliminate a restriction on federal participation in paying for
treatment in residential facilities with more than 16 beds, and to allow regional models for implementation.
The treatment services span all levels of intensity, including outpatient, intensive outpatient, narcotic
treatment programs, residential services, withdrawal management, additional medication assisted
treatment, recovery services, case management, and physician consultation. The department will provide
a recommendation to the Shasta County Board of Supervisors during FY 2016-17 as to whether or not to
opt-in the waiver, and whether to implement the new services alone or with a regional group of counties.
There may be an option to delegate the responsibility to implement the waiver benefits to our local Medi-
Cal managed care plan, Partnership Healthplan of California, in exchange for County’s limited
realignment revenue, therefore decreasing the risk to the County.

Some issues surrounding 2011 realignment remain unresolved, including the impact of realigned
responsibility for Drug Medi-Cal services. Since Drug Medi-Cal was realigned to counties, the counties
have taken on a significant federal entitlement program, without guarantee that realignment funds will
grow commensurately with program costs. Funds may have to be diverted from Perinatal and other
mental health programs in future years to fund Drug Medi-Cal services should realignment revenues fail to
fully support services, which could potentially escalate costs in other programs such as mental health and
child welfare.

Adequate space in regional locations serving low-income populations within their community continues to
285
be a priority. The HHSA continues to work toward development of a long-term space needs analysis and
plan for permanent solutions. The HHSA is also working towards a permanent solution in regards to a
training center for incoming classes of Eligibility Workers and for the provision of various trainings to
benefit other agency staff.
The ongoing implementation of the Affordable Care Act and a slow economic recovery have continued to
drive high caseloads in social services eligibility and employment programs and the associated need for
staff. The outlook for sufficient funding to cover proposed costs remains strong and Shasta County
continues to benefit from other counties under-expending their allocations.
The key threat on the horizon is the potential of another economic downturn. When this occurs, caseloads
will again grow and expand from this new higher-level plateau that we are currently on. The agency is
planning for this by building reserves to cover sustainable operations at our budgeted level of service
provision.

To help ensure financial and program sustainability, the HHSA continues to focus on development of
sufficient reserves. A key threat on the horizon is the potential of another economic downturn. When this
occurs, social service and safety net caseloads will again grow and expand from this new higher-level
plateau that we are currently on. The HHSA is planning for this by focusing on building reserves to cover
sustainable operations in our key areas of service provision, as well as working to resolve structural
budget deficits which have affected us. It should be noted that there are no Realignment shifts proposed
as part of this budget.

The most significant threat to this budget lies in risk associated with growing caseloads in child welfare
programs as well as changes to foster care due to legislative and court decisions. In previous years,
group homes, foster family homes, and foster family agencies have received substantial rate increases.
Court decisions established an annual determination of cost of living increases to these rates. Further, the
legislature has approved the extension of foster care and in some cases adoption assistance benefits to
families of adopted children up to 21 years of age. Increased resources for program services, will allow
more emphasis to be placed on activities to decrease the number of children placed in foster care and/or
adoptive homes while continuing to maintain their safety as well as services to support children being
placed in less restrictive settings, such as treatment services in foster care settings instead of group
homes, pursuant to AB 403 (Continuum of Care).
IHSS provider wage and benefit costs in this budget are projected to remain stable through FY 2016-17,
however, depending on the terms and timing of when a new contract is negotiated, the cost may
increase. IHSS program costs are subject to the IHSS Maintenance of Effort (MOE) established in FY
2012-13. The MOE sets a capped annual county cost for IHSS provider wages and benefits, IHSS
program services, and IHSS Public Authority costs. The MOE increased 3.5% in FY 2014-15 and will
continue to increase by 3.5% annually when 1991 realignment revenue base is met. In years where
revenue falls and base is not met, the annual MOE increase will not occur. Any negotiated increase in
wages and benefits would have to be approved by the state and the MOE would be adjusted to reflect the
county’s share of the cost increase. The MOE was implemented by the state in advance of approval by
the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) as part of a Coordinated Care Initiative
(CCI) to control the state share of Medi-Cal costs for elderly and disabled adults. If the federal Center for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) or the state declines to implement the CCI, the MOE will become
inactive and the county will revert to paying one-third of the non-federal costs in the local programs.
305
Furthermore, the state legislature is now negotiating, and the state Assembly has already approved,
repealing the Maximum Family Grant (MFG) Rule and increasing CalWORKs cash-aid grants by 4
percent. The MFG was implemented in 1995 and prohibits a CalWORKs family from receiving additional
cash aid upon having a baby while participating in the CalWORKs program (unless the mother can prove
she as sterilized, using Norplant, or on the Depo Provera shot). Due to currently robust AB 85 health
realignment redirections, and with the state currently proposing to make up the difference between the
estimates and actual revenue receipts, there should be no immediate county costs under the current
proposal. In the future, both of these changes could impact the General Fund (County share is 2.5%).

Monthly maximum GA payments are based on a statutory formula that uses federal poverty level, cost of
housing in the geographical area, and state adjustments to the CalWORKs Maximum Assistance
Payment (MAP). The current monthly maximum GA monthly aid payment (effective April 1, 2015) is $328,
per the formula authorized by the Board of Supervisors on December 17, 2013. If the state legislature
approve increases to the CalWORKs MAP then the GA payment amount will automatically increase as
well and the cost will be borne by the County General Fund.

The budget passed by Congress for Federal fiscal year 2016 requires HUD to continue to underfund
administrative fees earned by housing authorities nationwide. As a result the department will delete 3.5
vacant positions in FY 2016-17. Management has taken steps to curb controllable costs within services
and supplies. Revenue allocations from HUD will be monitored and expenditure levels will be adjusted
accordingly.

CDVA and the California Association of County Veterans Services Officers are reviewing proposed
legislative rule changes to the county subvention program that would amend Title 12 of the California
Code of Regulations, subchapter 4, subsections 452 and 453. Proposed changes would stabilize annual
state subvention funding methodologies (not guaranteed annual allocation amounts) but in return would
add county reporting, staffing accreditation, and other requirements. The County Veterans Service Officer
is watching this closely and keeping the CEO apprised.

On March 11, 2014 the Board of Supervisors adopted a resolution that raises the County’s self-insured
Liability and Worker’s Compensation risk management confidence level to 80 to 90 percent. Annually, in
compliance with requirements to participate in California State Association of Counties-Excess Insurance
Authority (CSAC-EIA) excess insurance programs, Risk Management contracts for an actuarial study of
reserves in the Self-Insured Programs. Insurance rates have been adjusted annually to strive to maintain
the eighty percent confidence level; however, due to many fluctuations in utilization the fund remains in
excess of eighty percent. The Auditor-Controller met with the department head to discuss rate setting and
a plan to return the reserves to an acceptable confidence level. Concurrent with the FY 2014-15
Recommended Budget the excess reserves was reduced and offset by an additional contribution to the
OPEB Irrevocable Trusts. In addition, rate setting will be structured to maintain the fund within a
confidence level between 80 to 90 percent. The Auditor-Controller will meet at least annually with Risk
Management to review the reserve level.

Expenses for the RABA joint powers authority and Burney Express flow through this fund. In August
2015, due to the Shasta Regional Transportation Agency’s unmet needs process; a Burney Express third
round trip was added. The increase in service cost is offset by Federal Transit Administration 5311f
Intercity Bus funds and 5311 Rural Transit funds

On December 3, 2013, the IHSS Governing Board approved a memorandum of understanding (MOU)
between the Shasta County IHSS Public Authority and the Service Employees International Union
(Local 2015). The MOU provided for wages of $9.64 per hour to IHSS providers. The MOU expired
on September 30, 2014, and negotiations for a successor MOU are in progress. On January 1, 2016,
the State minimum wage increased to $10.00 per hour for IHSS providers.
• The Governor signed SB 3 on March 28, 2016 which provides for increases to the state minimum
wage beginning on January 1, 2017 and reaching $15 per hour by 2022. Because current law only
requires locally negotiated wage and benefit increases to impact the County MOE, the California
State Association of Counties (CSAC) expects costs associated with this minimum wage increase
wage to be borne by the state; however this was not included in the SB 3 bill language and so the
Governor’s May Revise Budget will be closely monitored. SB 3 additionally removed the exemption of
IHSS workers to receive paid sick leave under the Healthy Workplaces, Healthy Families Act of 2014.
SB 3 requires the California Department of Social Services to convene a stakeholder workgroup to
implement the IHSS paid sick leave provisions and counties should expect to receive an All County
Letter with guidance on the paid sick leave benefit by January 1, 2017.
• The County MOE is currently set as per the CCI terms, however any negotiated wage or benefit
increase will increase the county MOE permanently. Additionally, the current agreement with the state
provides for annual 3.5 percent increases to the County MOE.
Background on Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI)
During FY 2011-12, the state began negotiations with Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS) to adopt a CCI whereby the state would take over the Public Authority role in counties as they
came under Medi-Cal Managed Care plans. The intention was to use IHSS as a way to further keep
elderly and disabled clients safely in their homes and out of institutional care, resulting in Medi-Cal
savings for the state. While counties still operate under the initial provisions of the CCI, which
established a county MOE instead of a share of cost for the IHSS program, the state has strong
concerns about the long term cost neutrality. If the state finds that its costs are increasing beyond
what its calculated savings projections level is, then it will unwind the CCI reinstating the cost-sharing
ratios in all three aspects of the program, thereby exposing the County to unknown cost increases.