The FY2014/15 Budget for Supervisorial District 1 includes $2,500 in proposed funding for contributions to non-County
agencies. The CAO recommends the Board consider affirming a funding level for FY2014/15 for contributions to non-county
agencies.
The FY2014/15 Budget includes the continued appropriation of $25,000 in contributions to non-County agencies for Travis
Community Consortium (TCC). The CAO recommends the Board affirm the non-County agency contribution for FY2014/15.
The Moving Solano Forward economic diversification study project will be unveiling a variety of strategies and implementation
plan recommendations. The potential exist that some of the study recommendations will qualify for follow up actions to the
current grant and could be partially funded by the Office of Economic Adjustment.
The County will continue to work with its city partners and Solano EDC as strategies to retain existing businesses and attract
new companies are developed and implemented.
To avoid increases in the General Fund’s share of the 2007 COP debt service payments, the General Services Director is
working on a Countywide Space Consolidation Program to reduce facility-related costs and effectively use County-owned
facilities. One of the goals of the program would include moving more non-General Fund units/divisions into the Government
Center so that these non-General Fund work units/divisions can contribute towards future debt service payments.
The biggest challenge the Grand Jury faces is continuing funding for its operation. The rising cost of mileage reimbursement,
which is set by the Internal Revenue Service, also impacts the budget if the total allocated funds remain static. On-going
expenses in the form of per diem and mileage reimbursement for active jurors varies from year to year depending on where the jurors are located and whether or not they choose to submit claims for their reimbursable expenses. This creates budget
forecast challenges because the Grand Jury is selected after the recommended budget is completed. Additionally, the Grand
Jury does not have the option to eliminate positions as a budget management tool. The Administrative Assistant occupies a
part-time position and the work of the Grand Jury would not be able to move forward in an effective and efficient way without an
Administrative Assistant.
General Fund costs in this department are a Constitutional responsibility. The County's General Fund exposure, represented by
the Court's appointment of private attorneys is driven by two factors: the availability of Public Defender and/or Alternate Public
Defender staff to provide representation where appropriate, and the number of hours required by private
attorney/investigator/special witness/psychiatric evaluations/court reporter to properly represent indigent defendants.
Adjustments may have to be made to this budget in FY2014/15 based on actual figures at year-end and what the State’s final
budget provides in funding.
The Department is anticipating a retirement during FY2014/15. The expected accrued leave payoff for this retirement is
estimated at $30,000. This payoff is not reflected in the Department’s budget due to the uncertainty and timing of the retirement.
There is a significant number of pending Redevelopment-related lawsuits which could impact the General Fund’s share of the
ABX1 26 residual balance.
There is a significant number of pending assessment appeals, if settled could impact the General Fund’s share of property tax
refunds due.
The overall demand for legal services remains high, although there has been a change in the mix of legal clients served,
including the securing of outside public agency contracts that generate significant non-general fund revenue.
The amount of reported billable hours (31,334 for FY2012/13 and approximately 30,000 estimated for FY2013/14) that exceed
the productive hours standard calculated by the Auditor-Controller of 1,720 hours per attorney. In the coming year, the
department will be working with the CAO to explore further the potential need to consider hiring a minimum of two more
attorneys and support staff and identify the mans to fund the positions.
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) mandates employer-paid health insurance for all employees working an average of 30 hours or
more per week. There are potential, financial exposures to provide health benefits to extra help employees; financial penalties
for non-compliance with ACA provisions; and possible departmental operational changes necessary to fulfill ACA requirements.
On February 10, 2014, the Department of Treasury and Internal Revenue Service issued final regulations on the ACA employer
shared responsibility provisions. To avoid paying substantial penalties, the proposed regulations initially required employers to
offer medical coverage to 95 percent of their full-time employees and dependents beginning January 1, 2015. The final
regulations retain this requirement for 2016 and beyond, but reduce the requirement for the 2015 calendar year to 70 percent of
full-time employees and their dependents. HR is continuing to work with County departments to prepare for proper
implementation of this new legal requirement. Employers may still be subject to penalties for failure to offer affordable coverage
as required by ACA.
The County of Solano is facing a demographic change of an aging workforce. It remains forecasted that senior and executive
managers will be retiring from the workforce, leaving a gap in the County’s talent pipeline. It is imperative to develop a pool of
talent that is able and ready to step into leadership positions at the supervisor, middle, senior and executive level within the
organization. The County reinstated the Future Leaders training program in FY2013/14 to help address succession planning
and leadership development for future senior and executive staff and expanded offerings for supervisors. However, the budget
does include expanded training and staff development programs for FY2014/15. Additionally, the County needs to identify
strategies to recruit, develop, and retain the younger generation (millennials) that will be entering the workforce.
The ROV continues to monitor school and municipal districts as legislation is drafted with the intent of moving them toward
election by districts versus the previous at-large model. This will require more staff time in maintaining the additional
boundaries, potentially splitting precincts, require additional ballot types/styles, and potentially require adjustments in the polling locations where citizens vote. Costs would also increase as more staff time would be necessary for proofing sample ballot
booklets and official ballots.
The ROV continues to monitor several election bills that have been introduced to allow acceptance of VBM ballots postmarked
on or before Election Day but received after Election Day. Other VBM bills would require the County to pay postage on all
returned VBM ballots. While these bills would provide more convenience to voters, additional costs would be incurred by the
ROV to implement each of these programs.
Solano County is now required to provide facsimile ballots and voting instructions in additional languages other than English at
polling places. This includes information in Spanish, Tagalog and Chinese. The Department is actively engaging with
community partners to attempt to recruit poll workers who are proficient in these additional languages to assist the voting
population on Election Day.
Several Bills are proposing implementation of Election Day registration (also known as conditional voter registration) prior to
implementation of the statewide voter registration system (CalVoter). The ROV participates in both the business
requirements/implementation committee for CalVoter, and the sub-committee on implementation of Election Day registration.
This new procedure may cause additional technology costs, canvass costs, poll worker expenses, additional polling locations
and materials costs in high turnout elections.
Bills at both state and the federal level are requesting jurisdictions to look into increasing early voting opportunities. This may
include satellite locations and extensions of time to include Saturdays and possibly Sundays. This will increase facility cost, staff
cost, and potentially technology costs to provide ballots in all styles at remote locations.
Several bills introduced in Congress focus on poll place performance and ensuring lines for voting are less than one hour. Many
of the suggested strategies are already implemented in Solano County. The ROV will work with its electronic poll book system
and use of pre-election planning tools to document efforts to maintain the suggested less than 30 minute wait time. These bills
will potentially impact the office in federal elections where the ROV will be required to provide more polling locations, staff,
equipment and resources to ensure compliance while documenting the Department’s efforts.
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) will require employers to pay healthcare costs for those employees who work 30 hours per week
for 90 days. The ROV is working with Human Resources to determine the impact of the ACA on ROV’s extra-help hiring policies.
At this time, ROV does not anticipate the ACA to impact costs until calendar year 2015.
The Airport will need to generate sufficient revenue in the future to provide for required local matches toward State and Federal
grants. Three capital projects are proposed for FY2014/15: 1) The Nut Tree Airport Master Plan; 2) The Runway Threshold Shift
Design Project; and 3) The Airfield Pavement Rehabilitation Project.
The Nut Tree Airport Master Plan currently identifies a shift in the Airport runway thresholds to address an existing runway
safety area issue. Phase II of the Runway Threshold Shift is planned for FY2014/15. This project will also include the
construction of Taxiway B, connecting the proposed ICON Aircraft manufacturing plant to the runway. Taxiway B will be funded
by ICON Aircraft, unless the FAA determines the taxiway to be eligible for Airport Improvement Program (AIP) Funding. The
Runway Threshold Shift Project is considered a high funding priority by the FAA. This runway project is eligible for 90% funding
through the FAA Airport Improvement Program, and has been identified for AIP funding in 2014.
The Airport plans to assess all pavements on the airport and to prepare the Airport Pavement Management Plan and any
necessary designs to rehabilitate pavement areas that are in need of repair. The Pavement Rehabilitation Project is eligible for
90% funding through the FAA.
The IT services agreement with Xerox terminates on December 31, 2014. The Board approved a new sourcing strategy that
includes “on-ramping” key technical positions and also allowing for multi-sourcing of the remaining work. Given the workload in
the Department, both of these processes are taking longer than originally anticipated and so the Department is recommending
extending the Xerox contract to the end of FY2014/15 or June 30, 2015. Costs for this six month extension have been included
in the Recommended Budget.
Although DoIT staff have recently been augmented by the addition of one IT Specialist for the Law and Justice Division and one
Business Systems Analyst for the H&SS Support Division, the Department continues to face a number of significant workload
challenges due to the level of activity and number of technology projects in the user departments. The workload generated by
the EHR systems, HIE, HITECH Meaningful Use, and regulatory compliance far out-strips the staff available (as confirmed by a
consultant to H&SS). The Department will work closely with H&SS throughout the year to ensure that the highest priority
projects get the appropriate attention and triage non-essential work. Similarly, the impact of Law and Justice technology
initiatives will be re-evaluated at midyear and further staffing adjustments may be necessary.
Space Consolidation and Strategic Real Property Transactions
The County’s space consolidation efforts continued with the September 2013 reopening of John F. Kennedy Library in Vallejo.
The improvements renovated approximately 6,500 square feet of space which relocated the Children’s Program from the first
floor the main second floor to consolidate library functions on a single level. The project improved security and safety for
staff/public, created operating efficiencies and reduces the Library’s annual operating costs by reducing the square footage
occupied by the Library.
The County also sold the former 31,500 square foot Vallejo Veterans Building located on a .45 acre parcel at 444 Alabama
Street so that it can be redeveloped as a local community asset. The County also strategically purchased a .34 acre parking lot
at 1500 Solano Avenue adjacent to the County’s Vallejo Campus to expand parking capacity and also acquired an undeveloped
2.55 acre parcel in the Solano Business Park in Fairfield that will facilitate planned expansion of the County’s Beck Avenue
Campus. This property acquisition places contiguous land under the County’s control at the Beck Avenue Campus. Staff will be
presenting an opportunity to master plan the site to the Board of Supervisors in 2014.
Legislative Actions and New Legal Requirements
SB 1022 – This budget trailer bill, was chaptered into law in June 2012 as California Government Code Chapter 3.13. On
February 26, 2013, the County Board of Supervisors approved the Sheriff’s Office to apply for SB1022 Request for Proposal
funding. In late October 2013, Solano County submitted an application to compete for $160 million in adult local criminal justice
construction financing available to mid-sized Counties for the acquisition, design and construction, or renovation of jail and/or
program facilities. On December 12, 2013, the County received notification from the Board of State and Community
Corrections, which administers the SB1022 program, that Solano County’s proposed project will be recommended to receive a
conditional funding award in the fully requested amount of $23,037,000 to construct program space to educate, train and
rehabilitate inmates at the County’s Claybank Campus to prepare offenders for re-entry into local communities. In 2014, the
Board of Supervisor’s accepted funding and authorized staff to proceed with the project.
Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Act Program – On October 8, 2013, the Board of Supervisors adopted a resolution
electing to become subject to the California Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act Program administered under the
State Auditor-Controller’s Office. The California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Act is a voluntary program established in
1983 in Public Contracts Code Sections 22000-22045 that is administered under the State Controller’s Office. The Act
promotes uniformity of the cost accounting standards and bidding procedures on construction work performed or contracted by
public entities in the State. Solano County became the 37th of the 58 California counties that have elected to participate in the
program. In essence, the program sets forth standardized accounting standards for public works projects, requires that
participating agencies maintain an annual list of qualified contractors, and establishes bid processes and procedures, including
financial limits for force account, informal and formal bidding. Maintenance activities are excluded from the definition of a public
project and therefore not subject to the program. The County can voluntarily withdraw from the program at its own discretion.
SB 328 – On October 3, 2013 the Governor signed an act to modify Section 20146 of Public Contract Code relating to public
works which authorizes Counties, until January 1, 2018, with approval of the Board of Supervisors, to deliver projects using
Construction Manager at-Risk construction contracts for the erection, construction, alteration, repair or improvement of any
building owned or leased by the County. A Construction Manager at-Risk contract can only be used for projects in the County in
excess of $1 million and may be awarded using either the lowest responsible bidders or best value method to a Construction
Manager at-Risk that possesses or that obtains sufficient bonding. Staff is evaluating the merits of the newly available project
delivery method in relation to projects that are in early stages of development and will present information to the Board on a
project-by-project basis if staff recommends use of this delivery method.
AB195 – On August 19, 2013, the Governor signed this legislation to legally extend the use of design-build project delivery
method from July 1, 2014 to July 1, 2016. This bill is consistent with the 2013 State Legislative Priority No. 6 approved by the
Board of Supervisors which states: “Support or seek alternative legislation to extend existing provisions to allow design-build
bidding options on construction projects.” Staff continues to evaluate the merits of the design-build project delivery method in relation to projects that are in early stages of development and will present information to the Board on a project-by-project basis
if staff recommends use of this delivery method.
Adoption of 2013 California Building Standards Code
On January 29, 2013, the California Building Standards Commission announced the adoption of the 2013 California Building
Standards Code, following a comprehensive multi-state agency and stakeholder review of the 2010 building codes. The thirteen
volume code is published on a triennial basis and was published in July 2013. On November 26, 2013, the Board of
Supervisors approved an ordinance adopting the 2013 State of California Building Codes and local amendments, which became
effective on December 27, 2013 with an operative date of January 1, 2014. However, on December 18, 2013, the California
Building Standards Commission issued an information bulletin announcing the change of the effective date of specific provisions
of the 2013 edition of the California Building Standards Code, Title 24, California Code of Regulations, specifically Title 24, Part
1, Chapter 10 and Part 6, and affected provisions in Part 11 (California Green Building Standards Code) from January 1, 2014 to
July 1, 2014. This postponement was necessary due to unanticipated delays in developing the 2013 software for demonstrating
performance compliance with the California Energy Code. Without the new software, requiring compliance with the new
California Energy Code will create a hardship for the building design professionals, the construction industries and enforcement
agencies. Important updates in the 2013 code include:
 An extensive update of California’s Energy Code to conform with California’s policy that achieve “zero net energy” footprint
for new construction (residential buildings by 2020 and commercial buildings by 2030);
 Division of the State Architect’s adoption of the 2010 Americans with Disabilities Act Standards with California amendments;
 Updated California Green Building Code (CALGreen) requirements for nonresidential building alterations and additions;
 New plumbing code provisions pertaining to greywater and rainwater catchments.
There are currently two legislative bills pending, one State and one Federal, that would impact the Child Support Program if
enacted. Assembly Bill (AB) 1654 would allow families receiving CalWORKs to retain more of the child support collected when
a payment is received. Currently, when a child support payment is received on behalf of a child receiving CalWORKs, up to the
first $50 is paid to the family; the remaining amount is returned to Federal, State and County government as recoupment for
public assistance. If AB 1654 is approved, the current payment of up to $50 will increase to up to $100 for the first child and up
to $200 for families with two or more children. These dollars would not be considered income or deducted from assistance that
the family receives. The increase is intended to help families meet their basic needs.
In addition, the Supporting At-Risk Children Act of 2013 (S. 1870/S. 1877) contains several provisions impacting the child
support enforcement program. Perhaps of greatest interest is the acknowledgement that parenting time or visitation
arrangements are a part of child support discussions for divorced parents. If enacted, the State will implement procedures for
establishing voluntary parenting time arrangements at the time a child support order is initially issued for separating, nonmarried
parents.
The ongoing implementation of AB 109/Realignment on the Public Safety Criminal Justice System continued to increase the
number of parole violation cases. The department will continue to evaluate the caseload impact and provide recommendations
for appropriate staffing levels going forward.
The FY2014/15 Recommended Budget includes the full year funding needed to provide for a continuation of the staffing and
other costs previously approved by the Board under the 2011 Solano Public Safety Realignment Act Implementation Plan.
These costs are funded by the State AB 109 allocation in FY2014/15 and AB 109 carry forward funds from prior years unspent
allocations. The use of one-time carry forward has been applied to existing, now operational programs, so they may continue,
and to address the State AB 109 funding shortfall in FY2014/15. The Department and the County Administrator are continuing to
monitor the State allocation of AB 109 funds as Departments address the mandated changes resulting from the implementation
of 2011 Public Safety Realignment.
Federal rules do not allow for grantees to request extension of their project-period until 90-days prior to the current grant enddate.
Given that, the earliest the OFVP can request an extension for the Safe Haven: Supervised Visitation project is July,
2014. If successful, staff will submit an Appropriation Transfer Request for Board approval to receive and appropriate additional
revenue at that time. With the continued federal budgetary impasse, it is unclear whether either of the Department’s federal awards may be at risk of
having funding reduced or eliminated during the coming fiscal year. Should that occur, the Department will work with their CAO
Analyst to identify alternative funding sources to support continued implementation of these critical programs.
The FY2014/15 Recommended Budget includes the full year funding needed to provide for a continuation of the staffing and
other costs previously approved by the Board under the 2011 Solano Public Safety Realignment Act Implementation Plan.
These costs are funded by the State AB 109 allocation in FY2014/15 and AB 109 carry forward funds from prior years unspent
allocations. The use of one-time carry forward has been applied to existing, now operational programs, so they may continue,
and to address the State AB 109 funding shortfall in FY2014/15. The Department and the County Administrator are continuing to
monitor the State allocation of AB 109 funds as Departments address the mandated changes resulting from the implementation
of 2011 Public Safety Realignment.
The FY2014/15 Recommended Budget includes the full year funding needed to provide for a continuation of the staffing and
other costs previously approved by the Board under the 2011 Solano Public Safety Realignment Act Implementation Plan.
These costs are funded by the State AB 109 allocation in FY2014/15 and AB 109 carry forward funds from prior years unspent
allocations. The use of one-time carry forward has been applied to existing, now operational programs, so they may continue,
and to address the State AB 109 funding shortfall in FY2014/15. The Department and the County Administrator are continuing to
monitor the State allocation of AB 109 funds as Departments address the mandated changes resulting from the implementation
of 2011 Public Safety Realignment.
The Stanton Correctional Facility construction schedule is targeted for completion in the Fall 2014. In anticipation of the
scheduled completion the Sheriff has been working with the County throughout FY2013/14 to add the necessary staff to bring
the facility online. Staff allocated to the Stanton Correctional Facility are completing the necessary training and commissioning of
the building and systems. In conjunction with the new facility the County has funded a new Jail Management System (JMS),
which when complete will provide for significant enhancements over the existing system. The new JMS is a critical component of
jail operations and will allow the Stanton Correctional Facility to operate with a different staffing pattern. Implementation of the JMS is in the development and testing phase and at this point it is uncertain of the exact date when the JMS and the Stanton
Correctional Facility will be brought online. The timing of opening the new jail is critical to meet State deadlines and to ensure
inmate capacity in the Solano County correctional facilities. The Inmate population in the Spring of 2014 is trending in the 950
range with the total rated bed capacity 1,081 in the existing Clay Bank Detention Facility and Justice Center Detention Facility.
The Sheriff will continue to monitor the inmate population and staffing necessary to safely operate the Solano County
correctional facilities.
Depending on when the Stanton Correctional Facility is fully online, the Sheriff is exploring the possibilities of assisting other
Counties and/or the United States Marshal Service by contracting to house inmates from their overcrowded facilities. By
contracting out empty jail bed space the Sheriff can provide a viable mechanism to offset operational costs associated with
running the Solano County correctional facilities while assisting other agencies.
The 2014 COPS funding opportunities, which are open for application beginning in May 2014, are under evaluation by the
Sheriff’s Office. If eligible for the 2014 programs the Sheriff’s Office anticipates submitting grant applications and will return to
the Board as necessary to accept additional funding if awarded.
The Sheriff’s Office expects to pursue opportunities to offset operational costs associated with providing animal control services
through contracting this service with other agencies. Procuring contracts for animal control services within the county is a viable
mechanism to create greater efficiencies at a reduced rate for our neighboring agencies.
The FY2014/15 Recommended Budget includes the full year funding needed to provide for a continuation of the staffing and
other costs previously approved by the Board under the 2011 Solano Public Safety Realignment Act Implementation Plan.
These costs are funded by the State AB 109 allocation in FY2014/15 and AB 109 carry forward funds from prior years unspent
allocations. The use of one-time carry forward has been applied to existing, now operational programs, so they may continue,
and to address the State AB 109 funding shortfall in FY2014/15. The Department and the County Administrator are continuing to
monitor the State allocation of AB 109 funds as Departments address the mandated changes resulting from the implementation
of 2011 Public Safety Realignment. Title IVE has been an ongoing funding source for juvenile services since 2000. The
California Department of Social Services (CDSS) has reviewed the claiming process for counties and refined the definition of a
minor who is “at imminent risk of entering foster care.” As a result, it is uncertain how this will affect the overall revenue.
However, based on our initial projections, the Department could lose in excess of $300,000 between FY2013/14 and
FY2014/15.
The enactment of AB109 allows the probation officer to initiate flash incarceration (up to 10 days in county jail) for offenders
under Post Release Community Supervision (PRCS) to address non-compliant behavior. However, this option is not available
for offenders sentenced to probation or a split sentence under 1170(h) PC. This creates some challenges in holding these
offenders accountable and being able to address non-compliance immediately.
The Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) which became effective on August 20, 2012 outlines a phased implementation that
calls for changes to the Juvenile minimum staffing rations in secure juvenile facilities effective October 1, 2017. The Department
is monitoring staffing ratios and depending on the Juvenile Detention Facility population PREA could result in the need to
change staffing patterns from 1 staff per 10 youth to 1 staff per 8 youth. Upon implementation, this could add additional costs
related to increasing staffing at the facility.
The uncertainty of funding allocations from the State effect programs and services that are offered to adult and juvenile
offenders. Money received through Vehicle License Fees (VLF) is used to support programs under the Juvenile Justice Crime
Prevention Act (JJCPA), Youthful Offender Block Grant (YOBG), Juvenile Accountability Block Grant (JBAG), and AB109. The
final allocation of these dollars will ultimately dictate the level and types of programs funded and offered in the future.
The Department is preparing for a move of the entire office to the Cordelia area in FY2014/15 or shortly thereafter. This move
entails close to a million dollars in upgrades and many logistical and infrastructure challenges that will be addressed.
At the beginning of calendar year 2015, the Weights and Measures Division will be replacing its Access based Annual Device
Registration program with a third party software with the name of Device Registration and Billing System (more commonly
known as Dr. B’s) from the Statewide Soft company. Initial outlay was paid for in FY2013/14.
The Weights and Measures Division is still working under the relaxed inspection protocols of a Variable Frequency of Inspection
(VFI) authorization from the State Division of Measurement Standards. This relaxation of workload mandates is intended to
apply during times of economic hardship and only while a set level of compliance is maintained. It is anticipated that with relaxed
scrutiny, non-compliance will increase and a return to greater inspection frequency will be required in the coming year.
Two pieces of trailer-mounted Weights and Measures equipment exceed 50 years of age and are reaching the end of useful life.
At Third Quarter, the Board approved the use of unanticipated revenue for the purchase of a $30,000 new trailer mounted
Weights and Measures volumetric calibration Prover. However, the Propane Prover no longer meets national standards for
accuracy and traceability. A replacement is estimated at $58,550. The existing unit is operating on a grand-fathered certification
and staff will be working with the CAO to identify a means to replace this equipment in FY2014/15.
Sudden Oak Death (SOD), European Grapevine Moth (EGVM) and Light Brown Apple Moth (LBAM) were emergency programs.
These programs are now in a greatly reduced scope where they exist to monitor compliance for meeting requirements of the
county’s trading partners for export.
The Planning Division will work with California State Association of Counties to assist the legislature in its reform of the
California Environmental Quality Act.
The State of California passed SB 1608 requiring building divisions to have on staff individuals who hold a Certified Access
Specialist Program (CASP) Certification by 2014. The Building Division currently has the Plan Check Engineer certified for plan
review and counter consultation, and it is currently training one field inspector in preparation to take the State-mandated test for
certification prior to the July 1, 2014 deadline. A second inspector will be trained over this next year with the anticipation that he
will also receive his certification within the next two years.
The State Water Resources Control Board’s statewide onsite wastewater treatment system policy became effective on May 13,
2013. This policy creates several tiers of management and oversight for onsite systems, depending on the potential impact to
public health and the environment by their operation. The State policy will require Solano County to have a Local Agency
Management Program approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board by May 13, 2018 to continue the implementation
of a local program for most onsite systems. A proposed local program must be submitted to the Central Valley Regional Water
Board by May 13, 2016 in order to meet this timeline. Existing Solano County Code regulating septic systems and water wells
should meet the requirements for a Local Agency Management Program with minor amendments to strengthen countywide
monitoring and reporting of water quality and septic system operation. Failure to obtain a Local Agency Management Program
will result in the requirement for owners of new and replaced onsite sewage disposal systems, or owners of existing onsite
systems in sensitive areas already impacted by septic systems, to meet prescriptive standards or to obtain individual waste
discharge requirements from the State in order to operate their system. Economic improvement, the lack of rain during the winter months and new disposal contracts by the active landfills within
Solano County during FY2013/14 resulted in an unanticipated increase in disposed tons and revenue. On January 1, 2014 the
Napa-Vallejo Waste Management Authority (Authority) began to transport its waste to the Potrero Hills Landfill for disposal. This
contract runs through December 31, 2018 and may be extended. The Authority transported 135,800 tons of solid waste for
disposal from American Canyon, Napa and Vallejo, according to records from CalRecycle for 2011. This increase in disposed
tonnages and revenue from the Authority will be mostly offset by the loss of the Contra Costa Transfer Station contract by
Potrero Hills Landfill beginning the second week of July 2014. Still, both landfills are anticipated to see disposed tonnages above
those anticipated in the FY2013/14 budget, but below actual amounts received during FY2013/14.
There are potential policy and legislative hurdles that will impact Solano County’s ability to protect its interests in the Delta over
the next three years. As of this writing, staff is monitoring several bills that may impact the Delta ecosystem, water quality and
water supply. Staff is also monitoring drought related legislation that has been proposed in light of a Statewide Drought Disaster
declaration for 2014. The Water Bond proposed for the 2014 ballot is expected to be scaled down by the Legislature from the
original $11.1 billion so staff continues to monitor competing proposals to ensure Solano County’s water priorities are
addressed.
The key issue facing Public Works is the continuing federal underfunding of transportation. This is a long-term trend that has
been masked in the last 5 years by the use of one-time sources of funding, such as Proposition 1B and federal stimulus funds.
The number of local roads in California that are in failed condition is expected to nearly quadruple by 2020, from six percent to
22 percent. This means that nearly a quarter of all local roads in California will have failed within ten years unless additional
sources of transportation funding are developed. Solano County’s roads will be similarly impacted.
Federal oversight and reporting requirements have increased significantly. Phase 2 installment of 2011 realignment, which also
impacted 1991 realignment, created a higher level of complexity in financial reporting within our Social Services and Behavioral
Health Services programs.
The implementation of AB1297 along with the implementation of the State and Federal actions for the Affordable Care Act
(ACA) drastically changed the reimbursement and rate structure for Mental Health and Substance Abuse. ACA, as related to
the newly eligible Medical clients, brings in a new level of complexity for projecting revenues within Mental Health and
Substance Abuse including those services associated with EPSDT, Katie A, managed care and inpatient costs, and Drug
MediCal.
In December 2013, the federal government released the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) supercircular with an
implementation date of December 2014. This contains the final rule to the uniform administrative requirements, cost principles, and single audit requirements for federal awards and streamlines eight existing federal regulations into a single, comprehensive
policy guide. The OMB supercircular significantly impacts the department including our oversight of sub recipients and vendors.
The department expends approximately $70M in federal awards.
The department has also seen a heightened level of scrutiny in terms of fiscal and compliance audits within Social Services,
Health Services, Mental Health and Substance Abuse. This extends to audits by the California Department of Healthcare
Services for contract providers within all the programs supported.
Effective January 2014, the Affordable Care Act allowed for the expansion of mental health and substance use disorder services
to individuals formerly ineligible for MediCal, such as single childless adults. The benefits are available to clients with mild to
moderate conditions and also those that meet the severely mentally ill (SMI) criteria. FQHCs will bill the managed care plan
Partnership Health Plan of California for clients that meet the mild to moderate criteria. However, billing for the SMI patients
seen at the FQHC clinics using the rate-per-encounter model could change and instead have to occur through the Short Doyle
MediCal System, rather than being paid on an encounter basis, the services would be billed on a cost per unit/ fee-for-service
(by minute) basis and would have a 50% non-federal share. Due to the uncertainty, of the Federal Upper Payment Limits for
Short Doyle MediCal rates, the potential local fiscal impact of moving the costs of the integrated care clinics from the FQHC and
its billable units of service under the Short Doyle MediCal system remains unknown. The Department continues to explore its
fiscal and programmatic options on this issue while awaiting State clarification on whether and how billing for SMI individuals in
a FQHC setting might continue. The Recommended FY2014/15 budget includes a significant increase in Short Doyle MediCal revenues based on assumptions
that the State will continue to pay based on the interim rate established for FY2013/14 with an inflation factor. While AB1297
eliminated the State Maximum Allowable Rate (SMA) beginning July 1, 2012, the State continues to work on finalizing
implementation of the legislation. The State has increased the interim reimbursement rate for counties based on prior year cost
reports; however, it continues to work with the Centers for Medical Services (CMS) on a State Plan Amendment (SPA) that will
establish a methodology to determine an Upper Payment Limit (UPL) for reimbursement. While AB1297 eliminated the SMA
July 1, 2012, the SPA will allow counties to claim for their actual costs up to the UPL retroactive to January 1, 2009. The
mechanism for this claiming remains unknown as well as whether or not reimbursement will be capped at prior year published
charges. Depending on the outcome of the SPA, Solano County anticipates it will receive additional MediCal monies for prior
year services, but the amount and timing of receipt of this revenue continues to be unknown. Also, uncertain is the potential
fiscal impact of a UPL on cost reimbursement and future cost settlements.
Included in the MediCal revenue projection are assumptions for growth in Drug MediCal (DMC) services and mental health
inpatient bed days for newly eligible MediCal clients. As information on the newly MediCal eligible is still in the infancy phase
due to the January 1, 2014 start date, projections for revenue for the newly eligible in Behavioral Health may significantly
change. Also of note is the State's increased emphasis on DMC audits and recertification’s. If the State revokes DMC
certification for a provider, the revenue provider’s revenues will not be realized. Additionally, the County will have placement
challenges as only a few DMC providers exist, and any loss of DMC revenue could potentially put a strain on local funds.
Mental Health can claim federal reimbursement for administration of the Mental Health Plan. This reimbursement is capped at
15% of MediCal billing. Beginning with the FY2010/11 cost report, counties were allowed to distribute countywide overhead
charges among program cost centers. This distribution reduced the amount of administrative claiming but increased the direct
service cost per unit. For FY2013/14, Mental Health did not receive an A-87 overhead charge, instead received a credit. How
this swing of approximately $846,832 will impact the direct service cost per unit as well as administrative claiming is unknown.
2011 Realignment and the passage of Proposition 30 have proven to stabilize funding for mental health and substance abuse
services; however, concerns continue about whether the funding will keep pace with program growth. Since the source funding
for the Mental Health realigned programs changed in FY2012/13, the State continues to work on distribution methodologies for
base and growth for the Behavioral Health Subaccount. For FY2013/14, the State Controller’s Office (SCO) base distributions
among counties differed from FY2012/13. Additionally, the State has not determined growth distributions, and until those are
issued, future growth monies can’t be calculated. The Requested FY2014/15 budget assumes a 5% growth in 2011
Realignment based on information available from the California Mental Health Director’s Association (CMHDA) and assumes the
distribution percentage for Solano County will not change.
Potential growth in expenditures for the two realigned mental health programs, mental health managed care and EPSDT remain
a concern as they rely on 2011 Realignment to provide the 50% non-federal match for services. The Department continues to
implement community programs to strengthen the system of care with a goal of reducing hospitalizations. Expenditures for
adult inpatient stays have trended upward the past couple of years in part because of placement challenges in MediCal billable
facilities. If the facility cannot bill for the MediCal placement, then the County is responsible for 100% of the cost. To address
this issue, Solano County, as of April, 2014, began contracting with a community provider for a Psychiatric Health Facility (PHF)
in Vallejo to maximize reimbursement under MediCal Expansion. 10 of 16 beds were contracted to reduce out-of-county
placement of Solano residents in non-Medical reimbursable beds. This increased availability of beds in a MediCal billable PHF
should assist in reducing hospital costs; however, due to the nature of crisis services, projecting for future need is difficult.
Adding to the difficulty of these projections are the impact of recently increased AB109 and Jail programming, which count
among their treatment options inpatient psychiatric hospitalization in order to ensure the seriously mentally ill are not
inappropriately housed in jail instead of a treatment setting.
Concerns with 2011 Realignment growth keeping pace with growth in ESPDT services also remains. The Department has
started implementing expanded services for children in foster care as a result of the Katie A Settlement. The County Mental
Health Director’s Association (CMHDA) is advocating to the State, that Katie A services fall under the Proposition 30 mandate.
If the expansion of the services is deemed a Proposition 30 mandate, the State would provide funding for at least half of the
non-federal share for the expanded services. If the State does not provide the funding, then additional strains will be placed on
realignment to fund these services. Reimbursement for substance abuse services also remains somewhat unpredictable. In FY2012/13, the federal sequestration
reduced the Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment (SAPT) grant by 5%. While indications are that the SAPT grant won’t
be reduced as much as for FY2013/14, concerns remain that the grant will continue to be reduced either due to federal deficit
concerns and/or healthcare reform, on the assumption that MediCal expansion under ACA should relieve local systems of some
of their former cost burdens.
Prior to the implementation of the ACA, SAPT monies were used to fund services for individuals not receiving MediCal. Many of
those individuals should be eligible for MediCal and their services federally funded. Federal and State authorities have not
indicated that the funding will terminate, but questions remain if the funding will be repurposed. While more individuals are, in
fact, eligible for Drug MediCal (DMC) services, inadequate DMC rates and decertification of DMC providers are challenging the
system of care and placing more demands on available SAPT funding and 2011 Realignment. This issue has been raised with
the Department of Healthcare Services as these issues run contrary to the stated intention of the ACA to expand substance
abuse services in accordance with its new requirements.
There are a number of significant issues and policy considerations at the State and Federal levels that may impact the Division
of Health Services. Legislation passed in 2013 (AB 85) and signed by the Governor has changed the formula for growth in
public health realignment funding (1991 public health realignment), potentially significantly reducing future growth in these funds,
which provide support to nearly all of the programs in the Division.
At the federal level, some funding streams were eliminated, and others were reduced. The overall result is significant with
reductions in federal funding for the following public health programs: Women, Infants & Children Supplemental Nutrition
Program (WIC), Nurse-Family Partnership, Maternal Child and Adolescent Health, AIDS Care and Prevention, the Emergency
Preparedness and Response programs, and the Community Transformation Grant program. These decreases, combined with
increased operational cost are putting a considerable strain on the Health Services program budget.
As a result of protracted, significant vacancy rates in Family Health Services affecting clinic productivity and issues with billing
and collections substantially impacted clinic revenues, together with the anticipated impacts of implementing a system-wide
electronic health record infrastructure and rapid growth in clinic numbers and services, Family Health Services has developed
an operating deficit which is currently funded through the use of existing one-time revenues in Health and Social Services. The
steps being taken to address this deficit include deleting 11.7 FTE vacant positions as indicated above (the anticipated potential
impacts of the Affordable Care Act have not fully materialized, so these positions are not required at the present time), modifying
clinic workflows to maximize productivity, and engaging an appropriate vendor to provide billing and collections services. H&SS
will continue to monitor the fiscal status of the FHS clinics closely and take additional steps if required to close any remaining
funding gaps. The Department will report back on progress on or before Midyear.
The Federal Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) is in the process of tightening requirements for continued
funding of HRSA grants. Health Services currently has two HRSA grants (Ryan White, and Healthcare for the Homeless) for a
combined total of $1.6M. HRSA is currently auditing both programs.
In addition, the Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) reimbursement rates that have already been established are being
reviewed by the federal government to see if anything can be carved out or reduced based on new productivity requirements
that were not in effect when the rates were originally established. There is also proposed new legislation that may affect the
behavioral health integration aspect of the Family Health Services Clinics. H&SS is currently working to determine if these
changes can be supported under the current service delivery model.
The 2010 Federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was implemented effective January 1, 2014. The State chose the
option of State implementation rather than county implementation for MediCal expansion, using a sizeable portion of public
health realignment funding to cover the costs of expansion; it is unclear, however, if the amount of the public health realignment
funds being diverted from counties back to the State to help pay for costs related to implementation of the Affordable Care Act
will be enough to cover the population still in need of assistance. There has been a significant increase in the number of
patients assigned to the Family Health Services clinics by Partnership Health Plan, the County’s MediCal managed care
provider.
2011 Realignment provides a dedicated funding source from sales tax for Foster Care, Adoptions, Child Protective Services,
and Adult Protective Services. The guidelines are broadly defined to allow counties flexibility in structuring realigned programs.
However, cash flow problems for these programs may pose a significant risk to counties since the total amount of funding
generated may vary based on sales tax receipts. The State no longer has a share of program costs; the Counties assume the
risk of not having sufficient funding for cost increases, especially for Assistance programs where the services are mandated and
the County has no discretion regarding the eligibility factors.
The State is currently studying the impact of the Community First Choice Option program on savings in residential placements
by implementing this program in six pilot counties. The program provides assistance with activities of daily living to Medicaid
recipients who have a chronic illness, medical condition or disability. Services are provided in the home, and many of the eligible
residents are now being referred to In Home Supportive Services (IHSS). The IHSS caseload is, therefore, expected to
increase.
On Tuesday September 17, 2013, the US Department of Labor announced new regulations that will require overtime pay for the
4,300 Solano County IHSS workers effective January 1, 2015. California counties have been working with the California
Department of Social Services and the legislature to develop new guidelines. The guidelines are expected to be completed by
June 2014, and will, establish a system for IHSS providers to be paid based on hours capped at a standard 40 hour workweek.
This new process is expected to impose additional administrative burdens on counties to track, monitor and regulate overtime
and may require additional staff. However, these regulations are not expected to impact the County’s share of the IHSS MOE
cost for provider wages.
Legislation (SB738) is moving forward to serve Commercially Sexually Exploited Children (CSEC). According to the legislation,
“the Federal Bureau of Investigation reports that as many as 100,000 children are commercially sexually exploited each year
nationally. Studies show that virtually all exploited children have suffered extensive sexual, physical or emotional abuse and
that the majority are involved with, or have been involved with, California’s county based child welfare system. The
circumstances of abuse and neglect that led to a child’s involvement with CWS later leave youth particularly vulnerable to
manipulative and abusive exploiters." While timelines are unknown, current efforts are underway to prepare Child Welfare
Services to be able to serve this specialized population and handle the increased caseload numbers.
Legislation authorized Continuum of Care Reform (CCR) through Senate Bill 1013 (Chapter 35, Statutes of 2012). W & I code
11461.2 was added that required CDSS to consult with stakeholders to develop recommendations for revisions to the State’s
current rate setting system and services across the continuum of existing placement settings. It is anticipated that foster care
costs will increase, and additional program responsibilities will be added for Child Welfare Services.
The California Department of Social Services has been notified officially that California did not meet the work participation rate
requirements for FFY’s 2008, 2009, and 2010. The statewide liability for Federal Fiscal Year 2008 is $47.4 million and for
Federal Fiscal Year 2009 it is $113.6 million. For Federal Fiscal Year 2010, the liability statewide is $179 million. The Federal government rejected the State’s appeals for all three years, and the State is continuing to pursue other appeal options and is
also working on corrective action plans to mitigate the impact of these findings. H&SS will continue to follow this matter closely
and encourages the County to consider establishing a designated reserve for this unfunded liability.
Foster Care: AB 12 was approved in FY2010/11 and extends foster care for youths between the ages of 18 to 21 on a voluntary
basis; the impact of this new program is more apparent now that 37 foster youth have opted to remain in foster care. Rate
increases are not included in the FY2014/15 Requested Budget because information on changes is not available. However,
legislation did authorize a Continuum of Care Consortium to review and recommend changes to the State’s current rate setting
system for all foster care providers. To date, no recommendations have resulted from the work of this consortium but rate
increases could be one outcome that would impact the cost of foster care services and would be evaluated at Mid-Year and/or
Third Quarter budget projections. Since the County is now responsible for 100% of the non-federal share of this program,
increases in County General Fund may occur.
Adoptions: Increases in State mandated rates are driving up the costs of this program and caseload has been increasing,
currently projected at approximately 2%. Since the County is now responsible for 100% of the non-federal share of this program,
increases in County General Fund may occur.
CalWORKs: As a result of State program changes over the past two years and associated reductions to the CalWORKs
caseload, the cost of aid payments to Solano County is much lower, resulting in reduced State and Federal revenue in this
program. The Governor’s proposed FY2013/14 budget restored some requirements for families to re-engage in work activities,
but the changes that reduced time limits for remaining on aid appear to be reducing caseloads in general. Due to the
fluctuations in caseload, it is possible that the reduced caseload projected for FY2014/15 may be too optimistic. Increases in
County General Fund may occur, but are limited to 2.5% of the total benefits paid to recipients.
Under current California Law (SB 1036) only the 8 pilot counties implementing the Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI) are
scheduled to have employer of record functions transferred from the County/Public Authority to the State beginning 2014 and
into 2015. AB485 is another bill currently pending with the legislator under which proposes for all 58 counties to transfer their
employer of record functions to the State effective January 2015. The number of IHSS providers that can be covered by health insurance arranged via the public authority will vary in relation to
changes in paid hours because the funding for this benefit is based exclusively on reimbursement at $0.60 per paid provider
hour. When the number of paid provider hour’s increases, the number of providers that are covered also increases, but must be
limited to the total reimbursable amount. The State has proposed a plan to implement a 40-hour a week work cap on providers
effective January 2015. It is anticipated that more IHSS caregivers will qualify for expanded MediCal or subsidies through
California’s health exchange known as Covered California which could change the medical benefit cost in the upcoming year.
The Fund allocations to Counties have been gradually decreasing as smoking rates in California have been decreasing;
however, this is both anticipated and desired.
TPEP continues to work on the implementation of the 2014-2017 Comprehensive Tobacco Control Plan. 
Of its $6.7 million Recommended Budget, First 5 Solano currently holds contracts with H&SS amounting to approximately $1.5
million annually. Thus, significant changes at the State and Federal level to health and social services programs could directly
impact First 5 programs.
FY2014/15 is the final year of a three-year funding cycle. During FY2014/15, the First 5 Commission will be developing a
Program Investment Plan for funding beyond June 30, 2015. First 5 Solano currently holds reserves that would allow for
continued funding at current levels for approximately 3 years beyond FY2014/15. The Commission could choose to reduce
future annual funding in order to spread remaining reserves over a longer period.
The Children’s Network and the Family Resource Centers receive funding from the County General Fund and Children’s Trust
Fund. The Children’s Trust Fund revenues have been declining over the last few years. One of the responsibilities of the
Children’s Alliance is to make recommendations regarding the use of the Children’s Trust Fund. The FY2014/15 Recommended
Budget includes status quo funding; however, the Children’s Alliance may suggest a reduced appropriation for FY2014/15 if this
occurs, the budgets for the Children’s Network and Family Resources Centers would need to be reduced.
The Library continues to address its structural funding deficit having achieved a balanced budget at the close of the last two
fiscal years. However, with increases in personnel costs, the Department will continue to work on keeping its budget balanced
and decreasing the projected structural deficit. The Department continues to rely on fund balance and one-time revenues to
balance.
The Department will be working with the Solano, Napa and Partners (SNAP) consortium to identify a different governance model
for the future, likely a Joint Powers Agreement, which will replace the current contract for services model used by the current
SNAP partners with Solano County. In addition, the SNAP consortium will be issuing an RFP to look at different automation
vendors to select a new Integrated Library System (ILS). As the SNAP directors work through this process, which could take up
to two years, the SNAP consortium will remain in place as it is currently structured.
In considering the setting of contingency for FY2014/15, there are a number of uncertainties that may impact the County. The
County is still impacted by the limited revenues from AB109 and the high costs to provide mandated services to an increased
local jail population and to a larger probation population due to the 2011 Public Safety Realignment. The County is also exposed
to higher costs associated with the County-run clinics that are generating costs which are not reimbursable from Federal and
State programs, such as Medi-Cal. The County additionally uses contingency funds to pay for increased employee costs due to
MOUs that are approved after the Budget Hearing process. Only known MOU employee costs are included in the
Recommended Budget. In FY2013/14 the County used approximately $600,000 in contingencies.
The District’s property tax revenues have increased from FY2012/13; however, the revenues have not returned to the high of
FY2007/08.
There are two major federal deliberations which may affect the future status of, and activities of the WIB, as discussed below.
Within these two are mixed signals of Congressional support for the WIA program’s legislative reauthorization and annual
appropriations.
 The Congress and President continue debating efforts to balance the annual federal budget and reduce the federal debt
levels. The “annual deficit spending” debates also have an impact. However, there is expressed bipartisan support for the
“public workforce system” and a block grant effort to local communities, with a business-led board. Proposals for complete
elimination of the federal WIA program funding are not being suggested. Recent budget compromises, which forestalled
the second round of planned Sequestrations saw a 2% overall reduction in WIA appropriations to the states. This lays open
a lot of uncertainty and a wide range of possible options for the future.
 Congressional authorizing committees are taking up WIA Reauthorization legislation, which would provide a continued
longer-term revenue stream for the program. This effort has been undertaken a number of times across the last nine years,
only to be stalled. There is some optimism from federal insiders that WIA Reauthorization could be one area where
bipartisan agreement could be reached and positive Congressional action undertaken in the next session.
 A number of new initiatives are coming forth at the State level. These pose a potential impact on the WIB’s operation.
These include the following:
 Congress continues to limit the amount of Governor’s discretionary WIA funds, which the WIB routinely was able to
access with successful competitive grant applications. Without this funding source, dedicated programs for veterans,
ex-offenders, and certain targeted industries will likely not be available for jobseekers and employers.
 State legislative actions and/or staff-led initiatives are gradually impeding upon local decision-making (as
envisioned/afforded in the WIA legislation itself) and moving the public workforce system toward a more “one size fits
all” model for administration and service delivery. Some of these initiatives present unfunded mandates upon local
governments and WIBs.
 The challenge of day-to-day operation of the One-Stop Centers is compounded by continued reductions in State
funding for virtually every local agency that serves as a One-Stop Center partner. Most critically, this includes annual
reductions in staffing provided by the State Employment Development Department (EDD). More responsibility is falling
upon the WIB to support One-Stop Center services, further prompting need for streamlining and reductions in the range
and/or availability of services.
 The thrust for regional undertakings, collaboration-building and “braiding” of limited public resources increasingly calls
upon the WIB to “partner” in meaningful ways with other educational/training agencies on broader initiatives. While
advantageous these type initiatives present an added draw upon limited WIB fiscal and staffing resources.
The Solano County Fair Association continues to face major challenges in 2014. Increasing revenue in a continuing slow
economic time, particularly with respect to discretionary spending, continues to be a significant challenge. Maintaining the
current level of activities while creatively attracting new events, activities and revenue, represents an even greater challenge as
the SCFA goes forward with limited staff and resources. Particularly in light of the loss of State funding and replacement
revenue for live horse racing in 2012, SCFA continues to be mindful of the need to discover new revenue streams and increase
revenues from existing sources.
Maintaining and improving existing aging facilities with limited resources continues to challenge most fairgrounds in the United
States, including the Solano County Fairgrounds. SCFA must continue to maximize its limited resources for needed deferred
maintenance and capital improvements, while aggressively and creatively seeking and seizing new revenue opportunities.
Solano360, the redevelopment plan of the fairgrounds property and the “Fair of the Future,” continues to move forward with preengineering
work and required mitigation studies for Phase I of the Project. The County has secured entitlement from the City of
Vallejo for the entire project area based upon the approved specific plan and certified final environmental impact report and has
also negotiated and adopted a development agreement with the City of Vallejo. Information regarding the current status of the
development can be found on the County website at www.solanocounty.com/solano360.
The Solano County Fair has been active partner in the development of the redevelopment strategies, and enthusiastically
supports the project. In the short term, the Solano County Fair is challenged with developing new revenue streams that will not
conflict with this long-term strategy.
The SCFA 2014 budget anticipates a year-end Unrestricted Reserves of $291,126, which is $248,961 or 46% less than
budgeted at year-end 2013. The SCFA 2014 budget anticipates a year-end Restricted Reserves of $11,801, which is $131,211
or 92% less than budgeted at year-end 2013. The 2014 Budget anticipates year-end total reserves of $302,927. The SCFA
understands that ongoing operational costs cannot rely on the use of reserves and will continue to expand its year-round
revenue streams.
Solano360, the redevelopment plan of the fairgrounds property and the “Fair of the Future,” continues to move forward with preengineering
work and required mitigation studies for Phase I of the Project. The County has secured entitlement from the City of
Vallejo for the entire project area based upon the approved specific plan and certified final environmental impact report and has
also negotiated and adopted a development agreement with the City of Vallejo. Information regarding the current status of the
development can be found on the County website at www.solanocounty.com/solano360.
