In FY2015/16, the Board approved $2,000 in funding in Other Professional Services for District 1 for purposes of holding
functions to address issues of interest to the Supervisor. The CAO recommends the Board affirm a funding level for FY2016/17
in Other Professional Services and determine whether it remains one-time or on-going funding.
A new Supervisor will be assuming office in January and budget adjustments may be necessary at that time.
District 4 anticipates the possibility of revenues in the form of donations and contributions in the amount of $2,500. The CAO
recommends the Board affirm the collection of revenues to offset costs to host a community workshop.
The FY2015/16 Budget includes the continued appropriation of $27,500 in contributions to non-County agencies for Travis
Community Consortium (TCC) and the rebudgeting of $5,200 in consulting services. The CAO recommends the Board affirm
the non-County agency contribution for FY2016/17.
The County will continue to work with its city partners and Solano EDC as strategies to retain existing businesses and attract
new companies are developed and implemented as part of the IDEA project.
The rising cost of mileage reimbursement, which is set by the Internal Revenue Service, impacts the budget if the total allocated
funds remain static. On-going expenses in the form of per diem and mileage reimbursement for active jurors varies from year to
year depending on where the jurors are located and whether or not they choose to submit claims for their reimbursable
expenses. This creates budget forecast challenges because the Grand Jury is selected after the recommended budget is
completed.
The Grand Jury does not have the option to eliminate positions as a budget management tool. The Administrative Assistant
occupies a part-time position and the work of the Grand Jury would not be able to move forward in an effective and efficient way
without an Administrative Assistant. Additionally, by the request of the District Attorney, a criminal Grand Jury may be
summoned to investigate criminal matters, adding an additional and unpredictable cost to the Grand Jury budget.
General Fund costs in this department are a Constitutional responsibility. The County's General Fund exposure, represented by
the Court's appointment of private attorneys is driven by two factors: the availability of Public Defender and/or Alternate Public
Defender staff to provide representation where appropriate, and the number of hours required by private
attorney/investigator/special witness/psychiatric evaluations/court reporter to properly represent indigent defendants. Cost
exposures related to the number of private defense hours and, by implication, the incidence of criminal activity and arrest rates,
are beyond the County's control.
Adjustments may have to be made to this budget in FY2016/17 based on actual figures at year-end and what the State’s final
budget provides in funding.
There are several pending Redevelopment-related lawsuits filed by cities against the State Department of Finance which could
impact the General Fund’s share of the ABX1 26 residual balance depending on Court rulings in these cases.
The overall demand for legal services remains high, especially with the securing of outside public agency contracts that
generate significant non-general fund revenue.
The hiring of the additional attorney and staff positively affected the Office’s workload. However, as the number of hours
recorded for each attorney increases, and with additional requirements placed on staff to support not only assigned attorneys
but changes to County procedures, namely Documentum, additional full time staff may be required in the future.
With more than one-third of the County’s workforce retirement eligible (the median county employee is 46 years of age), and a
vacancy rate that has varied between 8% and 10.6%, recruiting, retaining and developing the next generation of County
employees will continue to play a critical role in the success of achieving the mission of Solano County. Applicants who are part
of the “millennial generation” are the next generation in line to replace “baby boomers” who are nearing retirement. To that end, the department implemented new strategies for recruitment efforts, including a video and on-line job fair, and is reviewing
classification specifications to ensure minimum qualifications are appropriate and job duties are accurate. Human Resources
staff is working with several departments to review policies and practices and develop strategies that will make public service
more appealing to millennials, with the focus on reviewing career opportunities for recent college graduates or other entry-level
job applicants.
Given the heavy emphasis on Labor Relations, and internal vacancies, the implementation of competency-based interviewing
has taken longer than originally anticipated. The department will be continuing to work with departments and their employees
and the labor unions to receive input on competencies for successful performance of essential job functions.
The department will begin preparations for collective bargaining agreement negotiations which are set to begin in spring 2017.
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) mandates employer-paid health insurance for all employees working an average of 30 hours or
more per week. The County has implemented the ACA for all Act-eligible employees. A remaining issue is the excise tax (now
postponed to 2020). The federal government has not issued final regulations on the excise tax so Human Resources will
continue to monitor.
The County of Solano continues to face a demographic change of an aging workforce with mid-management, senior and
executive managers in the County nearing retirement in larger numbers, leaving a potential gap in County leadership. In anticipation of the forecasted change, the County reinstated the Solano Leadership Academy training program in FY2013/14 to
help address development of mid-managers and supervisors, and has established another senior leadership development
training cohort to prepare individuals for executive leadership roles. These programs will continue to be offered every other
fiscal year. In addition, the County will need to expand and fund strategies designed to recruit and retain the younger
generations that will be entering the workforce in the coming years.
The ROV continues to monitor several election bills that will potentially change election processes statewide and assist with
funding of the County’s aging voting equipment. Current legislation changes will require ROV to register voters on Election Day.
This change will be in effect on January 1, 2017 and will require e-rosters to have real-time connection of all polling place roster
lists. Other bills are circulating that would provide a portion of funding for ROV to replace the existing voting equipment,
provided the county switch to Vote Centers and increased costs associated with early voting.
In June 2016, the department will provide recommendations to the Board on the future management of these historical records.
The Airport will need to continue to generate sufficient revenue in the future to provide for required local matches for State and
federal grants.
The Nut Tree Airport Capital Improvement Plan identifies rehabilitation of airfield pavements including the Airport’s runway;
considered a high funding priority by the FAA.
The Airport has prepared an environmental analysis on the removal of eucalyptus trees located between the Airport and the Nut
Tree area that are an existing hazard to flight safety given the proximity of the trees to the Airport’s runway as identified by the
State of California Caltrans Division of Aeronautics and the Federal Aviation Administration.
A continuing issue has been the County’s Property Tax System (SCIPS). While SCIPS was re-engineered over six years ago
so that it could run on a supported technology platform, the business logic (which is contained in over one million lines of code)
in the application was not changed. Maintenance of, and improvements to, the business logic is difficult and the overall
structure of the application and database has many short-comings. This situation is shared by the majority of counties in
California, most of whom operate legacy, home-grown systems. A small group of counties are working with Thomson-Reuters
to develop a system to meet Revenue and Taxation Code requirements. The County should closely monitor progress on this
system and consider implementing the vendor package in the future if it meets our business process requirements or, consider
other vendor packages that might be suitable. DoIT, working with the Auditor, Tax Collector, and Assessor will strive to make a
recommendation to the Board on alternatives to the SCIPS system at mid-year, FY2016/17.
The classification descriptions for most IT workers in DoIT have not changed for 20 years or more. As such they do not properly
reflect the knowledge, skills, abilities, and tasks expected of today’s technology workforce. Additionally, the classification
structure does not offer enough flexibility and opportunities for advancement to make the department attractive to job candidates
and to provide an incentive for employees to stay and expand their skills and responsibilities. The Department will work with
Human Resources on a review and classifications and present findings to the Board in FY2016/17
2015 California Building Code – Triennial Code Adoption Cycle Supplement
As part of the 2015 Code Cycle, the California Building Standards Commission receives proposed code changes from several
state agencies, including the Department of Housing and Community Development, the Division of the State Architect - Access
Compliance and the Division of the State Architect - Structural Safety, the Office of the State Fire Marshal, the Office of
Statewide Health Planning and Development, and the California Department of Public Health for code change consideration in
the 2015 Triennial Code Adoption Cycle. The accepted code changes are published on July 1, 2016, with Statewide Effective
Date of the 2016 Building Standards Code as of January 1, 2017. Department of General Services staff will continue to monitor
proposed changes for potential impact to County project requirements.
There are no pending issues. The Department of General Services is currently reviewing facility needs for the Criminal Justice
eligible programs and departments, and may have recommendations for this fund at Budget Hearings.
State Funding Allocation Initiative
Under the direction of CA DCSS Director, Alisha Griffin, substantial effort to strengthen California’s Child Support Program
continues. Of significance is the formation of a Budget Allocation Methodology (BAM) Committee, comprised of Directors from
16 local child support agencies, including Solano County DCSS and State DCSS executive staff. The Committee was formed to
address long-standing concerns about formula funding inequities created from an outdated funding allocation model. The
purpose of the BAM Committee is to develop and make recommendations for alternative budget allocation methodologies,
which may be used to fund local child support agencies in future years.
Federal Proposals
The Obama Administration’s proposed federal fiscal year 2016 budget to Congress resubmitted two 2015 child support
proposals which were not enacted into law previously. The proposed budget includes the policy proposed in previous budgets to
encourage states to pass through current child support collections to families receiving Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families (TANF) benefits, rather than retaining payments for cost recovery purposes. Also proposed previously, the Obama
Administration would mandate that all states implement parenting time (visitation) arrangements when obtaining child support
orders by 2021.
The passing of Proposition 47 in the 2014 November continues to increase the number of appeals. The department will continue
to evaluate the caseload impact and examine staffing levels going forward.
The District Attorney plans to provide the Board of Supervisors with an update regarding the Solano Family Justice Center in
FY2016/17. The report will expand on the plan for the center including grant funding and programs such as the Courage Center
2 and Kids’ Court, and address the District Attorney’s plan for continuing the mission of the FJC to increase direct services to
victims of crime.
The SFJC continues to prioritize direct services for victims through the Safe Harbor Visitation and Exchange Program, a grant
received by the SFJC under which services are provided through a contract with Child Haven Inc. and which is currently funded
from October 1, 2014 through September 30, 2016. The 2016 grant solicitation for this program through Justice for Families is
being reduced from $225,000 to $200,000 per year and will be awarded on a competitive basis. The previous grant funded staff from Child Haven provide the direct services to clients and limited term staff in the SFJC. Child Haven and the District Attorney
submitted a 2016 grant proposal for the reduced amount available focused on securing fund for direct services first, and seeks
to increase capacity for additional clients. The 1.0 FTE Limited Term Assistant Family Violence Prevention Coordinator position
will expire on September 30, 2016.
In 2016 the District Attorney received a one-time final allocation of $10,000 from the Solano Family Justice Center Foundation
which was the result of fund raising efforts, and also received notice that the non-profit intended to disband so no additional
funds would be received in future years. The District Attorney OFVP staff are continuing efforts to identify appropriate partners,
and funding opportunities including grants that could augment/compliment the operating of the Solano Family Justice Center
and will provide further information as part of our update to the Board.
The District Attorney plans to provide the Board of Supervisors with an update regarding the Solano Family Justice Center in
FY2016/17. The report will expand on the plan for the center including grant funding and programs such as the Courage Center
2 and Kids’ Court, and address the District Attorney’s plan for continuing the mission of the FJC to increase direct services to
victims of crime.
The SFJC continues to prioritize direct services for victims through the Safe Harbor Visitation and Exchange Program, a grant
received by the SFJC under which services are provided through a contract with Child Haven Inc. and which is currently funded
from October 1, 2014 through September 30, 2016. The 2016 grant solicitation for this program through Justice for Families is
being reduced from $225,000 to $200,000 per year and will be awarded on a competitive basis. The previous grant funded staff from Child Haven provide the direct services to clients and limited term staff in the SFJC. Child Haven and the District Attorney
submitted a 2016 grant proposal for the reduced amount available focused on securing fund for direct services first, and seeks
to increase capacity for additional clients. The 1.0 FTE Limited Term Assistant Family Violence Prevention Coordinator position
will expire on September 30, 2016.
In 2016 the District Attorney received a one-time final allocation of $10,000 from the Solano Family Justice Center Foundation
which was the result of fund raising efforts, and also received notice that the non-profit intended to disband so no additional
funds would be received in future years. The District Attorney OFVP staff are continuing efforts to identify appropriate partners,
and funding opportunities including grants that could augment/compliment the operating of the Solano Family Justice Center
and will provide further information as part of our update to the Board.
The State allocation of AB 109 for Solano County consists of a base allocation and an allocation of growth in the State funding
source. AB109 growth funds for Community Corrections are dependent on the State’s sales tax and VLF collections and are
allocated based on performance measures primarily on incarceration rates and Probation success rates. In FY2016/17
Department’s will focus on the evaluation of outcomes and program measurement in an effort determine the impact of Solano
County programs on the reduction in recidivism and achievement in performance measures necessary for maximizing the
allocation of growth funds.
The FY2016/17 recommended Budget includes the full year funding needed to provide for a continuation of the staffing and
other costs previously approved by the Board under the 2011 Solano Public Safety Realignment Act Implementation Plan.
These costs are funded by the State AB109 allocation in FY2016/17 and AB109 carry forward funds from prior year’s unspent
allocations. The Department and the County Administrator are continuing to monitor the State allocation of AB 109 funds.
The Safe Neighborhoods and Schools Act – Proposition 47 is a ballot initiative passed by California voters on November 4,
2014. Proposition 47 reduces certain non-serious and nonviolent property and drug offenses from wobblers or felonies to misdemeanors, reducing penalties to offenders who have not committed certain severe crimes including murder and certain sex
and gun crimes. The Public Defender’s Office is required to review cases on behalf of current and past clients to determine
Proposition 47 eligibility. The actual number of cases impacted by Proposition 47 in Solano County is still being determined.
However, preliminary estimates by the Public Defender indicate at least 10,000 individual cases are eligible, meaning
approximately 100,000 cases must be reviewed for eligibility under Proposition 47. The review of petitions and applications
under Proposition 47 in the Public Defender’s Office has resulted in increased legal, investigation and clerical workloads to
process and calendar cases with the Courts. In the year 2015 the Public Defender’s Office reviewed approximately 5,000
cases, filed approximately 750 petitions and made over 600 court appearances. Based on the increased workload required to
implement Proposition 47 additional resources had been allocated by your Board. The County Administrator in coordination with
County Departments and the Courts will continue to monitor the workload impacts of Proposition 47.
The Public Defender’s Office is working with Department of Information Technology to launch a new case management system.
This system will bring the Public Defender’s Office in line with the District Attorney’s Office, in order to achieve sharing of
discovery in an electronic format. The long range goal of this project includes information sharing with the Superior Court of
California, County of Solano and the office going “paperless”.
The State allocation of AB 109 for Solano County consists of a base allocation and an allocation of growth in the State funding
source. AB109 growth funds for Community Corrections are dependent on the State’s sales tax and VLF collections and are
allocated based on performance measures primarily on incarceration rates and Probation success rates. In FY2016/17
Department’s will focus on the evaluation of outcomes and program measurement in an effort determine the impact of Solano
County programs on the reduction in recidivism and achievement in performance measures necessary for maximizing the
allocation of growth funds.
The FY2016/17 Recommended Budget includes the full year funding needed to provide for a continuation of the staffing and
other costs previously approved by the Board under the 2011 Solano Public Safety Realignment Act Implementation Plan.
These costs are funded by the State AB109 allocation in FY2016/17 and AB109 carry forward funds from prior year’s unspent
allocations. The Department and the County Administrator are continuing to monitor the State allocation of AB 109 funds.
The Safe Neighborhoods and Schools Act – Proposition 47 is a ballot initiative passed by California voters on November 4,
2014. Proposition 47 reduces certain non-serious and non-violent property and drug offenses from wobblers or felonies to
misdemeanors, reducing penalties to offenders who have not committed certain severe crimes including murder and certain sex
and gun crimes. The Alternate Public Defender’s Office is required to review cases on behalf of current and past clients to
determine Proposition 47 eligibility. The actual number of cases impacted by Proposition 47 in Solano County is still being
determined. However, preliminary estimates by the Public Defender indicate at least 10,000 individual cases between the two
sides of the Department are eligible for Proposition 47 relief. This will require the review of approximately 100,000 case files
between the two departments within the three-year statutory period. The Alternate Public Defender’s Office has reviewed
approximately 2400 case files, filed approximately 300 petitions and made approximately 250 court appearances on Proposition
47 cases. The review of petitions and applications under Proposition 47 in the Alternate Public Defender’s Office, has resulted
in increased legal, investigation and clerical workloads to process and calendar cases with the Courts. Based on the increase
workload required to implement Proposition 47 additional resources have been allocated by the Board. The County
Administrator in coordination with County Departments and the Courts will continue to monitor the workload impacts of
Proposition 47.
The Stanton Correctional Facility (SCF) has been faced with several challenges since operations began in October of 2015
including 50 outstanding warranty repair items that have to be resolved. Currently, SCF is operating with capacity that is limited.
These commissioning and testing issues have had an impact on overall Custody Division operations as it has been difficult to
plan and allocate resources effectively due to the uncertainty of when the facility will become fully operational.
California Penal Code section 4115.5 allows for local law enforcement jurisdictions to contract for inmate housing with other
jurisdictions. Counties who contract for inmate housing do so for a variety of reasons such as overcrowding. The needs may
either be for a temporary or a more permanent basis. The Sheriff is responsible for the operations of the County jail facilities and
efficient scheduling of staff resources and has the responsibility to determine available capacity above the County of Solano
immediate needs verses capacity to assist other jurisdictions through the leasing of beds. The FY2016/17 Recommended
Budget includes a projection for revenue generated through lease beds up to a maximum of 125. However, this revenue stream
is not guaranteed and will fluctuate based on the availability of bed space and need on part of contracting entities.
The current regional Automated Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS) will reach its end of life in FY2016/17 and Cal-ID funds
are insufficient to purchase a system upgrade and replacement equipment. AFIS provides an accelerated response to
fingerprint searches for identification of individuals in the field. The mobile ID units are used during car stops for motor-related
offenses such as driving impaired, unlicensed drivers and vehicle theft. The two finger search is submitted to our local AFIS and
the CAL DOJ systems simultaneously. This rapid response allows for field officers, especially those making traffic stops, to: 1)
Authenticate individuals remotely and avoid unnecessary transfers to a booking facility; 2) Rapidly identify dangerous individuals
including persons with active warrants; 3) Confirm instances of mistaken identities; and 4) View a driver's license photograph
from the field. AFIS is used by the Sheriff and all local law enforcement agencies. Without a regional AFIS, information
available to the Sheriff would be limited to only information in the State Department of Justice’s System. Consequently, the Sheriff’s Office is exploring potential partnerships and finding opportunities to augment Cal-ID funds.
The State allocation of AB 109 for Solano County consists of a base allocation and an allocation of growth in the State funding
source. AB109 growth funds for Community Corrections are dependent on the State’s sales tax and VLF collections and are
allocated based on performance measures primarily on incarceration rates and Probation success rates. In FY2016/17
Department’s will focus on the evaluation of outcomes and program measurement in an effort determine the impact of Solano
County programs on the reduction in recidivism and achievement in performance measures necessary for maximizing the
allocation of growth funds.
The FY2016/17 recommended Budget includes the full year funding needed to provide for a continuation of the staffing and
other costs previously approved by the Board under the 2011 Solano Public Safety Realignment Act Implementation Plan.
These costs are funded by the State AB109 allocation in FY2016/17 and AB109 carry forward funds from prior year’s unspent
allocations. The Department and the County Administrator are continuing to monitor the State allocation of AB 109 funds.
Government Code 26731 restricts 95% of funds for implementation, maintenance and purchase of auxiliary equipment and
furnishings for automated systems for the Sheriff’s Civil Division and only 5% can be used for operations. It would be
advantageous for Solano County to pursue a legislative change to modify these percentages.
The Sheriff’s Office is seeking to expand the Narcotics Enforcement Team by collaborating with the Benicia Police Department
to add a Benicia Officer to the team. The City of Benicia would cover 50% of the cost and Asset Forfeiture Funds could be used
to fund the remaining 50%.
At this time the grant extension is still in the approval process. Should the Office of Emergency Services receive additional funds
for the 2016 EMPG during FY2016/17, the Sheriff will return to the Board to recognize unanticipated revenue.
Phase 1 and 2 of the Animal Shelter construction and remodel project is complete. The expansion provides for additional
kennels and includes a cattery and dog kennel showcase area to promote animal adoptions. The expansion also features a
public, low-cost spay/neuter and vaccination clinic. Phase III, which is the final phase includes the remodel of the existing
Shelter building and is in the early stages with expected completion targeted for end of FY2016/17.
The Sheriff’s Office has been approached by the cities of Fairfield, Vacaville, Rio Vista and Benicia to explore feasibility of
providing contracted animal control services. Procuring contracts for animal control services within the County is a viable
mechanism to create greater efficiencies at a reduced rate for our neighboring agencies as well as a means to offset operational
costs. If the feasibility review results in a potential for a contract, it would come to the Board for consideration and approval.
Title IV-E has been an ongoing funding source for juvenile services since 2000. The California Department of Social Services
(CDSS) reviewed the claiming process for counties and refined the definition of a youth who is “at imminent risk” of entering
foster care/group home placement. As a result, the Department’s reimbursement rate for Title IV-E continues to decline. In
FY2015/16, reimbursements resulted in a decrease of $320,000.
The uncertainty of funding allocations from the State of California does impact programs and services that are offered to adult
and juvenile clients. Monies received through Vehicle License Fees (VLF) are used to support programs under the Juvenile
Justice Crime Prevention Act (JJCPA), Youthful Offender Block Grant (YOBG), Juvenile Accountability Block Grant (JBAG), and
AB109. In addition, funding provided by Senate Bill 678 is unknown. The final allocation of these dollars will ultimately dictate
the level and types of programs that are offered in the future.
The Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA), which is effective October 1, 2017, could change the staffing patterns at the JDF due
to the fact that the staff to minor ratio will change from 1 staff per 10 youth to 1 staff per 8 youth. Once implemented, this might
add additional costs related to increasing staffing at the facility depending on total population and the operation/staffing of the
three programs housed separately on the Juvenile Hall campus. There is a potential for FY2017/18 of up to 4 staff in order to be
in compliance with the mandate.
The passage of Proposition 47 has had an impact on Department operations. The Department provides supervision based on
risk and the reduction of felonies to misdemeanors for certain crimes can reduce the time that the client is under jurisdiction. As
a result, it may be difficult to provide treatment services if resources are not immediately available.
The implementation of AB 403 and AB 12 continue to be important elements of the Community Care Reform (CCR) initiative
that is mandated by California Department of Social Services (CDSS). The new mandates focus on permanency, reunification,
and a reduction in the use of group home placements. These changes in services for probation clients are new areas for
probation, so the Department is collaborating with Health and Social Services, Child Welfare Services Division to develop
strategies related to serving this population.
Solano County currently contracts for inmate calling services in the Solano County Juvenile Detention Facility, including New
Foundations and the Challenge Academy. Under the contract, youth are charged a fee to make collect phone calls and a
portion of the revenues are deposited in the County Inmate Welfare Fund and/or the Ward Welfare Fund in accordance with
California Penal Code Section 4025. These funds are used for the benefit, education and welfare of the youth. In September
2013, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) released a Report and Order and Further Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking on inmate calling services. This action proposes limiting inmate long-distance calling rates from correctional
facilities. In October 2014, the Commission released a Second Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, which seeks comment
on a potential bank of inmate telephone commissions and potential impacts of implementation timelines. Data collection efforts
by the FCC continue, and while a final ruling has not been issued by the FCC, revised rules could result in a significant reduction
or elimination of the revenue to the Juvenile Hall Recreation-Ward Welfare Fund.
Timely hiring of limited term and extra-help staff for detection programs is an ongoing need due to State and Federal contractual
requirements to begin those activities when the insects are biologically active in our climate area.
Pending legislation in the regulation of Medical Marijuana may impact the Department, if the County or municipalities within the
County allow for cultivation, then the existing State Laws include responsibilities for the Agricultural Commissioner.
The Department staff will be working on a new program area as the result of a statewide pest quarantine that is spreading to the
northern regional area. Specifically, the Asian Citrus Psyllid which a pest of citrus that can vector Huanglongbing (HLB), a
motile bacterial disease, which is also commonly known as citrus greening due to the appearance of the fruit after infection. In
Solano County, the impact of the quarantine associated with this pest will be to production and shipping nurseries. Nurseries
are currently preparing to meet the quarantine guidelines which include requirements for inspection and certification, including
screened greenhouses to prevent pest introduction. In Solano County, one 2.2-acre biosecurity greenhouse has been
completed; housing ~ 90,000 plants and another is being built. Department staff will inspect these greenhouses for compliance
under the quarantine requirements every 30 days.
In 2015 the number of phytosanitary field (PQ) requests to the Department for inspection, was reduced by approximately 43%,
from a total of 10921 acres in 2014 to 6183 acres in 2015. Phytosanitary field inspections are completed by the Department by
walking the crop rows in order to identify common plant diseases that can be spread by seed. Once inspected the seed can
then be stored and shipped to importing countries with the statement that the seed is free from those specific diseases. The
reduction in requests for inspection appears to be multi-factored, but includes reductions in exports, and conversion of some
fields previously used for seed production to permanent crops such as almonds and walnuts. In 2016, the Department
anticipates the requests for PQ field inspections to continue to decline, in part due to a seed company moving to self-certification
and the general trend of reduced exports.
Automation projects will improve data management in the Agricultural Commissioner’s office. A new software program has been
developed for the pesticide regulatory program. Over the last three years the state Department of Pesticide Regulation (DPR) in
conjunction with staff of the California Agriculture Commissioners and Sealers Association has worked on the prototype for a
new pesticide inspection and data recording system. The beta testing of the new CalPeats system will occur in early summer of
2016 with deployment expected in early 2017. Under the current system, inspections are handwritten in each County and then
recorded and submitted to DPR for data input. The new system will allow for use of computer tablets in the field, and that
information will then be uploaded to DPR. In addition to the inspections, associated reporting requirements, follow-ups and enforcement actions will also be captured. The Department will also move Weights and Measures inspections to the new tablet
technology within the same time frame. A pilot project to automate insect trapping records is being done in six counties in
advance of a statewide rollout, once it is completed in the next year; the Department anticipates expanding tablet use to
seasonal employees in the detection program.
The Planning Division will be working with Travis Air Force Base staff to conduct a joint land use study involving possible
alternate land uses on the base; formulating a medical marijuana ordinance; working with Bay Conservation and Development
Commission staff regarding development proposals in the Suisun Marsh; working with County residents to develop a
recommended noise ordinance for Board of Supervisor consideration; and providing staff support to the regional park system
effort.
The Department submitted a Local Agency Management Program (LAMP) to the Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control
(CVRWQCB) Board in early 2016 in compliance with the statewide onsite wastewater treatment system policy that became
effective on May 13, 2013. The LAMP contained components of Solano County Ordinance Chapter 6.4 that regulates disposal
of liquid wastes. After review by the CVRWQCB is completed, minor amendments to Solano County Code, Chapter 6.4 may be
required for approval of the LAMP.
A Groundwater Sustainability Agency (GSA) must be formed by June 30, 2017 in order to be in compliance with the Sustainable
Groundwater Management Act (SGMA). If no GSA is developed, then the County is responsible provided that the County
completed all requirements to become a GSA and has not deferred to the state to assume this role. The Solano County Water
Agency is taking the administrative lead in coordinating discussion with local GSA eligible agencies and stakeholders, including
retaining facilitation services, to develop the potential structure for one or more GSAs that overly the Solano Subbasin. The
Department, through Environmental Health and Delta Water Activities, will remain engaged in this process, and staff time
commitment is anticipated to dramatically increase as the GSA formation deadline approaches. The Board will likely have several major policy decisions before the final recommended GSA structure is decided. Once established, the GSA(s) must
develop a sustainability plan by January 31, 2022. Solano County Code, Chapter 13.4 regulating groundwater well construction
may also require amendment to include measures for protection against subsidence, overdraft and saltwater intrusion, and to
better integrate with any sustainability plan finally approved by the GSA(s).
There are potential policy and legislative hurdles that will impact Solano County’s ability to protect its interests in the Delta over
the next three years. As of this writing, staff is monitoring several bills that may impact the Delta ecosystem, water quality and
water supply, including federal drought legislation that has been re-introduced. Furthermore, with the revised BDCP-CA
WaterFix environmental review, permit applications and related actions, another round of monitoring and comment on the Delta
tunnels project will likely be necessary to address local concerns and impacts. In addition, the State’s Ecosystem Restoration
efforts will also demand staff attention be given the State’s need and objective to implement habitat projects locally in
FY2016/17 as well as the state’s emphasis on integrated water management planning.
During FY2016/17 a Groundwater Sustainability Agency (GSA) structure that represents the diverse interests throughout the
county and subbasin and the subsequent completion of the Groundwater Sustainability Plan to balance all needs, including
those of agricultural and urban users, will be essential. Responding to regulations formed by state agencies to implement
SGMA will be important. Implementation of the newly adopted groundwater legislation will require staff time to participate in
SCWA led and State facilitated local efforts to establish a GSA before June 30, 2017.
Under the direction of the Board of Supervisors; the Department of Resource Management continuing its work on investigating
the development and initiation of a Dependent Park District. For FY2016/17 staff anticipates continued coordination and
investigation into opportunities to better promote parks and open space, as well as increasing park asset awareness by the
public and park attendance.
The key issue facing Public Works is the continuing federal and State underfunding of transportation. This is a long-term trend
that has been masked by the use of one-time sources of funding, such as Proposition 1B and federal stimulus funds. The recent
and significant declines in the price of fuel, and resulting reductions to gas tax revenues will impact the Road Fund in
FY2016/17. Solano County’s roads and non-pavement inventory (culverts and sidewalks) will be similarly impacted. If this
revenue depression persists into future years, the conditions of the County’s roads will likely decline.
In FY2015/16 the pending issues and policy considerations include:
California is the leader in implementing the Federal Affordable Care Act, operating the nation’s largest Medicaid program, and
seeks to partner with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to ensure continuous strides toward expanding access to
health care, improving quality of outcomes, and controlling the cost of care. The focus of the State of California Medi-Cal 2020
1115 Waiver Renewal submitted in FY2014/15 to the federal government is to build on a County coordinated model and shared
accountability approaches for managed care plans. It included the requirement to work with County Mental Health plans to
support Medi-Cal members with identified mental health issues; and provide an integrated model to encourage physical health
and mental health plans to implement an integrated care model at the provider level for patients with serious mental health and
other chronic health conditions over the next 5 years.
The Federal Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Super Circular stipulates new rules governing expenditures,
administration, and audit of federal grants and funds, which became effective on December 26, 2014. The Super Circular
requirements apply to federal agencies that make federal awards to non-federal entities, non-federal entities that receive federal
grant funds including direct recipient of funds or a sub-recipient receiving federal funds through a sub-recipient award.
The significant changes in requirements include a focus on performance over compliance for accountability, efficient use of
information technology and shared services, providing consistent and transparent treatment of costs, limiting allowable costs to
make best use of federal resources, strengthening oversight; targeting audit requirements on risk of waste, fraud, payment
errors, and abuse. H&SS annual federal awards and expenditures total approximately $70 million and these changes in
procedures significantly impact the department, including the program and fiscal oversight of sub-recipients.
Revenues in Behavioral Health are not keeping pace with the increases in program expenditures. Many of the services utilize
1991 and 2011 Realignment for reimbursement and/or as federal matching funds for Medi-Cal services. As many unknowns
continue to surround both realignment funding sources, it is difficult to project what will be received for Behavioral Health.
Revenues and expenditures will be carefully monitored and service levels may need to be adjusted based on available funding
streams.
The Recommended Budget for 1991 Realignment is assuming that the CalWORKs MOE will be met and Behavioral Health will
receive its guaranteed amount plus base. In addition, it assumes that both FY2015/16 Vehicle License Fee (VLF) and Sales
Tax growth will be received as well as FY2015/16 Mental Health Subaccount growth from 2011 Realignment. The projection is
not conservative as it relies on significant growth of sales tax and VLF revenues statewide. If the CalWORKs MOE is not met,
the exposure for Solano County is $1.7 million. As base is funded first, if the CalWORKs MOE and base are met, the exposure
would be reduced by an estimated $390,000 to $517,000. The projection is based on information from the Governor’s
FY2016/17 Proposed Budget; however, the California Behavioral Health Director’s Association (CBHDA) has indicated that
current year revenues are flat so growth may not materialize.
A permanent base has not been established for the 2011 Behavioral Health Subaccount. Additionally, a permanent
methodology to distribute growth also does not exist. Without either having a permanent distribution structure, projecting 2011
Realignment is difficult. The State continues to discuss a distribution methodology for FY2015/16 subaccount and the existing
distribution is based on FY2014/15 percentages which were not adjusted for FY2013/14 growth. The Recommended Budget
uses the Governor’s Proposed Budget estimate for FY2016/17 with the existing distribution percentages. The State also
continues to discuss distribution of the FY2014/15 growth. As the previous growth distribution considered growth in Early and
Periodic Screening, Diagnostic, and Treatment (EPSDT) and Drug Medi-Cal (DMC) Program among counties before distributing
the remaining funds to counties, it is difficult to project what growth may be received and the Recommended Budget does not
include any estimate. Potential exposure on 2011 Realignment is difficult to estimate as too many unknowns exist.
Reimbursement of costs through AB 1297 is still uncertain and impact of this change on Medi-Cal revenues is still unknown.
While AB 1297 eliminated the State Maximum Allowable Rate (SMA beginning July 1, 2012), the State has not fully
implemented the legislation. Recently, the Centers for Medical Services (CMS) approved the State Plan Amendment (SPA) that
will allow counties to claim their actual costs up to an Upper Payment Limit retroactive to January 1, 2009. The mechanism for
this claiming remains unknown as well as whether or not reimbursement will be capped at prior year published charges.
Depending on the outcome of the SPA, Solano County anticipates it will receive additional Medi-Cal monies for prior year
services, but the amount and timing of receipt of this revenue continues to be unknown. Also, uncertain is the potential fiscal
impact of an Upper Payment Limit (UPL) on cost reimbursement and future cost settlements. As final cost settlements typically
happen five years after the close of a fiscal year, any changes to the process during the time period can impact any final
adjustments in the cost report which could impact any cost settlement amounts.
The Recommended Budget assumes the interim Medi-Cal rate for FY2016/17 will increase and units for services and payer mix
will remain similar to the first six months of FY2015/16. Any time the rate increases it requires more matching revenues as
Medi-Cal services require a 50% non-federal match for the non ACA population. As realignment provides a majority of the
matching revenue, if increases in expenditures continue to push the interim rate up and growth in realignment revenues do not
materialize as needed, the Department may need to request additional County support.
The Behavioral Health Division continues to utilize Intergovernmental Transfer funds (IGT) from the restricted reserve for
Behavioral Health programs; however, the fund is diminishing and the Department anticipates depleting the fund in FY2016/17.
In addition to the remaining IGT being utilized to support the ICCs, the Division is anticipating to receive $2.5 million from Public
Health IGT for clinic operations. If IGT funding is not available to support the ICCs, County funds may be needed to continue to
support clinic operations.
Fiscal impacts related to legislative changes under AB 403 are unknown and may result in future cost increases for children’s
services. AB 403, the Continuum of Care Reform (CCR), is a broad legislative attempt to reform the Child Welfare system. AB
403 proposes to create local, community based therapeutic foster care homes as an alternative to long term placement for
children and youth in out of home group placement. This group includes juveniles under Probation’s supervision as well. The
fiscal consequences of this reform effort are uncertain. While there may be some cost neutrality of shifting care for a child from a residential model to a community based model, many of the children and youth served may also require more hospitalization
and crisis services and community based services. Because the intensity of the services required, costs may be more
expensive to the mental health system to serve. Additionally, changes in the criteria for other mandated services like Katie A.
could result in increased service demand and/or case discovery. The Department is participating in a State Workgroup to better
anticipate these impacts in advance.
The Department continues to monitor implementation of the Drug Medi-Cal Waiver 2020 ‘Organized Delivery System’ statewide
and will continue to assess if Solano County has the programmatic and fiscal resources to participate successfully. Fiscal
details on the claiming under the DMC Waiver are still pending.
There are a number of significant issues and policy considerations at the State and federal levels that may impact Health
Services.
The Family Health Services budget was developed upon the assumption that providers will meet target productivity goals and
that vacant revenue generating positions will be filled. If expenditures increase, including fixed costs and those associated with
non-revenue generating positions, and actual productivity in FY2016/17 falls below the targeted goals, FHS may need to seek
additional General Fund assistance from the County. With the expansion of Medi-Cal for undocumented children, the County’s
contract to pay a portion of the premiums for low-income families with children should decrease but not be totally eliminated.
Some children will still need to be covered through this program. The number of children that will be able to convert to Medi-Cal
is not yet known, but is expected to be a substantial portion of the children currently in the program.
Vacancies in Family Health Services, particularly provider vacancies, continue to be a challenge. The implementation of the
Affordable Care Act in January 2014 has impacted the already significant shortage in primary care providers, which includes
physicians, nurse practitioners and physician assistants. These providers are critical to the generation of revenue and the large
number of provider vacancies is contributing to the operating deficit in the clinics. The County has attempted to address this
problem by increasing pay for providers, and providing incentives, such as student loan reimbursement, to eligible providers.
This has somewhat alleviated the problem; however, the clinics are still experiencing a 13% vacancy rate.
The ACA is helping to shift the focus of healthcare delivery to primary care and to whole person healthcare (addressing the
spectrum of physical, mental and behavioral health needs). As a result of intensified competition for primary care and
behavioral health providers, the already substantial shortage of these providers has worsened throughout the nation, including in
Solano County. At the same time, the number of persons with healthcare coverage through Medi-Cal and Covered California
has increased significantly. This has created challenges with respect to access to healthcare for many individuals, particularly
for the uninsured and those on Medi-Cal, as most providers in the County are not accepting new Medi-Cal clients.
There has been an 85% increase in the number of patients assigned to the Family Health Services (FHS) Clinics by Partnership
Health Plan, the County’s Medi-Cal managed care provider, since implementation of the ACA. Due to the issues noted above,
the FHS Clinics are experiencing an acute shortage of primary care providers. This combination has negatively impacted both
client service (with extended wait times for appointments) and the financial status of the Clinics. Efforts are underway to
continue improving Clinic productivity and workflow efficiency. However, recruitment and retention of providers is the most
critical area of focus for the FHS Clinics.
The Medicare FQHC Prospective Payment System (PPS) Final Rule came out on May 2, 2014 and was required to be
implemented by July 1, 2015. This rule changed the way Medicare encounters are reimbursed, and sets a national base rate
with a small adjustment for regional variations. This rate is then compared to the actual charge per encounter and Medicare will
pay 80% of the lesser of the FQHC’s actual charge or the encounter rate. FHS Clinics were required to implement the
International Classification of Diseases Version 10 (ICD 10) for medical record-keeping and billing purposes by October 2015.
This new version is significantly more detailed and complicated than the version previously in use. The implementation of
Medicare PPS and ICD 10 has resulted in reduced productivity in the Clinics while providers and other staff are adjusting to the
new coding system.
Productivity continues to be an issue in Family Health Services. Less productivity than projected is a function of both providerrelated
issues and the large number of provider vacancies in the Clinics. Continuing changes in the Electronic Healthcare
environment, such as new Medicare regulations and implementation of ICD-10, have slowed the rate of achieving targeted perprovider
productivity goals; however, the Clinics have introduced a daily scorecard that should help to monitor this on a daily
basis.
Health Services is applying to the California Department of Health Care Services for a second year of Intergovernmental
Transfer (IGT) funds to help maintain and improve current public health and healthcare services and to improve access to those
services for eligible County residents.
In response to audit findings by the U.S. Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), the FHS Clinics are seeking
designation as a Community Health Clinic (330e status). One of the requirements necessary to achieve this designation was
creation of a Co-Applicant Board, which was approved by the Board of Supervisors in November 2015 and inaugurated in
January 2016. Forecasting anticipated Public Health Realignment Funding (1991 Realignment from Sales Tax and VLF) over the next 3-5
years is difficult given the changes in the formula for growth in 1991 Realignment resulting from passage of legislation (AB 85)
signed by the Governor in 2013. As a result, allocation of these Realignment monies, which provide support to nearly all of the
programs in the Public Health Division, needs to account for potential variability from year to year and the possibility of another
economic downturn while ensuring continuation and/or appropriate expansion of core services and activities. Core services
include communicable disease programs (including TB, STD and HIV control), the Public Health Laboratory, disease
surveillance and epidemiology, Public Health Nursing, Vital Statistics, California Children’s Services, WIC, chronic disease
prevention and health education; significant current projects include public health accreditation, community health indicators
development (to identify “hot spots” and monitor health status), a Countywide Needs Assessment (being conducted in
partnership with Solano’s hospitals and clinics), and the Network of Care portal.
Public Health, with the assistance of DoIT, is actively engaged in developing and implementing an IT infrastructure that will
optimize data interoperability, access to public health data, analysis, service provision and sharing of community health data.
Solano County’s aging population will need increased prevention services in order to minimize healthcare impacts and their
associated costs. The Department is looking at integrating various programs in Older and Disabled Adult Services (ODAS) with
Public Health to have more of a community impact on growing aging and disability issues. In addition, implementing a public
health nurse home-visiting program focused on the elderly and disabled adults would be very beneficial to the County; however,
it would require additional position allocations.
An ongoing concern is ensuring sustainability of programs in Public Health that currently rely on funding that is at risk of being
reduced or eliminated, such as evidence-based home visiting (Nurse Family Partnership (NFP) and Healthy Families America
(HFA)), injury prevention and chronic disease prevention.
The Division of Health Services and H&SS Administration are working with Partnership Health Plan to obtain Intergovernmental
Transfer funds for Public Health and Medical programs.
Details on Pending Issues and Policy Considerations are described in each H&SS Division.
Employment and Eligibility Services
The Governor’s Budget projects a decrease in the Statewide CalWORKs caseload and is also proposing a decrease in the
statewide administrative allocation for CalWORKs staffing and services to clients. The County Welfare Director’s Association
(CWDA) is advocating with the Legislature and the Governor to prevent this reduction to County revenues, and H&SS is
assisting in this effort.
The FY2016/17 Recommended Budget assumes that the States’ Medi-Cal allocation will be increased based on a Governor’s
Budget augmentation of $1.67 million statewide. However, Solano’s share of this augmentation may not be sufficient to cover
expenditures if the trend in Medi-Cal applications continues to increase. Solano’s cost is allocated to the Medi-Cal program
based on the time studies of eligibility workers to this program and the time study process must be reported accurately for all
Social Services programs. The State’s cost allocation methodology is not a function that can be controlled by H&SS; and
therefore, allocated costs are reported as required which result in overspending of this allocation. CWDA and the State prepare
midyear reallocations of funding to alleviate shortfalls in various allocations when possible, but the reimbursement for shortfalls
can take as long as 18 to 24 months due to the Department of Health Care Services’ delayed process in claiming federal
revenues for 100% of county expenditures statewide.
The Governor’s Budget projects a decrease in the CalFresh statewide allocation, which will not impact Solano negatively since
the FY2016/17 revenue projection does not anticipate full utilization of the projected allocation at the FY2015/16 level.
Child Welfare Services (CWS)
The non-federal share of CWS programs and Adult Protective Services now relies 100% on 2011 and 1991 Realignment
revenue which comes from dedicated vehicle license fees and sales tax revenues. The 2011 Realignment funds are intended to
cover the State’s share of cost in these programs realigned to counties, but may not be sufficient to cover the cost during an
economic downturn.
A decrease of $32,000 in revenues is projected for the Children Trust Fund monies that provide funding for contracts with
Children’s Network and the Family Resource Centers. This reduction may impact community based programs administered
through the Child Abuse Prevention Council. The funding is declining primarily due to lower receipts for birth certificate fees. In early 2012, the Quality Improvement Project, Improving Psychotropic Medication Use in Children and Youth in Foster Care
(QI Project) was initiated. The goal of the project is to improve the health of children and youth in foster care with the focus on
improving the oversight and monitoring of psychotropic medication use as outlined in the federal Child and Family Services
Improvement and Innovation Act of 2011 (P.L. 112-34), required of State Title IV-B agencies as part of their Health Care
Coordination and Oversight Plan. Under a data sharing agreement executed between the California Department of Social
Services (CDSS) and the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS), CDSS will perform an initial match of the CWS/CMS and
a DHCS dataset that contains fee for service and Medi-Cal managed care encounter data of pharmacy paid claim records for all
children and wards in foster care who received a psychotropic medication.
Fiscal Impact of AB 403, the Continuum of Care Reform is still unknown. On October 11, 2015, California Governor Jerry Brown
signed AB 403 to allow the Department of Social Services (CDSS) to reform child welfare services and implement a continuum
of care starting January 1, 2016. The reform initiative will eliminate lower level group homes and put restrictions on the use of
out-of-state placements. It establishes a core practice model to govern all services, whether delivered by a county or licensed
provider organization, to create consistency and continuity of care. It ensures that medically necessary mental health services
will be made available to children and youth in foster care regardless of their placement setting. The provisions of AB 403 began
phasing in on January 1, 2016, with some provisions taking effect in later years. AB 403 comprehensively reforms placement
and treatment options for youth in foster care. The measure builds upon years of policy changes to improve outcomes for youth
in foster care. The reforms in this bill will provide youth with the support they need in foster care to return to their families or to
find a permanent home if returning to their families is not an option.
The goal of AB 403 is to make sure that youth in foster care have their day-to-day physical, mental, and emotional needs met;
that they have opportunities to grow up in permanent and supportive homes; and that they can grow into self-sufficient,
successful adults. Unfortunately, the existing continuum of care placement options for foster youth include long-term group
home placements, as well as placements with foster families who do not always receive sufficient professional support to
provide care for youth who have complex needs. AB 403 addresses these issues by ensuring that families who provide foster
care receive targeted training and support so that they are better prepared to support youth living with them. The bill also
advances California’s long-standing goal to move away from the use of long-term group home care by increasing youth
placement in family settings and by transforming existing group home care into places where youth who are not ready to be
placed with families can receive short term, intensive treatment. The measure creates a timeline to implement this shift in
placement options, and it calls for the adoption of new standards and performance measures.
SB 1013 (Chapter 35, Statutes of 2012) sought to accelerate achieving permanency and address some redundancies in foster
home approval processes by establishing a new Resource Family Approval (RFA) process. This new approval process replaces
the existing multiple home approval processes and increases approval standards by incorporating a comprehensive
psychosocial evaluation of all families that want to foster, adopt or provide legal guardianship to a child. Consistent with the
goals of CCR, the Resource Family Approval process seeks to improve the experience children and youth have in home-based
family care placements by further emphasizing the capacity of the caregivers and the quality of parenting they provide to the
children and youth in their care. This new approval process needs to be fully implemented by January 1, 2017.
Older and Disabled Adult Services (ODAS)
In September 2013, the US Department of Labor (DOL) implemented a rule requiring the payment of minimum wage, overtime,
travel time, and wait time during medical appointments for domestic service employees, which included IHSS providers.
Effective February 1, 2016, individual providers in IHSS are now eligible for compensation for over time, travel time and wait
time. These new regulations would impact approximately 4,300 Solano County IHSS workers. This new process is expected to
impose additional administrative burdens on counties to track, monitor and regulate overtime which requires additional staff.
The State has assured counties that the cost of additional staff will not be an increase to the County cost of administering this
program. H&SS is assessing the workload increase generated by the FLSA process requirements and if there is a need for
additional staff for FLSA administration, outreach and technical assistance, overtime approval/exception process, and
processing of violations.
Space allocation for new staff / positions should be addressed with automating work processes, including piloting hoteling
concepts. The Managed Care Organization (MCO) tax was completed by the Legislature and signed by the Governor in 2016. This
ensures continuation of the Coordination of Care Initiative (CCI) pilots and that the IHSS MOE will remain in place. The IHSSMOE
is intended to permanently replace the County’s share of cost for the administration of the IHSS program in the Older and
Disabled Adult Services Division for IHSS provider wages and for IHSS Public Authority Administration. The base year costs to
establish the MOE is FY2011/12, and includes an inflation factor of 3.5% effective July 2014. This new approach to funding the
IHSS program will include moving collective bargaining with IHSS providers from the local level by 2018. This proposal is
contingent upon the success of pilot projects for the State’s CCI that intends to utilize a managed care approach for all of the
components of long term care and to place these components under the State’s control. If the pilot projects are not successful,
the legislation (SB 1036) allows the State to terminate the CCI project, and collective bargaining would return to the counties
and the MOE would revert to the pre-existing 35% of non-federal cost. The CCI project has been renewed for the FY2016/17
with seven pilot counties participating, but will be reviewed again in January 2017.
See Pending Issues and Policy Considerations under Public Authority (Fund 152 - BU 1520).
Adoptions: Increases in State mandated rates are driving up the costs of this program and caseload has been increasing. Due
to the 1991 and 2011 Realignment statutes, the State has shifted 100% of the non-federal share of cost to counties. If these
revenues that depend on sales tax and vehicle license fees are not sufficient to cover the cost increases, CGF may also
increase.
Foster Care: Rates may increase significantly in January of 2017 due to the impact of the State legislation AB 403 for the
Continuum of Care reform related to Child Welfare Services and Foster Care Assistance programs. The State has not provided
information on how rates will change for the new configuration of services that are mandated in this legislation. Since these are
post 2011 realignment mandates, the detail of how State General Fund will be allocated to cover the cost of any increased costs
has not been provided. Due to the 1991 and 2011 Realignment statutes, the State has shifted 100% of the non-federal share to
counties. If these revenues that depend on sales tax and vehicle license fees are not sufficient to cover the increases, CGF may
also increase.
The IHSS-MOE is intended to permanently replace the County’s share of cost for the Administration of the IHSS program in the
Older and Disabled Adult Services Division, for IHSS provider wages, and for IHSS Public Authority Administration. The base
year costs to establish the MOE was FY2011/12, and there is a built in inflation factor of 3.5% effective July 2014. This change
to funding the IHSS program includes moving collective bargaining with IHSS Providers from the local level to the State level by
2018. The plan is contingent upon the success of pilot projects in eight counties for the State’s Coordinated Care Initiative
(CCI), that intends to utilize a managed care approach for all of the components of long term care and to place these
components under the State’s control. If the pilot projects are not successful, the legislation (SB 1036) allows the State to
terminate the CCI project, and collective bargaining would return to the counties and the MOE would revert to the pre-existing
35% of non-federal cost. The CCI project has been renewed for the FY2016/17, but will be reviewed again in January 2017.
The implementation of overtime for IHSS providers has a significant increase in cost for the State. Counties do not share in this
cost under the IHSS MOE formula. Should a re-evaluation of the IHSS MOE occur, there is exposure in increased cost from
overtime costs to the counties.
First 5 Solano is continuing to seek ways in which the early childhood system can be sustained and even expanded as First 5
Solano revenues and reserves are declining. First 5 Solano will be engaging in Systems Change work with its grantee and
community partners to identify specific actions, such as increasing the capacity of early childhood providers, identifying new
funding sources or leveraged dollars, integrating systems, and legislative and policy changes.
The FY2016/17 Recommended Budget includes expenditures for 7.0 FTE with anticipated salary savings. First 5 Solano is
currently reassessing its internal workload to meet the requirements as established by the newly adopted plans referenced
above.
Traditionally, the Children’s Network and the Family Resource Centers receive funding from the County General Fund and
Children’s Trust Fund to support the SCA and the Family Resource Center Network. One of the responsibilities of the SCA is to
make recommendations regarding the use of the Children’s Trust Fund which has not yet been done for FY2016/17. In addition,
the Children’s Trust Fund revenues have been declining over the last few years so the decline in these funds may lead to a
decline in Family Resource Center services.
Given the continued increase of veterans served by CVSO, it is important for the County to continue to advocate for more funds
from the State of California.
The Library continues to address its structural operating deficit having achieved a balanced budget for the last three fiscal years.
However, with increases in personnel costs, reductions in revenue from the City of Vallejo and the restructure of SNAP resulting
from the withdrawal of three member libraries the Department will need to continue to work on keeping its budget balanced and
address the structural deficit. The Department continues to rely on fund balance and one-time revenues to balance its annual
budget.
With the departure of Napa County Library, Napa Valley College and Solano Community College Libraries, the Department
continues to work with the new automation consortium, SPLASH (Solano Partner Libraries and St. Helena). The Department
will have a new contract in place with its current vendor, TLC, which provides the Integrated Library System (ILS). There will be
new enhancements to the current system such as text messaging for notices, email notices and the ability to provide services
out in the community as the Library continues to enhance outreach services. In addition, having an agreement with Link + gives
Library customers the ability to search for materials at libraries throughout the State of California including, San Francisco,
Sacramento, Contra Costa and Berkeley to name a few.
The Department will be working a new strategic plan over the next fiscal year. The Library will be hiring a consultant to help the
Department navigate through this process. This will be the Department’s fourth strategic plan over the past fifteen years.
In addition, the Department plans to issue an RFP to update its facilities master plan. The existing plan was a twenty-year plan
that was developed in 2000 and is nearly at its “end of life”. The update will need to incorporate numerous changes in libraries,
especially in automation.
In considering the setting of contingency for FY2016/17, there are a number of uncertainties that may impact the County. In
FY2016/17 H&SS Behavioral Health (BU 7780) continues to see reductions of revenues from the State for mandated services
realigned to the County in 2011 and 2013 such as Institutions for Mental Diseases (IMD) placement costs, resulting in the use of
one-time financial sources to cover the expenditures/revenues gap in this program area. If one-time restricted funds such as
Intergovernmental Transfer (IGT) are depleted and not available in the future, the General Fund will likely need to bridge this
gap to support this mandated service. Another General Fund exposure is that the County is still impacted by the limited
revenues from AB109 and the high costs to provide mandated services to address recidivism, increases in local jail population,
as well as a larger probation population due to the 2011 Public Safety Realignment.
There are several policy level issues to be considered and addressed, originating from both the federal and State levels.
The federal workforce programs are emphasizing the following:
 Addressing “institutional change” for the nation’s major educational and training programs. This is not the first time this has
been attempted in order to better prepare American workers for business/industry. However, this remains a significant
undertaking.
 Addressing “income mobility” for workers and families. This is a new and likely significant undertaking, with many variables.
 Devoting additional efforts and resources to those job seekers with multiple barriers to successful, sustainable employment.
This target group traditionally is ill prepared and unable to compete, even in healthy economic times.
 Addressing workforce needs on both a local and regional basis. How this dual effort can be adequately resourced in a time
of shrinking federal funding is a question.
 Creating career pathways linking high schools and community colleges for vocation oriented education and skills training.
This is a renewed effort of offering meaningful skills acquisition avenues for those not intending to pursue advanced college
degrees.
 Increasing use of technology. This effort provides certain efficiencies and added productivity but lessens the needed
personal relationships and support of professional staff with job seekers.
New State level initiatives are coming forth, which pose a potential impact on the WDBSC’s operation as well. These are as
follows:
 The Governor and the California Workforce Investment Board are much more active on State level initiatives, often driven
by the following overarching needs/strategies.
 Focus on growth industry sectors 
 Focus on mid/high skill and mid/high wage occupations
 Work with local economic development efforts
 Plan and perform regionally
 Develop and test bold new strategies
 These are “macro” undertakings for which local policy makers will have to determine realistic goals/outcomes and prioritize
use of limited resources.
The SCFA started 2016 with an Undesignated Net Position of $104,671. The projected net profit before depreciation for 2016 is
$29,148; however, this projected net profit falls short of the surplus needed to meet the demands on the reserves in 2017
without reducing the SCFA’s Undesignated Net Position. The accounting demands on the Reserves are associated with the
lease obligations for the parking lot improvement project of $64,000 and the electronic sign of $26,744.
The 2015-16 State of California budget included $7 million to provide operational and training support to the network of fairs in
California, for which the SCFA is slated to receive $32,487 in 2016. This was the first State support for fairs since it was
eliminated as a recession budget-cutting measure in 2011. The proposed 2016-17 State budget reduced this proposed funding
to $4 million, and it is unclear at this time how much or if the SCFA will receive State funding in 2017. Pending legislation, AB
2678 (Gray) seeks to provide a long-term funding solution for the California network of fairs. This legislation redirects 30% of
the State’s portion of sales tax revenue generated on fairgrounds property to the Fairs and Exposition Fund, which will distribute
these funds to the 78 fairs in the network. It is estimated this would initially generate $12 million annually for the Fairs &
Exposition Fund.
Operational costs for the Fairgrounds property, which are outside the SCFA’s control, continue to increase and hamper its
financial viability during this transition time between the current developer selection phase of Solano360 and the implementation
of the Fair of the Future concept. Most notable examples include:
 The Vallejo Sanitation and Flood Control District increased its storm water rates in late 2015 from a flat monthly parcel
charge of $1.97 regardless of property use to a methodology that calculates rates based on the permeability of the ground
surface. As a result, the SCFA storm water rates increased from about $71 per year to $27,726 per year.
 The City of Vallejo is in the process of implementing a new five-year rate structure for water services. The Prop. 218
process began in late 2015. In April 2016, the City of Vallejo pulled back the proposal to modify the rate structure to address
public input received. No timetable has been established by the City to restart the Prop. 218 process with a modified rate
structure plan. Based on the rate structure plan previously released, the base service charge for the Fairgrounds property
could increase from the current $537 per month to $5,416 per month by 2020. At the same time, the water consumption
usage charge would be reduced from the $3.53 per unit to $1.52 per unit. The SCFA paid $32,918 in FY2014/15 for water
service. The projected net increase – based on the previously released rate structure and assuming no change in water
uses – is estimated at $21,090 in FY2016/17, $32,841 in FY2017/18, $44,092 in FY2018/19, $54,372 in FY2019/20 and
$58,549 in FY2020/21.
 The California minimum wage increased from $9 per hour to $10 per hour on January 1, 2016, which resulted in a net
impact on salaries and benefits of $12,900 for 2016. Subsequently on April 4, 2016, Governor Jerry Brown signed
legislative increasing the minimum wage to $10.50 in 2017 and incrementally increasing until $15 per hour in 2020. The
2016 increase primarily affected seasonal and intermittent part-time employees who work during the 5-day Fair and/or when
events are held on the Fairgrounds. As the minimum wage increases, this will impact year-round part-time and full-time
employees to keep up with minimum wage or sufficiently above minimum wage to avoid employee loss.
SCFA’s small cadre of employees operates and maintains the Fairgrounds between annual County Fairs. These employees
participate in the California Public Retirement System at the same benefit structure as County of Solano employees. The SCFA
also participates in the County’s series of Pension Obligation Bond repayments. As such, the SCFA is also experiencing
escalating retirement costs – up $7,700 in the 2016 budget and projected to increase another $8,605 in 2017.
