To meet the growing needs and increasing responsibilities of District 1, the funding includes increased staffing allocation up to 2.0 FTE Board of Supervisor Aides.
The FY2015/16 Recommended Budget for Supervisorial District 1 includes a $2,500 in funding for the contributions to non-County agencies consistent with Board adopted policy. In FY2014/15, the Board approved a one-time increase to $5,000. The CAO recommends the Board consider affirming a funding level for FY2015/16 for contributions to non-County agencies.
District 1 expressed a desire to hold office hours at the Florence Douglas Senior Center, for which the increase in non-county contributions could serve as a donation to the facility.
The County will continue to work with its city partners and Solano EDC as strategies to retain existing businesses and attract new companies are developed and implemented.
The Board had expressed an interest in considering the expansion of the Farmbudsman Program available hours early in FY2014/15. The Recommended Budget reflects a status quo. The County staff will provide additional options for Board consideration during budget hearings.
To avoid increases in the General Fund’s share of the 2007 COP debt service payments, the General Services Director is working on a Countywide Space Consolidation Program to reduce facility-related costs and effectively use County-owned facilities. One of the goals of the program would include moving more non-General Fund units/divisions into the Government Center so that these non-General Fund work units/divisions can contribute towards future debt service payments.
The rising cost of mileage reimbursement, which is set by the Internal Revenue Service, impacts the budget if the total allocated funds remain static. On-going expenses in the form of per diem and mileage reimbursement for active jurors varies from year to year depending on where the jurors are located and whether or not they choose to submit claims for their reimbursable expenses. This creates budget forecast challenges because the Grand Jury is selected after the recommended budget is completed.
General Fund costs in this department are a Constitutional responsibility. The County's General Fund exposure, represented by the Court's appointment of private attorneys is driven by two factors: the availability of Public Defender and/or Alternate Public Defender staff to provide representation where appropriate, and the number of hours required by private attorney/investigator/special witness/psychiatric evaluations/court reporter to properly represent indigent defendants. Cost exposures related to the number of private defense hours and, by implication, the incidence of criminal activity and arrest rates, are beyond the County's control.General Fund costs in this department are a Constitutional responsibility. The County's General Fund exposure, represented by the Court's appointment of private attorneys is driven by two factors: the availability of Public Defender and/or Alternate Public Defender staff to provide representation where appropriate, and the number of hours required by private attorney/investigator/special witness/psychiatric evaluations/court reporter to properly represent indigent defendants. Cost exposures related to the number of private defense hours and, by implication, the incidence of criminal activity and arrest rates, are beyond the County's control.
Adjustments may have to be made to this budget in FY2015/16 based on actual figures at year-end and what the State’s final budget provides in funding.
There are several pending Redevelopment-related lawsuits filed by Cities against the State Department of Finance which could impact the General Fund’s share of the ABX1 26 residual balance depending on Court rulings in these cases.
The overall demand for legal services remains high, especially with the securing of outside public agency contracts that generate significant non-general fund revenue.
The amount of reported billable hours (31,334 for FY2012/13, 31,169 for FY2013/14, and an estimated 31,928 for FY2014/15) has consistently exceeded the productive hours standard of 1,720 hours per attorney for several years by 21% to 30%. This consistent excess of hours suggests a need to consider hiring a minimum of two more attorneys and two support staff in upcoming budgets. That will be resolved in FY2015/16.
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) mandates employer-paid health insurance for all employees working an average of 30 hours or more per week. There are potential, financial exposures to provide health benefits to extra help employees; financial penalties for non-compliance with ACA provisions; and possible departmental operational changes necessary to fulfill ACA requirements. On February 10, 2014, the Department of Treasury and Internal Revenue Service issued final regulations on the ACA employer shared responsibility provisions. To avoid paying substantial penalties, the regulations require employers to offer medical coverage to 95 percent of their full-time employees and dependents beginning January 1, 2015. These regulations retain that requirement for 2016 and beyond, but reduced the requirement for the 2015 calendar year to 70 percent of full-time employees and their dependents. During this time, employers may still be subject to penalties for failure to offer affordable coverage.
The County has implemented the ACA for all Act-eligible employees. Remaining issues are the Internal Revenue Service reporting requirements of employers at 2015 calendar year-end, with most reporting to be done by the Auditor-Controller’s Office, and the 2018 excise tax. The federal government, as of March 2, 2015, has not issued final regulations either on the Internal Revenue Service reporting requirements or the 2018 excise tax.
HR is implementing competency-based interviewing. However, the project implementation is taking longer than originally anticipated due to department vacancies and competing work priorities.
The department has observed an increase of employees released during the probationary period, and who claim their dismissal was based on discriminatory employer conduct. Such complaints necessitate an investigation by HR staff and may result in a higher volume of Civil Service Commission hearings.
Finally, HR is/will be negotiating successor collective bargaining agreements between the County and its 19 full-time, represented employee units. Two units’ agreements expire in July 2015 and the remaining 17 units’ agreements expire in September 2015. Negotiations preparations and/or negotiations have begun.
The County of Solano continues to face a demographic change of an aging workforce. It remains forecasted that senior and executive managers will be retiring from the workforce, leaving a gap in the County’s talent pipeline. The County reinstated the Future Leaders training program in FY2013/14 to help address succession planning and leadership development and this program will continue to be offered every other fiscal year, with funding included in the Recommended Budget. The County needs to identify strategies to recruit and retain the younger generation (millennials) that will be entering the workforce.
The ROV continues to monitor several election bills that increase costs associated with VBM ballots. Bills are circulating that requires VBM postage to be paid on all VBM ballots and for all registered voters to receive a VBM ballot. While these bills would provide more convenience to voters, additional costs would be incurred by the ROV to implement either of these programs.
The ROV is involved with studying the impact and implementation of Election Day registration, also known as conditional voter registration. This new model is currently required to be implemented in elections in 2017 with the completion of the statewide voter registration database (VoteCal). The ROV is anticipating the possibility that this may be required in 2016 elections. To accommodate this, the ROV will provide for real-time connection of all polling place roster lists. The e-roster currently in use will handle this need. The ROV is also evaluating other additional costs seen in high turnout elections, such as, canvass costs, poll worker expenses, additional polling locations and materials costs.
Bills at both the State and federal level are requesting jurisdictions to look into increasing early voting opportunities. This may include satellite locations and extensions of time to include Saturdays and possibly Sundays. The ROV’s pilot program to implement vote centers in the Primary election will help pave the way in the event this is required for November elections. Expanding this to every city in the county will increase facility cost, staff cost, and potentially technology costs to provide ballots in all styles at remote locations. The ROV is working with the Secretary of State’s office to discuss further reduction in polling places if more vote centers are implemented.
With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), the ROV will be required to change its practices with extra-help staffing. Additional crews will be required to help with the heavy workload around the election, and additional time training staff will be required. This has been accounted for in the ROV’s appropriation for extra-help.
Given recent statewide mandatory urban conservation rules, the Department will continue to explore water conservation efforts at County facilities.
On December 9, 2014, the Board received a report on the Solano County Historical Records future options. At that time, the Board directed staff to hire a consultant to evaluate the Records and develop policies/procedures for managing the records. Staff worked with the Board committee and representatives from the commission on the qualifications and then solicited Requests for Proposals in January, 2015 and received no suitable submittals. County staff, in coordination with the Historical Records Commission, continues to work to identify a qualified consultant to perform the evaluation. Once a consultant is identified, Staff will return to the Board with a proposed contract and next steps and a proposal for funding the necessary work.
The Airport will need to continue to generate sufficient revenue in the future to provide for required local matches for State and Federal grants.
The Nut Tree Airport Master Plan currently identifies a shift in the Airport runway thresholds to address an existing runway safety area issue. Phase II of the Runway Threshold Shift is planned for FY2015/16. The Runway Threshold Shift Project is considered a high funding priority by the FAA and a grant agreement with the FAA for 90% funding was secured by the County during FY2014/15.
The Airport has assessed all pavements on the airport during FY2014/15 as part of an Airport Pavement Management Plan. The necessary designs to rehabilitate pavement areas will be prepared during FY2015/16. Design plans will also be prepared for a new relocated Automated Weather Observation System (AWOS) anticipated to be 90% funded by the FAA. Relocation of the AWOS is necessary as the existing weather station is sited within a future hangar development area.
Upon acceptance of a market price assessment performed by Gartner Inc. at its April 28, 2015 meeting, the Board approved extending the term of the current IT services agreement with Xerox to December 2018. The Department’s appropriation request for this contract assumes current expenditures will increase by the pre-negotiated cost-of-living adjustment. However, the Department will be negotiating for new services consistent with the strategy to leverage cloud services, adopt a “virtual” desktop infrastructure and improve “mobility. The Department may request additional appropriation from the Board as part of the FY2015/16 Midyear report to address contract negotiations.
The Board approved a new infrastructure service delivery strategy and new organizational model for the Department at its March 10, 2015 meeting. The new organizational model includes the addition of an assistant director position as well as four key technical positions to improve the internal capabilities of the Department. Recruiting for these new positions recently got underway. These positions were approved after the issuance of budget instructions and so the cost for these positions has not been included in charge-back rates to departments. While the additional positions will increase total IT costs in the short run, once DoIT has had the opportunity to fully integrate the positions into its service delivery structure and is able to leverage new agreements with providers of managed and/or cloud services, the Department estimates that costs will eventually be reduced. Since the overall cost increase is expected to be temporary, DoIT recommends that the Board allow the Department to use fund balance as the source of funds for these positions in FY2015/16.
A continuing issue has been the County’s chargeback system for telephone usage, due to aging custom software that has become difficult to maintain. New software needs to be purchased or the billing process outsourced to a third-party provider for the Department to be able to continue to correctly pass-through charges to County departments.
In addition, while the County’s property tax system (SCIPS) was re-engineered over five years ago so that it runs on a supported technology platform, the business logic (which is contained in over one million lines of code) in the application was not changed. Maintenance of, and improvements to, the business logic is difficult and the overall structure of the application has many short comings. This situation is shared by the majority of counties in California, most of who operate legacy, home-grown systems. A small group of counties are working with Thomson-Reuters to develop a system to meet Revenue and Taxation Code requirements. The County should closely monitor progress on this system and consider implementing the vendor package in the future if it meets our business process requirements.
2013 California Building Code – Intervening Code Adoption Cycle Supplement
In November 2013, the Board of Supervisors adopted an ordinance adopting the 2013 State of California Building Code and local amendments. As part of the 2013 Code, State agencies with authority to develop building codes worked with industry stakeholders to develop the first-in-the-nation statewide green building standards, which resulted in CALGreen. On July 1, 2015, the 2013 Intervening Code Adoption Cycle Supplement will become effective. This Supplement applies to nonresidential additions and alterations; specifically newly constructed buildings, building additions of 1,000 square feet or greater, and/or building alterations with a permit valuation of $200,000 or above for occupancies within the authority of the California Building Standards Commission. Code sections relevant to additions and alterations apply only to the portions of the building being added or altered within the scope of the permitted work. The Supplement alters requirements for Indoor Water Use, Building Maintenance and Operations, but does not significantly change Outdoor Water Use or Pollution Control requirements. The Supplement also altered portions of code relating to administration of the code pertaining to rulemaking. Since many County projects will be affected by this Supplement, County staff have sought training to understand the new requirements so that the new requirements can be incorporated into County projects submitted for building permit after July 1, 2015. In addition, the Governor issued a series of Executive orders between 2013-2015 calling of various actions statewide to address the Drought in California. The requested actions include a request for additional changes to the Uniform Building Code effective in 2016 that are targeted at reductions in the use of water in appliances, toilets, showers, etc. as well calling for reductions in long-term water usage emphasizing drought tolerant landscaping, use of sprinklers and emitters, and the removal of turf. All these codes changes and mandates will likely impact cost for capital projects as well as capital renewal and major maintenance repairs.
H.R. 4980, Preventing Sex Trafficking and Strengthening Families Act of 2014 was signed into law on September 29, 2014. Perhaps of greatest interest is the acknowledgement that increased parental access and visitation not only improves parent-child relationships and outcomes for children, but also have been demonstrated to result in improved child support collections, which creates a double win for children: a more engaged parent and improved financial security. Using existing funding, Congress supports establishing parenting time (visitation) arrangements when obtaining child support orders.
Similarly, the Obama Administration’s proposed FFY2015/16 budget includes a mandate that all states implement parenting time (visitation) arrangements by 2021 as part of the child support process, rather than as exclusively a family law matter. States will have the option to implement parenting time arrangements before that date. As proposed in previous budgets, the FFY2015/16 proposed budget also encourages states to pass through current child support collections to families receiving Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) benefits, rather than retaining payments for cost recovery purposes. And, the administration proposes again to require child support payments made on behalf of foster care children be used to promote the best interests of the child rather than offset state costs.
As directed by President Obama’s Executive Order 13563 Improving Regulation and Regulatory Review in November 2014, the Federal Office of Child Support Enforcement issued Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) for public comment. The NPRM proposes to make changes to strengthen the Child Support Enforcement program to update current practices in order to increase regular, on-time payments to families, increase the number of noncustodial parents working and supporting their children and reduce the accumulation of unpaid child support arrears. Some of the proposed regulatory provisions would require changes to California State Law.
The FY2015/16 recommended Budget includes the full year funding needed to provide for a continuation of the staffing and other costs previously approved by the Board under the 2011 Solano Public Safety Realignment Act Implementation Plan. These costs are funded by the State AB109 allocation in FY2015/16 and AB109 carry forward funds from prior years unspent allocations. The use of one-time carry forward has been applied to existing, now operational programs, so they may continue, and to address the State AB 109 funding shortfall in FY2015/16. The Department and the County Administrator are continuing to monitor the State allocation of AB 109 funds as Departments address the mandated changes resulting from the implementation of 2011 Public Safety Realignment.
The Safe Neighborhoods and Schools Act – Proposition 47 is a ballot initiative passed by California voters on November 4, 2014. Proposition 47 reduces certain non-serious and nonviolent property and drug offenses from wobblers or felonies to misdemeanors, reducing penalties to offenders who have not committed certain severe crimes including murder and certain sex and gun crimes. The District Attorney is required to review all petitions for resentencing and applications for the reduction of felony convictions to a misdemeanors filed by the Public / Alternate Defender or Private Defense Council under Proposition 47. The required review is extensive and often involves investigation staff. In addition, the District Attorney’s Victim Witness Unit is also required to contact victims and notify them of action regarding the case. The review of petitions and applications under Proposition 47 in the District Attorney’s Office, have result in increased legal, investigation and clerical workloads to process and calendar cases with the Courts and an increase in Victim Witness workload to provide notification to victims in Proposition 47 cases. Based on the increase workload required to implement Proposition 47 additional resources are included in the FY2015/16 Recommended Budget. The District Attorney in coordination with County Administrator and the Courts will continue to monitor the workload impacts of Proposition 47.
The pilot project approved by the Board in December 2012 included a commitment by the (former) District Attorney to establish a nonprofit agency that could raise funds and access resources only available to nonprofit agencies. A nonprofit board of directors was selected and the Solano Family Justice Center Foundation received its nonprofit designation in July 2013. On October 7, 2014, the Solano County Board of Supervisors received a report that the FJC Foundation raised $29,000 from individual and corporate donors. This amount exceeds the $13,000 amount included in the Benchmark Matrix which outlined the goal for fundraising in connection with the pilot project. While funds have been raised for the SFJC, the FJC Foundation has not made a contribution to the County as of May 2015. The current District Attorney is working with the Foundation Board to secure the contribution of funds raised for the SFJC as the Board approved pilot envisioned.
The initial Solano Family Justice Center Pilot Project period ends on June 30, 2015. The actual FY2014/15 costs related to the Family Justice Center were in-line with the projected costs at the time the Board of Supervisors approved the Family Justice Center. Based on the new grant funding received and accepted by the Board in October 2014, there are resources to continue the mission of the FJC and to provide direct services to victims of crime and action was taken by the Board to extend contracts for services and extend limited term positions assigned to SFJC. Consistent with the intent of the initial pilot authorization the District Attorney will be providing an update before June 30, 2015 on the SFJC and seeking continuance and of the operation with the grant funding secured through 2017.
The FY2015/16 recommended Budget includes the full year funding needed to provide for a continuation of the staffing and other costs previously approved by the Board under the 2011 Solano Public Safety Realignment Act Implementation Plan. These costs are funded by the State AB109 allocation in FY2015/16 and AB109 carry forward funds from prior year’s unspent allocations. The use of one-time carry forward has been applied to existing, now operational programs, so they may continue, and to address the State AB 109 funding shortfall in FY2015/16. The Department and the County Administrator are continuing to monitor the State allocation of AB 109 funds as Departments address the mandated changes resulting from the implementation of 2011 Public Safety Realignment.
The Safe Neighborhoods and Schools Act – Proposition 47 is a ballot initiative passed by California voters on November 4, 2014. Proposition 47 reduces certain non-serious and nonviolent property and drug offenses from wobblers or felonies to misdemeanors, reducing penalties to offenders who have not committed certain severe crimes including murder and certain sex and gun crimes. The Public Defender’s Office is required to review cases on behalf of current and past clients to determine Proposition 47 eligibility. The actual number of cases impacted by Proposition 47 in Solano County is still being determined. However, preliminary estimates by the Public Defender indicate at least 10,000 individual cases would need to be reviewed for eligibly under Proposition 47. The review of petitions and applications under Proposition 47 in the Public Defender’s Office has result in increased legal, investigation and clerical workloads to process and calendar cases with the Courts. Based on the increase workload required to implement Proposition 47 additional resources have been allocated by your Board. The County Administrator in coordination with County Departments and the Courts will continue to monitor the workload impacts of Proposition 47.
The FY2015/16 recommended Budget includes the full year funding needed to provide for a continuation of the staffing and other costs previously approved by the Board under the 2011 Solano Public Safety Realignment Act Implementation Plan. These costs are funded by the State AB109 allocation in FY2015/16 and AB109 carry forward funds from prior years unspent allocations. The use of one-time carry forward has been applied to existing, now operational programs, so they may continue, and to address the State AB 109 allocation funding shortfall in FY2015/16. The Department and the County Administrator are continuing to monitor the State allocation of AB 109 funds as Departments address the mandated changes resulting from the implementation of 2011 Public Safety Realignment.
The Safe Neighborhoods and Schools Act – Proposition 47 is a ballot initiative passed by California voters on November 4, 2014. Proposition 47 reduces certain nonserious and nonviolent property and drug offenses from wobblers or felonies to misdemeanors, reducing penalties to offenders who have not committed certain severe crimes including murder and certain sex and gun crimes. The Alternate Public Defender’s Office is required to review cases on behalf of current and past clients to determine Proposition 47 eligibility. The actual number of cases impacted by Proposition 47 in Solano County is still being determined. However, preliminary estimates by the Public Defender indicate at least 10,000 individual cases would need to be reviewed for eligibly under Proposition 47. The review of petitions and applications under Proposition 47 in the Alternate Public Defender’s Office, has result in increased legal, investigation and clerical workloads to process and calendar cases with the Courts. Based on the increase workload required to implement Proposition 47 additional resources have been allocated by your Board. The County Administrator in coordination with County Departments and the Courts will continue to monitor the workload impacts of Proposition 47.
The FY2015/16 recommended Budget includes the full year funding needed to provide for a continuation of the staffing and other costs previously approved by the Board under the 2011 Solano Public Safety Realignment Act Implementation Plan. These costs are funded by the State AB109 allocation in FY2015/16 and AB109 carry forward funds from prior years unspent allocations. The use of one-time carry forward has been applied to existing, now operational programs, so they may continue, and to address the State AB 109 funding shortfall in FY2015/16. The Department and the County Administrator are continuing to monitor the State allocation of AB 109 funds as Departments address the mandated changes resulting from the implementation of 2011 Public Safety Realignment.
The Safe Neighborhoods and Schools Act – Proposition 47 is a ballot initiative passed by California voters on November 4, 2014. Proposition 47 reduces certain nonserious and nonviolent property and drug offenses from wobblers or felonies to misdemeanors, reducing penalties to offenders who have not committed certain severe crimes including murder and certain sex and gun crimes. Beginning November 5, 2014, many offenders were now charged with a misdemeanor and will serve little or no jail time. Additionally, State and County inmates convicted of these crimes prior to November 5, 2014, are eligible to have their sentence reduced based on the reclassification of their conviction. The Sheriff continues to take necessary action to implement sentence reductions and/or the potential release of these inmates from custody. As of March 10, 2015, 108 inmates were released back into the community. It is too early to predict the full impact Prop 47 will have on the State of California; whether crime will increase due to elevating the threshold for felony offenses, the diminished threat of incarceration, and/or re-offenses committed by the released inmates.
The Sheriff’s Office continues to explore opportunities to offset operational costs associated with the opening of the Stanton Correctional Facility through the contracting of jail bed capacity with other agencies such as neighboring counties and/or the United States Marshal Service. Procuring contracts for empty jail bed space can provide the County with a viable mechanism to offset operational costs associated with running three correctional facilities simultaneously.
Previous legislation California Senate Bill 720 (1997) originally authorized the imposition of a $1 fee, $2 for commercial vehicles, to be added to vehicle registration fees for the automation of fingerprinting systems under the fingerprint identification program (Cal-ID). On December 9, 1997, the Board approved this initial fee with Resolution 97-300. Chapter 292, Statutes of 2014, authorizes a county that has adopted a resolution to impose the $1 vehicle registration fee, to increase that fee to $2 in the same manner that it imposed the initial $1 fee. However, it has been called into question whether the imposition would actually be considered a tax and therefore requires a two-thirds vote of the County voters. The Sheriff in coordination with County Counsel is continuing to monitor this issue and will provide further updates when available. Should the increase be approved, the funds will be used for the future replacement of AFIS equipment.
Phase 1 of the Animal Shelter construction and remodel project is complete. Phase II which includes construction of the new 12,500 square foot, pre-engineered expansion is targeted to open in the early summer of 2015. The expansion provides for additional kennels and includes a cattery and dog kennel showcase area to promote animal adoptions. The expansion also features a public, low-cost spay/neuter and vaccination clinic. Phase III, which is the final phase includes the remodel of the existing Shelter building and is in the early stages with expected completion targeted for late in FY2015/16.
The Sheriff’s Office has been approached by the cities of Fairfield, Vacaville, Rio Vista and Benicia to provide contracted animal control services. Procuring contracts for animal control services within the County is a viable mechanism to create greater efficiencies at a reduced rate for our neighboring agencies as well as a means to offset operational costs.
Title IVE of the Social Security Act administered through the Department of Health and Human Services provides Federal funding for administrative services and activities for Probation which reduce or eliminate the need to remove an at-risk child from his/her home and thereby reducing cost of placement to foster care. As part of an ongoing review of the Title IVE claiming process for counties, the California Department of Social Services (CDSS) has recently refined the definition of a minor who is “at imminent risk of entering foster care.” As a result, the Probation Department is uncertain how this will affect the overall Title IVE revenue, budgeted at $320,000 in FY2015/16. The Probation Department will continue to monitor changes in the claiming process, funding for Title IVE and the potential impacts for Solano County.
The FY2015/16 recommended Budget includes the full year funding needed to provide for a continuation of the staffing and other costs previously approved by the Board under the 2011 Solano Public Safety Realignment Act Implementation Plan. These costs are funded by the State AB109 allocation in FY2015/16 and AB109 carry forward funds from prior years unspent allocations. The use of one-time carry forward has been applied to existing, now operational programs, so they may continue, and to address the State AB 109 funding shortfall in FY2015/16. The Department and the County Administrator are continuing to monitor the State allocation of AB 109 funds as Departments address the mandated changes resulting from the implementation of 2011 Public Safety Realignment.
The enactment of AB109 allows the probation officer to initiate flash incarceration (up to 10 days in county jail) for offenders under Post Release Community Supervision (PRCS) to address non-compliant behavior. However, this option is not available for offenders sentenced to probation or a split sentence under 1170(h) PC. This creates some challenges in holding these offenders accountable and being able to address non-compliance immediately. Discussions continue targeted at changing this.
The Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) which became effective on August 20, 2012 outlines a phased implementation that calls for changes to the Juvenile minimum staffing ratios in secure juvenile facilities effective October 1, 2017. The Department is monitoring staging ratios and depending on the Juvenile Detention Facility population PREA could result in the need to change staffing patterns from 1 staff per 10 youth to 1 staff per 8 youth. Once implemented, this could add additional costs related to increasing staffing at the facility.
Funding allocations from the State effect programs and services that are offered to adult and juvenile offenders. Money received through Vehicle License Fees (VLF) is used to support programs under the Juvenile Justice Crime Prevention Act (JJCPA), Youthful Offender Block Grant (YOBG), Juvenile Accountability Block Grant (JBAG), and AB109. The final allocation of these dollars will ultimately dictate the level and types of programs that are offered in the future. SB678 (Community Corrections Performance Incentive Act) is State funding based on improved probation outcomes. The amount appropriated for distribution to counties is based on costs avoided by the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) because of a reduction in the percentage of probationers sent to prison or county jail. This funding has been targeted by the State for reduction annually for several years, making the funding uncertain. The Department projected a reduction in SB678 revenues of $621,600 in the FY2015/16 Recommended Budget when compared to the FY2014/15 Adopted Budget. As this revenue supports key programing vital to Probation’s success in achieving favorable outcomes, such as substance abuse programs, the loss in funding from SB678 is recommended to be backfilled with AB109 funds in FY2015/16.
The Safe Neighborhoods and Schools Act – Proposition 47 is a ballot initiative passed by California voters on November 4, 2014. Proposition 47 reduces certain nonserious and nonviolent property and drug offenses from wobblers or felonies to misdemeanors, reducing penalties to offenders who have not committed certain severe crimes including murder and certain sex and gun crimes. The Department is assisting the Public/Alternate Defender and the District Attorney in reviewing the terms and conditions for probation, in addition to evaluating reports provided to the Courts. Probation will also be conducting risk assessments using existing tools to determine the individual risk scores and making necessary recommendations for summary or formal probation. Although the Department provides supervision based on risk to reoffend, the reduction of felonies to misdemeanors for certain crimes reduce the time that the offender is under jurisdiction. As a result, it may be difficult to provide treatment services if resources are not immediately available. The Department in coordination with County Administrator and the Courts will continue to monitor the impacts of Proposition 47 and the deployment of resources for treatment of those on supervision.
Solano County currently contracts for inmate calling services in the Solano County Detention Facilities, including the Juvenile Hall. Under the contracts inmates or wards are charged a fee to make collect phone calls and a portion of the revenues are deposited in the County Inmate Welfare Fund and or the Ward Welfare Fund in accordance with Penal Code 4025. These funds are used for the benefit, education and welfare of the inmates or wards. In September 2013, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) released a Report and Order and Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on inmate calling services. This action proposes limiting inmate long-distance calling rates from correctional facilities. In October 2014 the Commission released a Second Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, which seeks comment on a potential ban of inmate telephone commissions and potential impacts of implementation timelines. Data collection efforts by the FCC continue, and while a final ruling has not been issued by the FCC, revised rules could result in significant reduction or elimination of the revenue to the Juvenile Hall Recreation-Ward Welfare Fund.
The department is preparing to consolidate departmental operations at the County’s Cordelia site during FY2015/16. The move entails logistical and infrastructure changes and the department is working closely with the Department of General Services to minimize impacts to departmental services during the transition.
Timely hiring of staff for detection programs is an ongoing need due to contractual requirements to begin those activities when the insects are biologically active in the county’s climate area.
In 2014, Egyptian Broomrape, an invasive weed species, was found in a processing tomato field in Dixon. This was the first North American find of this plant species. The weed, which is parasitic and derives its nutrition from the plant host can spread easily by seed. The seed which is the size of pepper flakes can remain viable in the soil for up to 25 years. The United States Department of Food and Agriculture and the California Department of Food and Agriculture are working jointly with the grower and Solano County Department of Agriculture on an eradication project to eliminate the pest. The Agriculture Department has followed BOS policy and cut the High Risk Pest Exclusion program in proportion to State funding cuts since FY2008/09. The High Risk Pest Exclusion program is funded by a continuous appropriation from the State legislature. The program had fully funded County inspections at parcel terminals, specialty markets and shipments forwarded from the state border inspection program for the purpose of interdicting pests. In FY2008/09, the continuous appropriation was reduced by half. Since then, CDFA has annually reduced funding to support other State agricultural activities. As the program funding sent to counties has dwindled, a committee of state and county staff and industry officials has set performance measures used to determine the distribution of the now very limited funding. Nearly one-third of California counties have completely lost cost share for this program. Today the Solano County Agriculture Department receives $16,233 in High Risk funding. The reduction in funding for the program has led to staff inspections of only 2 ½ months per year versus inspections throughout the year. With the funding decreases, staff resources that were used for the High Risk program were reassigned to other program areas, such as export certification and pesticide use enforcement. Consequences of the reduced inspection could allow for the introduction of exotic pests such as fruit flies and noxious weeds through the parcel terminal pathway during the times of the year when no inspector is assigned to inspect FedEx and UPS. Additionally, fewer inspections yield lower performance measures, threatening the limited and reduced funding amounts.
Agricultural Commissioner Jim Allan, continues to serve on the Executive Board of the California Agricultural Commissioners and Sealers Association. The organization which includes representatives from Counties statewide, works to promote and protect local agricultural. In May of 2015, Commissioner Allan will assume the presidency of this organization for a one-year term.
The State Water Resources Control Board’s statewide onsite wastewater treatment system policy became effective on May 13, 2013. This policy creates several tiers of management and oversight for onsite systems, depending on the potential impact to public health and the environment by their operation. The state policy will require Solano County to have a Local Agency Management Program approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board by May 13, 2018 to continue the implementation of a local program for most onsite systems. A proposed local program must be submitted to the Central Valley Regional Water Board by May 13, 2016 in order to meet this timeline. Existing Solano County Code regulating septic systems and water wells should meet the requirements for a Local Agency Management Program with minor amendments to strengthen countywide monitoring and reporting of water quality and septic system operation. Failure to obtain a Local Agency Management Program will result in the requirement for owners of new and replaced onsite sewage disposal systems, or owners of existing onsite systems in sensitive areas already impacted by septic systems, to meet prescriptive standards or to obtain individual waste discharge requirements from the state in order to operate their system.
The Sustainable Groundwater Management Act (SGMA) became effective on January 1, 2015. This law establishes a new structure for managing groundwater at a local level and requires the formation of a local Groundwater Sustainability Agency (GSA) by June 30, 2017. If no GSA is developed, then the County is responsible unless the County defers to the state to assume this role. The GSA must develop sustainability plans by January 31, 2020 in groundwater basins and sub basins designated by the Department of Water Resources as high priority or by January 31, 2020 for those designated medium priority. Both high and medium priority groundwater basins exist within Solano County. The Department began working collaboratively with the Solano County Water Agency, Solano Irrigation District and other agencies to discuss implementation of the SGMA and formation of a GSA beginning in March 2015. This work, along with outreach to other agencies and groups, will continue into FY2015/16 and beyond. Solano County Code, Chapter 13.4 regulating groundwater well construction may also require amendment to include measures for protection against subsidence, overdraft and saltwater intrusion, and to better integrate with any sustainability plan finally approved by the GSA.
Amendments to Solano County Code, Chapter 25 regulating the land application of biosolids are required to allow the practical application of a liquid, Class A biosolids soil supplement that is directly injected into the soil. Currently, the ordinance is written for surface application of a solid “cake” biosolids and may not be conducive for direct injection. Lystek Inc. (A Canadian Company) is proposing to construct biosolids processing facility at the Fairfield-Suisun Sewer District treatment plant that can produce a liquefied, Class A biosolids material for use in Solano County. The Department’s Planning Services and Parks Divisions will be evaluating options for formation of a regional park system within Solano County. The Department will be providing the Board with various options after completion of this evaluation, which will include input from the public and advisory committees.
Agricultural sustainability will be a focus of several processes underway, both in Planning and in Delta Water. This includes protection of agricultural lands potentially affected by planned habitat restoration efforts by federal and state agencies in eastern Solano County, as well as protecting agricultural lands from conversion pressures from commercial scale solar developments.
Recology Hay Road landfill may receive additional tonnage of solid waste over a fifteen year period if an agreement with the City and County of San Francisco (City) is approved by the City. The City’s current agreement with the Altamont Landfill in Alameda County expires in early 2016, and the City is pursuing other options for the long term disposal of their municipal solid waste. A Preliminary Negative Declaration released on March 4, 2015 by the City’s Planning Department states that the agreement will result in Recology Hay Road’s daily disposal of municipal solid waste increasing from 651 tons per day to 1,851 tons per day. The Department will continue to monitor this proposal and will update the Board as additional information is received.
Several General Plan implementation measures are addressed in this budget, including the initial preparation of a noise ordinance, and initiation of a strategic planning effort for the Pleasants Valley Area.
As of this writing, staff is monitoring several bills that may impact the Delta ecosystem, water quality and water supply, including federal drought legislation that will be re-introduced. Furthermore, with the announced proposed BDCP changes, and plans to release revised environmental documents, another round of monitoring and comments on the Delta tunnels project will be necessary. In addition, the implementation of groundwater legislation may require significant staff time to coordinate county responsibilities. Flood control and ecosystem restoration will also demand more staff attention given the state’s emphasis on integrated water management planning.
Overall, we anticipate that this will require an increase in staff time commitment. To meet this workload, the new regular 1.0 FTE position will be filled, in addition to retaining the existing contract employee for the entire fiscal year. There may be a need to grow/evolve regarding the commitment of resources to focus on water related matters and state activities and regulations in the coming months.
On May 12, 2015, the Board unanimously supported establishing a two member Board Committee to provide oversight of exploratory efforts towards the establishment of a regional parks system, the designation of the Resource Management Department to provide staff to support these efforts, approval of an initial project budget of $51,000 (funded with General Fund savings in the FY2014/15 Resource Management Budget), and approval for the County Administrator to enter into a contract with Obrien Consulting/Strategy Research Institute to conduct initial exploratory work on the feasibility of establishing a regional park system in Solano County including the evaluation of various options and strategies for community engagement. This work would include reviewing policy and historical documents pertinent to regional parks and open space planning in the County, including, but not limited to the 2003 Park and Recreation Element of the General Plan and the 2008 General Plan.
Work for this effort is underway and Staff anticipates reporting back to the Board in late August or early September with a preliminary report of information gathered and recommendations for next steps.
The key issue facing Public Works is the continuing federal and State underfunding of transportation. This is a long-term trend that has been masked by the use of one-time sources of funding, such as Proposition 1B and federal stimulus funds. The recent declines in the price of fuel, and resulting reductions to HUTA revenues will temporarily impact the Road Fund for at least FY2015/16. Solano County’s roads will be similarly impacted. If funding continues to decrease into future years, it is expected that the conditions of County roads will likely decline.
In FY2015/16 the pending issues and policy considerations include:
California is the leader in implementing the Affordable Care Act, operating the nation’s largest Medicaid program, and seeks to partner with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services to ensure continuous strides toward expanding access, improving quality of outcomes, and controlling the cost of care. The focus of the State of California Medi-Cal 2020 1115 Waiver Renewal submitted in FY2014/15 to Federal Government is to build on a County coordinated model and shared accountability approaches for managed care plans required to work with County Mental Health plans to support Medi-Cal members with identified mental health issues; and provide an integrated model to encourage physical health and mental health plans to implement an integrated care model at the provider level for patients with serious mental health and other chronic health conditions.
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Super Circular stipulates new rules governing expenditures, administration, and audit of Federal grants and funds, that became effective on December 26, 2014. The Super Circular requirements apply to Federal agencies that make Federal awards to non-federal entities, non-federal entities that receive federal grant funds including direct recipient of funds or a sub-recipient receiving federal funds through a sub-recipient award.
The significant changes in requirements include a focus on performance over compliance for accountability, efficient use of information technology and shared services, providing consistent and transparent treatment of costs, limiting allowable costs to make best use of federal resources, strengthening oversight; targeting audit requirements on risk of waste, fraud, payment errors, and abuse. H&SS annual federal awards and expenditures total approximately $70 million and these changes in procedures significantly impact the department, including the program and fiscal oversight of sub-recipients.
The Mental Health Division continues to utilize Intergovernmental Transfer funds (IGT) from the restricted reserve for Behavioral Health programs; however, the fund is diminishing. The division is seeking to maintain a certain amount of IGT revenue through close collaboration with the Health Services Division and Partnership Health Plan.
Increased utilization of placements in IMDs and State Hospitals remain a concern. These costs are primarily funded with 1991 Realignment and growth in 1991 Realignment Funds. Expenditures for Augmented Board and Care facilities are also trending up and compete with other placement costs for 1991 Realignment Funds. As growth in 1991 Realignment currently is not keeping pace with increases in placement costs, County General Fund support is needed for these long term costs. The Department is committed to continue its efforts to implement community programs to strengthen the system of care with the goal of reducing hospitalizations and placements, as well as the length of stay at each of these types of facility. Recent developments in State law (AB109, Prop 47 among others) have increased the entry into the community of individuals who have extensive criminal records, require a great deal of support, and require extensive services.
Expenditures for adult inpatient stays have trended upward the past couple of years, in part because of placement challenges in Medi-Cal billable facilities. If the facility cannot bill for the Medi-Cal placement, then the County is responsible for 100% of the cost. In April 2014, the Department contracted with a community provider for a Psychiatric Health Facility (PHF) in Vallejo to maximize reimbursement under Medi-Cal Expansion. Ten of the sixteen beds were contracted to reduce out-of-county placements in non-Medi-Cal reimbursable beds. The increased availability of beds in a Medi-Cal billable PHF should assist in reducing hospital costs; however, net savings may be reduced because of the increased flow of individuals from the justice system.
The County Administrator and the Health and Human Services Director have been involved in working with administrators of the County Medical Services Program (CMSP) to determine if funds from this program could be realigned to counties to address the significant increase in cost of IMDs and related placements. Due to ACA with expanded Medi-Cal coverage, the number of individuals receiving CMSP benefits has drastically decreased the use of some of these funds which could offset County cost for non-reimbursable IMD-related placements by the Federal and State government.
The Department has been working on a gap analysis for mental health services, and has identified a need to focus its resources on assisting clients with stabilization and reentry into the community to achieve its clinical and budgetary goals. Contract expansions with existing providers to address these two areas are in process. By improving in these two service areas, it is expected that high-cost placements and hospitalizations will be reduced.
The State is submitting for a Federal 1115 Waiver for enhanced Substance Use Disorder and requesting that counties consider whether or not they wish to ‘Opt in’. Opting in would result in a broader array of services being offered but could also pose additional financial risk to the Department. Under the waiver, counties choosing to opt in will become responsible for Narcotic Treatment Program (NTP) contracts and will be obligated to expand those services as necessary to comply with Federal law, in addition to sharing in the increased costs implied in the enhanced continuum of SUD services set forth in the waiver. A separate recommendation will be brought forward in FY2015/16.
Due to Electronic Health Record (EHR) Implementation issues, revenue projections for the Recommended Budget are based on assumptions using service data. FY2015/16 Short Doyle revenue projection is based on six months of EHR service data representing claims that are in the process of being billed, reduced by a denial rate based on a Medi-Cal percentage from the existing EHR system known as Avatar.
Reimbursement of costs through AB1297 is still uncertain and the impact of this change on Medi-Cal revenues is still unknown. While AB1297 eliminated the State Maximum Allowable Rate (SMA) beginning July 1, 2012, the State has not fully implemented the legislation and the amount and timing of receipt of this revenue continues to be unknown. As final cost settlements typically happen five years after the close of a fiscal year, any changes to the process during the time period can impact any final adjustments in the cost report which could in turn affect cost settlement amounts.
2011 Realignment and the passage of Proposition 30 have stabilized funding for Mental Health and Substance Abuse services; however, concerns continue about whether the funding will keep pace with program growth. Revenues expected to be received for 2011 Realignment are still unknown as base and growth distributions for 2011 Behavioral Health Realignment have not been finalized.
Concerns with 2011 Realignment growth keeping pace with growth in ESPDT services also remain as this program relies on 2011 Realignment to provide the 50% match for services. The Department has expanded services for children in foster care as a result of the Katie A Settlement; however there is uncertainty about whether the State will agree to share in these new costs.
Prior to the implementation of the ACA, SAPT was used to fund services for individuals not receiving Medi-Cal. Many of those individuals should be eligible for Medi-Cal and their services federally funded. Questions remain about whether the funding will be repurposed, reduced or will remain at the current levels. While more individuals are eligible for Drug Medi-Cal (DMC) services, inadequate DMC rates and decertification of DMC providers are challenging the system of care and placing more demands on available SAPT funding and 2011 Realignment, along with enrollment behavior. These issues have been raised with DHCS as they run contrary to the stated intention of the ACA which is to expand substance abuse services in accordance with its new requirements.
There are a number of significant issues and policy considerations at the State and Federal levels that may impact the Division of Health Services.
The 2010 Federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) was implemented effective January 1, 2014. The ACA is helping to shift the focus of healthcare delivery to primary care and to whole person healthcare (addressing the spectrum of physical, mental and behavioral health needs). As a result of intensified competition for primary care and behavioral health providers, the already substantial shortage of these providers has been worsened throughout the nation, including in Solano County. At the same time, the number of persons with healthcare coverage through Medi-Cal and Covered California has increased significantly. This has created challenges with respect to access to healthcare for many individuals, particularly for the uninsured and those on Medi-Cal, as most providers in the county have closed to new Medi-Cal clients.
There has been a 67% increase in the number of patients assigned to the Family Health Services (FHS) Clinics by Partnership Health Plan, the County’s Medi-Cal managed care provider, since implementation of the ACA. Due to the issues noted above, the FHS Clinics are experiencing a shortage of primary care providers (with a vacancy rate of about 25 to 30%). This combination has negatively impacted both client service (with extended wait times for appointments) and the financial status of the Clinics. Efforts are under way to continue improving Clinic productivity and workflow efficiency. In addition, the Department is working with the County Administrator’s Office, and Human Resources to improve recruitment and retention of providers, which represents the most critical area of focus for the FHS Clinics.
The Medicare FQHC Prospective Payment System (PPS) Final Rule came out on May 2, 2014 and is required to be implemented by July 1, 2015. This rule changes the way Medicare encounters are reimbursed, and sets a national base rate with a small adjustment for regional variations. This rate is then compared to the actual charge per encounter and Medicare will pay 80% of the lesser of the FQHC’s actual charge or the encounter rate. FHS Clinics will be required to implement the International Classification of Diseases Version 10 (ICD 10) for medical record-keeping and billing purposes by October 2015. This new version is significantly more detailed and complicated than the version currently in use. It is anticipated that implementation of Medicare PPS and ICD 10 will result in reduced productivity in the Clinics for a period of time while providers and other staff adjust to the new coding system.
In response to audit findings by the U.S. Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), the FHS Clinics are seeking designation as a Community Health Clinic (330e status) in addition to a Health Care for the Homeless site (330h status). This will require establishing a Community Advisory Board to oversee the Clinics.
The Division of Health Services and H&SS Administration are working with Partnership Health Plan to obtain Intergovernmental Transfer funds for Public Health programs. The specific requirements for obtaining these funds and the spending plan for any funds received are not yet clear.
The Family Health Services requested budget was developed upon the assumption that providers will meet target productivity goals and that vacant revenue generating positions will be backfilled by locum tenens staff. If expenditures increase, including fixed costs and those associated with non-revenue generating positions, and actual productivity in FY2015/16 falls below the targeted goals, FHS may need to seek additional General Fund assistance from the County.
2011 Realignment provides a dedicated funding source from sales tax for Foster Care, Adoptions, Child Protective Services, and Adult Protective Services. The State no longer has a share of program costs; the Counties assume the risk of not having sufficient funding for cost increases, especially for Assistance programs where the services are mandated and the County has no discretion regarding the eligibility factors. The guidelines are broadly defined to allow counties flexibility in structuring realigned programs. However, cash flow problems may occur in future years due to variances or declines in the sales tax revenues, and therefore funding changes may pose a significant risk to counties.
The Approved Relative Caregiver program will be implemented in Solano County effective June 1, 2015. This program provides an increase in payments to relative caregivers who are providing care for children who are not eligible for AFDC-federal foster care payments and are wards of the court, having been removed from their homes by the County’s Child Welfare Services program. An allocation of State General Fund (SGF) will be provided for a set number of children who met the program criteria as of July 2014. This allocation is intended to cover the basic costs of the increases to monthly payments for those children who are currently eligible. In the event that the SGF funds are not sufficient in the future to cover all costs of this program, the County will be responsible for covering any shortfall in funding.
The Governor’s Budget provided new data on the implementation of the Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI) savings which provides for a coordinated medical, behavioral health, long-term supports and services and home and community based services all coordinated through managed care plans. The program provides assistance with activities of daily living to Medicaid recipients who have a chronic illness, medical condition or disability. Services are provided in the home, and many of the eligible residents are now being referred to In Home Supportive Services (IHSS). The IHSS caseload is, therefore, expected to increase. The budget makes no changes in the current County IHSS role in CCI with respect to eligibility determination, assessment of hours, and program administration. The budget does however indicate several unexpected changes in the program which threaten its continued viability: 1) Six pilot counties are participating currently, but are using a passive enrollment process which is resulting in a very high opt out rate; 2) The federal government reduced the amount of savings California is allowed to retain, from 50% to 25%, reducing projected savings; 3) Two changes also impact increases in projected costs for this program: The 4% tax on Managed Care Organizations may not be continued due to Federal guidelines and the potential change in the implementation of FLSA overtime rules for IHSS Providers. The Governor’s projections indicate that if savings projected are not viable due to these changes, the CCI would cease operations in January 2017. This change would negate the IHSS MOE and the County would again be responsible for a higher share of cost based on the IHSS program sharing ratios prior to the implementation of the IHSS MOE.
In September 2013, the US Department of Labor (DOL) implemented a rule requiring the payment of minimum wage, overtime, travel time, and wait time during medical appointments for domestic service employees, which included IHSS providers. State law was passed to conform to the new DOL regulations by capping provider hours to 66 hours per month per provider, and instituting a cap of 7 hours of travel time. However, in late December 2014, a federal district court ruled that a portion of the regulations exceeded DOL authority and delayed implementation. These new regulations would impact approximately 4,300 Solano County IHSS workers. If implemented, this new process is expected to impose additional administrative burdens on counties to track, monitor and regulate overtime and may require additional staff. However, these regulations are not expected to impact the County’s share of the IHSS MOE cost for provider wages. In the event that the CCI is not continued at the State level, these increases would impact the County’s share of IHSS provider wages
In early 2012, the Quality Improvement Project: Improving Psychotropic Medication Use in Children and Youth in Foster Care (QI Project) was initiated. The goal of the project is to improve the health of children and youth in foster care, with the focus of improving the oversight and monitoring of psychotropic medication use as outlined in the federal Child and Family Services Improvement and Innovation Act of 2011 (P.L. 112-34), required of State Title IV-B agencies as part of their Health Care Coordination and Oversight Plan. Under a data sharing agreement executed between the California Department of Social Services (CDSS) and the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS), CDSS will perform an initial match of the CWS/CMS and a DHCS dataset that contained fee for service and Medi-Cal managed care encounter data of pharmacy paid claim records for all children and wards in foster care who received a psychotropic medication to assist with monitoring the care of foster youth.
California Department of Social Services (CDSS) released ACIN I-40-14, outlining the need for developing qualitative case reviews for the purpose of examining practices and ensuring conformity with Title IV-E and Title IV-B requirements. It is expected that statewide implementation of case reviews will occur no later than August 31, 2015. Case reviews include, but are not limited to, an extensive online review process and in-depth interviews with individuals involved in the case plan for each case selected for review. CWS is required to begin to develop a qualitative review process and a formal training curriculum and process guide for conducting case reviews.
Solano County continues to see declining numbers of State-Licensed Foster homes. We have currently under 30 homes and struggle with recruitment of new families. As a result we continue to be dependent on the Foster Family Agency certified homes which has a greater financial burden on the County. A new statewide initiative called Resource Family Approval (RFA) provides consistency of licensing and approval for continuum of all foster care.
The California Department of Social Services has been notified officially that California did not meet the work participation rate requirements for FFY’s 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011. The Statewide liability for these FFY’s is estimated at $589 million. FFY 2015 has been designated the corrective compliance year for the State of California. If the State of California does not meet the work participation requirement in FFY 2015 the penalty will be imposed and counties contributing to the failure will share in the cost proportionate to the contribution to the failure to meet the requirement. H&SS will continue to follow this matter closely and encourages the County to consider establishing a designated reserve for this unfunded liability.
Adoptions: Increases in State mandated rates are driving up the costs of this program and caseload has been increasing. Since the County is now responsible for 100% of the non-federal share of this program, increases in County General Fund may occur.
Foster Care: The implementation of the Approved Relative Caregiver program may result in payments that exceed the allocated amount from the State General Fund, resulting in an increase in required County General Fund to cover the costs of these payments to relative foster parents.
IHSS Provider Wages: Any changes to the IHSS MOE methodology for determining the County’s share of Cost in this program will shift a higher cost of IHSS provider wages to the County.
The IHSS-MOE is intended to permanently replace the County’s share of cost for the Administration of the IHSS program in the Older and Disabled Adult Services Division, for IHSS provider wages, and for IHSS Public Authority Administration. The base year costs to establish the MOE is FY2011/12, and it has a built in inflation factor of 3.5% effective July 2014. This new approach to funding the IHSS program will include moving collective bargaining with IHSS Providers from the local level to the State level over a three year period. This proposal is contingent upon the success of pilot projects in 8 counties for the State’s Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI), that intends to utilize a managed care approach for all of the components of long term care and to place these components under the State’s control. If the pilot projects are not successful, the legislation (SB1036) allows the State to terminate the CCI project, and collective bargaining would return to the counties and the MOE would revert to the pre-existing 35% of non-federal cost.
The number of IHSS providers that can be covered by health insurance will vary in relation to changes in paid hours because the funding for this benefit is based exclusively on reimbursement at $0.60 per paid provider hour. When the number of paid provider hour’s increases, the number of providers that are covered also increases, but must be limited to the total reimbursable amount. It is anticipated that more IHSS caregivers will qualify for expanded Medi-Cal or subsidies through California’s health exchange known as Covered California.
There are a couple of significant pending issues or policy considerations regarding the Tobacco Prevention and Education Fund for FY2015/16. The first of these is implementation of the County’s new policy regarding smoking-free campuses. Identification of appropriate exceptions or modifications to the policy, if any, and the specific phase-in of the policy will need to be addressed in the coming fiscal year, as will provision of tobacco cessation courses to employees and the community. The second is implementation of appropriate regulation of electronic cigarettes in Solano County. The Fund allocations to Counties have been gradually decreasing as smoking rates in California have been decreasing; however, this is both anticipated and desired.
Of its $6.8 million Recommended Budget, First 5 Solano currently holds contracts with H&SS amounting to approximately $1.5 million annually. Thus, significant changes at the state and federal level to health and social services programs could directly impact First 5 Solano programs.
First 5 Solano is currently engaged in a strategic planning process which is aimed at addressing the significantly declining revenues and reserves. If not addressed through other means, the decrease in funding will have an impact on the amount of direct services available in the community for children ages 0-5. To that end, First 5 Solano is also actively engaged in a collective impact planning process to create partnerships in a common agenda to support young children. These activities are aimed at continuing services and supports for young children despite declining First 5 Solano dollars.
The Children’s Network and the Family Resource Centers receive funding from the County General Fund and Children’s Trust Fund. The Children’s Trust Fund revenues have been declining over the last few years. One of the responsibilities of the Children’s Alliance is to make recommendations regarding the use of the Children’s Trust Fund. The FY2015/16 Recommended Budget includes a decrease in the allocation of this funding which may correlate with a commiserate decrease in Family Resource Center services available in the community. 
Given the continued increase of veterans served by CVSO, it is important for the County to continue to advocate for more permanent funds for the State of California.
The Library continues to address its structural deficit having achieved a balanced budget for the last three fiscal years. However, with increases in personnel costs, the Department continues to work on keeping its budget balanced and decreasing its structural deficit. The Department continues to rely on fund balance and one-time revenues to balance its budget.
The Department continues to work with the Solano, Napa and Partners (SNAP) consortium in an effort to establish a different governance model, likely a Joint Powers Agreement, which will replace the current contract for services that each of the SNAP partners has with Solano County. In addition, the SNAP consortium has issued an RFP to look at different automation vendors to select a new Integrated Library System (ILS). If contract negotiations are successful the SNAP consortium will migrate to a new ILS beginning July 2016. While this is occurring, the SNAP consortium will remain in place as it is currently structured.
The Library will be working to bring high-speed broadband by connecting to the California Research and Education Network (CalREN), a high-capacity fiber-optic network. This exciting opportunity is made possible by a partnership of the California State Library, the Califa Group, and the Corporation for Education Network Initiatives in California (CENIC). The Library is one of thirty California public libraries invited to participate in Phase One of this project. Through participation in this project, the Library will receive grant funding and technical assistance to complete and maintain CalREN connectivity. Connecting to CalREN will enable the Library to provide significantly improved access to the myriad digital resources and assist our customers to become more digitally empowered. Among the anticipated results of becoming a digitally empowered public library will be the ability for the Library to:
 Function effectively as an anchor institution by providing access, both wirelessly and via desktop, to the Internet
 Bring the world into the Library for the enrichment and advancement of our customers, including employment and healthcare information, business opportunities and cultural events
 Empower customers to become active producers of content, not just consumers of it
In considering the setting of contingency for FY2015/16, there are a number of uncertainties that may impact the County. In FY2015/16 H&SS’ Behavioral Health (BU 7780) continues to see reductions of revenues from the State for mandated services realigned to the County in 2011 and 2013 such as Institutions for Mental Diseases (IMD) placement costs, resulting in the use of one-time financial sources to cover the expenditures/revenues gap in this program area in FY2014/15 and FY2015/16 ($4.0 million est.). If one-time restricted funds such as Intergovernmental Transfer (IGT) are depleted and not available in the future, the General Fund will likely be required to bridge this gap to support this mandated service. The County is still impacted by the limited revenues from AB109 and the high costs to provide mandated services to address recidivism and increases in local jail population as well as larger probation population due to the 2011 Public Safety Realignment. In 2014/15 the County used approximately $125,000 in contingencies due to the South Napa Earthquake in August 2014.
The Board will be considering the update of the County Capital Improvement Plan for FY2015/16 thru FY2019/20 which if approved may require a revision to this fund at Budget Hearings to fund new approved projects for FY2015/16. In addition the County will be undertaking an effort in FY2015/16 to update and establish 20-year campus/facility plans which could result in identifying other needs for these funds.
The District’s property tax revenues have not yet stabilized and remain at risk of further declines during the economic recovery.
There are several policy-level issues to be considered and addressed, originating from both the Federal and State levels. These include the following:
 The federal workforce programs are emphasizing the following, issues for local policy-makers and administrators.
 Addressing “institutional change” for the nation’s major educational and training programs. This is not the first time this has been attempted in order to better prepare American workers for business/industry. However, this remains a huge undertaking.
 Addressing “income mobility” for workers and families. A significant undertaking, with many variables.
 Addressing workforce needs on both a local and regional basis. How this dual effort can be adequately resourced in a time of shrinking federal funding is a question.
 Creating career pathways linking high schools and community colleges for vocation-oriented education and skills training. This is a renewed effort of offering meaningful skills acquisition avenues for those not intending to pursue advanced college degrees.
 Increasing use of technology. This effort provides certain efficiencies and added productivity but lessens the needed personal relationships and support of professional staff with job seekers.
 Both the Governor and the California Workforce Investment Board (CWIB) are much more active on State-level initiatives and new ones are anticipated. These will likely be driven by the following over-arching needs/strategies.
 Focus on growth industry sectors
 Focus on mid/high-skill and mid/high-wage occupations
 Work with local economic development efforts
 Plan and perform regionally
 Develop and test bold new strategies
 These are “macro” undertakings for which local policy-makers will have to determine realistic goals/outcomes and prioritize use of limited resources.
The SCFA 2015 budget anticipates a year-end Unrestricted Reserves of $32,628, which is $271,214 or 89% less than budgeted for year-end 2014. The SCFA 2015 budget anticipates a year-end Restricted Reserves of $21,748, which is $9,325 or 75% more than budgeted for year-end 2014. The 2015 Budget anticipates year-end total reserves of $54,376. The SCFA understands it must reverse the trend of using reserves to subsidize ongoing operational costs. Excess .33 horse racing revenues and new temporary revenue streams are being earmarked for one-time expenditures and to increase reserves.
The SCFA is on a biennial audit schedule, with the Auditor-Controller completed the CY2012-CY2013 audit in May 2015. The next scheduled audit would be finished in early 2017. Given the SCFA’s precarious financial position, the County Administrator has asked the Auditor-Controller to complete a single year audit for 2014 and is in process at the time of this Budget document writing. An audit is necessary to make more informed decisions regarding the Fairgrounds and the upcoming Solano360 redevelopment project.
The Vallejo Sanitation and Flood Control District (VSFCD) is proposing a dramatic increase in storm water rates effective July 1, 2015, subject to voter approval from a mail ballot in May 2015. The District states the need for the rate increase is to cover rising operational costs, repair its aging drainage system and increase fairness and equity in the current rate structure. Due to the large size of the Fairgrounds property – 150 acres – and the mix of permeable and non-permeable surfaces, the rate would increase from $71 per year to nearly $27,000 per year. If approved by the VSFCD Board, the SCFA will need to address how to pay for this rate increase.
The Governor’s Budget released in January 2015 included $3.1 million for fair operations and $7 million for infrastructure projects. If this remains part of the final budget, the SCFA would receive a yet-to-be determined amount for fair operations and would have to submit projects for potential funding. The SCFA is actively working with its associations and California Division of Fairs and Expositions to be poised to access these funds. The 2015 Budget does not anticipate these funds.
The SCFA has been evaluating and pursuing a variety of options designed to increase the diversification of revenue sources to maximize the utilization of the Fairgrounds. These proposals range from renting a portion of the former golf course area to a year-round outdoor entertainment firm to renting the excess capacity of the commercial kitchen in McCormack Hall. Other strategies reflect a different approach to facility rentals to generate momentum for usage, including partnering with event promoters on events instead of being strictly a provider of rental space. The lack of investable financial resources meters the pace at which the SCFA can push forward these new approaches. The still to-be-set timing of on the ground activities associated with Solano360 redevelopment projects adds limitations on short-term solutions due to the anticipated limited timeframe to recoup upfront investments
The rising maintenance and utility cost associated with the electronic sign continue to erode its ability to provide positive net revenue. The SCFA is pursuing a Request for Proposal to replace the electronic sign in accordance with the Solano360 Specific Plan. Solano360 envisions the demolition of the current Expo Hall and replacement with a new Expo Hall capable of handling large trade shows, concerts and corporate events. Even with the project fast-tracked, Expo Hall will not be available as a revenue stream for approximately two years. This project will also impact the location of the carnival rides and commercial vendors during the annual Fair and available lawn space that makes the Fairgrounds attractive to several regional dog shows. McCormack Hall and the County Building would be the remaining buildings available. The County Building features about 4,500 square feet of floor space and generally serves as a large meeting room and would not be able to absorb Expo Hall-type events. McCormack Hall has approximately the same 20,000 square feet of floor space as Expo Hall, but due to its dimensions it is not a direct replacement. While McCormack Hall can theoretically handle the vast majority of Expo Hall-type events if the renter is willing to make adjustments, some of the buildings deficiencies need to be addressed in order for it to serve as a replacement income stream. The SCFA can accommodate existing dog shows with McCormack Hall, but the configuration of building and grass space is not as compact as currently established at Expo Hall. A roof replacement is necessary to accommodate events during inclement weather. McCormack Hall also suffers from other long overdue maintenance and modernization of the building, which affect its HVAC, lighting, electrical systems, restrooms and kitchen. It is important to note that sustaining a customer base during the replacement of Expo Hall is essential to meeting the necessary revenue streams required to repay the financial obligations for the construction. Due to these issues, the SCFA has been working with the County Administrator to develop an improvement project for McCormack Hall that improves the viability of the building while Expo Hall is unavailable.
