 Partner with the City of Santa Rosa to complete the annexation of Roseland and other southwest Santa
Rosa unincorporated areas islands.  Implement the Community Task Force recommendations including a civilian oversight program.  Lead the County’s ability to increase staffing capacity by ensuring maximum utilization of the new
Hyperion budget tool functionalities, which is expected to provide increase financial transparency and robust multi-year fiscal planning opportunities.  Coordinate the Health Task Force initiative, which aims to reduce health care plan costs by working with stakeholders to identify cost savings opportunities.  Continue to develop the community engagement framework enhancing the County’s ability to be more connected and partner with its citizenry to address key issues.  Facilitate the disposition of the Chanate property to ensure the asset provides value added services to the community.
 Coordinate efforts toward achieving the 2015 Board established priorities, including addressing the impacts of marijuana, increasing affordable housing, supporting the expansion of early learning opportunities, completing the development of a sustainability initiative, and continuing to ensure the long-term fiscal health of the county.
 Work with the County, Water Agency and interested stakeholders to develop governance model for new state groundwater management regulations, which were enacted to ensure ground water is managed locally in order to preserve limited groundwater resources.  Provide legal assistance to develop a regulatory system to address the safety, health, environmental, and economic impacts of medical marijuana and the potential legalization of recreational marijuana in 2016.  Assist with Labor negotiations in order to complete new Labor MOUs by the end of FY 2015-2016.  Work with PRMD to prepare a draft of a resolution and ordinance for the Code Enforcement Enhancement Program, which will provide additional resources and tools to tackle the environmental, health, and safety impacts associated with properties that are not in compliance with building codes.  Work with PRMD to prepare a draft of proposed amendments to the Vacation Rental Ordinance, which is intended to address the impacts associated with unregulated vacation rentals.  Provide legal support to Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) and County to address legal and governance issues related to fire and other special districts in order to efficiently and effectively meet public safety interests throughout our community.  Continue legal support to Caltrans and Sonoma County Transit Authority (SCTA) for the Highway 101 improvement project right of way acquisitions to improve public safety and provide for congestion relief.
 Complete a 3-year department strategic plan that guides department priorities, and identifies performance metrics.  Complete Phase One of workforce development programs (implementation of workforce development program and curriculum) and begin Phase Two (development of succession planning program and tools), to establish and implement programs that develop and retain an outstanding workforce.  Complete the majority of labor negotiations in the first year of the 2-year budget cycle with the objective of balancing fiscal responsibility to ensure continuity of services with a competitive work environment that will attract and retain a high quality workforce.  Continue the Human Resources Optimization Project and the Internal Services Management Review by evaluating outcomes and findings, developing appropriate action plans, and initiating implementation to determine how to best optimize resources to enhance services to our internal customers and the public.  Continue County-wide policy/guideline review and development, including the following: Code of Conduct Policy, Extra-Help Guidelines, and Performance Management Guidelines to provide leadership and guidance to departments and ensure consistent policies and application throughout the County.  Upgrade, in collaboration with the Auditor-Controller-Treasurer-Tax Collector, the Human Resources Management System (HRMS), and continue development and roll-out of HRMS modules and features.  Convert department internet site to the new County standard Content Management System (CMS), to improve user navigation and content for internal customers and the public.
 Continue barrier removal projects identified in the updated American with Disabilities Act Transition Plan for County Facilities to improve public access.  Implement recommendations related to the Chanate Complex including develop potential options for use, cost, and funding plans.  Support and prioritize an increase in facility maintenance work to retain value and preserve assets, and to ensure that the County’s older buildings are operated in a safe, compliant, and sustainable manner.  Continue a lead role in engaging departments to better focus on procurement planning for services and commodities to align the County’s strategic procurement position resulting in business practices that are accessible, transparent, fiscally responsible, and accountable to the public.  Complete California Energy Commission and Metropolitan Transportation Commission grant funded electric vehicle charging stations to upgrade technology and accessibility and expand the Sonoma County Electric Trail to support economic and environmental stewardship by reducing carbon emissions.  In collaboration with other departments, develop an internal operations Climate Action 2020 plan proposal for consideration by and Board of Supervisors.
 Redevelop the Integrated Justice System to incorporate bi-directional data and document sharing between new court case system and County justice systems to retain efficiencies ensuring data is available in a timely manner and to mitigate risks.  Improve management of information to allow County departments and the public to better access and analyze data with expansion of GIS analytics, web content services, and electronic file storage and retrieval to decrease public records response times.  Implement a mobile technology program that will provide secure access to County data and applications while reducing risks to the organization benefitting access to both employees and the public.  Enhance the County’s new Enterprise Financial System functionality to streamline business processes by leveraging additional benefits of the newly deployed system to gain efficiencies for County departments.  Implement updated technology features providing more real time data to the Sonoma County Public Safety Consortium including; officer ability to complete crime reports in the field, data gathering and sharing via California‘s Smart Justice System to access statewide information, and Cal Fire 911 integration.  Expand tools and resources for increased awareness and engagement in government services through web sites, mobile applications, social media, online data sets, and related technologies to allow more access of public information.  Expand self-service functionality to County departments of current tools for IT service management to improve service delivery, monitoring, and reporting.
 Complete phase 2 of the Enterprise Financial System implementation, including Hyperion budgeting, grants accounting, contract management, accounts receivable, billing, and project costing.  Increase efficiency and stability in the Human Resources Management System (HRMS) environment by upgrading to version 4.5, and moving it onto Microsoft supported servers to maintain warranty and ensure ongoing vendor support.  Continue to collaborate with the Permit and Resource Management Department to increase revenues from the Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT)/Vacation Rental By Owner programs by pursuing statewide legislation impacting the third-party vacation rental marketplace and by revising the TOT ordinance to require a unique registration certificate for each applicable property in the unincorporated County.  Identify, control, and reduce risk throughout the County by beginning a three-year audit program based upon the results of a County-wide risk assessment.  Inclusion of California HERO (Home Energy Renovation Opportunity) and California First PACE (Property Assessed Clean Energy) programs as new clean energy assessment options for Sonoma County property owners for the FY 2015-2016 tax roll.  Contribute to the County’s public accountability and fiscal transparency by obtaining the Government Finance Officers Association’s (GFOA) awards for the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the Popular Annual Financial Report, and the County’s Adopted Budget.  Support department fiscal operations County-wide by educating and training staff on required accounting standards and best practices.
 Implement all facets of e-recording and document management to expedite processing, improve accuracy and speed up retrieval of official records.  Implement e-filing solution for fictitious business names and vital statistics applications to increase efficiency and streamline data retrieval.  Develop a succession plan for positions being vacated, assess current work assignments, and reassign where appropriate to reduce costs to insure consistent customer service and better access to the public.  Execute a smooth transition to the new statewide voter registration database system, VoteCal, which is scheduled to roll out in 2015-2016 to comply with new State election regulations.  Develop options and identify funding to replace the current voting and ballot counting systems to conduct more efficient and successful elections.
 Monitor ongoing death penalty case for potential impacts on the Alternate Public Defender Services budget.  Work with County Counsel to ensure continuity of Alternate Public Defender Services beyond the expiration of current contract on June 30, 2016.
 Enhance and refine Department’s efforts to reduce recidivism among juvenile and adult offenders by:  Continuing to develop expertise of sworn staff in delivering evidence based practices;  Improving data collection and outcome measurements to evaluate effectiveness of supervision and program services, to ensure the right programs are being offered to the right offenders;  Develop sanctions and incentives matrices for adult and juvenile offenders; Improving re-entry component of the Boys Camp program, including development of pro-social, supportive connections with community members.  Maintain and enhance comprehensive staff development programs supporting the acquisition and application of officer safety and case management skills.  Adjust Juvenile Hall staff schedule to provide a more efficient service delivery model and enhance programming for youth in detention.  Invest in infrastructure, including facility equipment in the Juvenile Hall and Camp, trailers in SAC, and emerging technologies to improve officer and community safety, and enhance supervision effectiveness.  Revise the County's Comprehensive Multi-Agency Juvenile Justice Plan and fully implement the Title IV-E Waiver (California Well-Being Project) to improve outcomes for delinquent youth and their families.
 Continue to investigate and prosecute those who prey on elders, handling cases of sexual and physical abuse, the infliction of mental abuse, and neglect, as well as all financial crimes, including fraud, identity theft, and forgery. Outreach efforts will continue to educate seniors about scams and how to avoid them, and to raise awareness on services.  Expand collaboration with criminal justice and community partners to serve victims of family violence, sexual assault, elder abuse and child abuse as the lead administrative agent of the Family Justice Center.  Develop a strategic plan to focus prosecution in the areas of greatest need, including elder protection, domestic violence, major fraud, and the development of a real estate fraud unit.  The District Attorney will continue to collaborate with justice partners on proven intervention and prevention programs, such as the Mayor’s Gang Task force; the Gang Resistance, Education and Training Program; Gun Information for Teens; and truancy programs for juveniles and their parents.
 Continue to improve client and inter-departmental communications using holistic client-based theories and technology including implementation of an updated website that provides links to community services, public information and department contacts.  Improve representation of non-citizen clients by providing immigration law training and resources.  Encourage and train staff in the use of the new Legal Case Management system to increase the efficient use of data in court, reduce paper and improve department procedures.  Build statistical data reports based upon established benchmarks using the new Legal Case Management system implemented in March, 2015. These reports will be used to ensure that workloads are distributed in a manner that provides consistent representation for all clients.  Identify and implement systematic approaches to lessen the increased workload created by the implementation of Proposition 47.
 Analyze options to replace the Sheriff’s aging helicopter to ensure the Sheriff’s continued ability to provide the community with air support for law enforcement, search and rescue (SAR), fire suppression, and long line emergency rescue missions.  Improve efficiencies in the County’s adult detention facilities through the implementation of a Jail Management System (JMS). A new JMS system will allow for the retirement of the current obsolete UNIX system, support inmate scheduling and visiting, improve information sharing and record keeping, provide inventory control, and a multitude of other detention facility operational functions that can result in potential cost savings in the future.  Explore the provision of regional pathology services to prevent future case backlogs, increase accountability, and improve response times on coroner cases. Regionalization may also produce financial savings for the agencies involved.  Be responsive to the Community and Local Law Enforcement Task Force by evaluating and responding appropriately to Task Force recommendations.  The Sheriff has requested additional staffing in order to address on-going hiring and retention needs, to analyze current patterns of retention, turnover, injury, illness and hiring rates, and to develop a strategy to implement the findings of the analysis.
 Implement the Portrait of Sonoma County’s Agenda for Action, which highlights the goals of providing universal preschool and preventing tobacco use.  Implement the expansion of a County operated Medi-Cal Managed Care Plan for substance use disorder services, which will provide services to clients who previously did not qualify or previously experienced barriers to service access, poor treatment outcomes, or high cost of services.  Expand targeted investments in low-income families during pregnancy and the first two years of life to build resiliency and reduce disparities in the healthy development of children through the Nurse Family Partnership and Strengthening Families Field Nursing Program, both part of the upstream portfolio.  Complete the implementation of a new and expanded Behavioral Health Crisis Stabilization Unit, and identify long-term facilities solutions for out-patient behavioral health services, children’s medical therapy services, public health laboratory services, and animal shelter services.  Explore funding sources for prevention and health equity, including new financing strategies such as Wellness Trusts and Social Impact Bonds.
 Expand human services transportation services to all regions in Sonoma County. The Sonoma Access Coordinated Transportation Services (SACTS) Consortium, in partnership with over 40 organizations countywide, is coordinating expansion and development of up to 9 volunteer coordinator sites. This effort is funded through a combination of Federal Transportation Authority and local funds.  Launch Aging Together Sonoma County, a new initiative, to connect Sonoma County residents across the lifespan with resources and support focused on healthy aging.
 Complete Paulin Lobby remodel and intake business process redesign. Expand CalFresh Community Connections outreach to include place based services in collaboration with other divisions, departments and community based partners.
 As part of the Northern California Career Pathways Alliance, develop career pathways for youth that provide a pipeline to high-skill, high-wage and high-growth employment.
 Develop additional strategies and services for CalWORKs clients to assist in improving their economic situation, including housing, asset building, training, education and work opportunities.
 Increase the number of placements with relatives and extended family members in order to not only improve children’s experience in foster care but also increase the number of children that leave foster care to a permanent home.
 Complete Strategic Planning framework and begin implementation.
 Expand the provision of HSD services into all regions of Sonoma County through place-based services in alignment with the Portrait of Sonoma County.
 Reduce wait times for eligibility determinations and responses to requests for services.
 Connect residents to basic services such as housing and food.
 Complete state eligibility requirements for 2,500 IHSS caregivers, including investigating criminal histories
and providing orientation.
 Match 1,600 client requests for caregiver assistance with Registry caregivers.
 Add 300 new caregivers to the Registry.
 Ensure Sonoma County families in need of child support receive services by improving accessibility, expanding public information, and increasing outreach.  Strengthen collaborative partnerships by working with County initiatives such as Sonoma County Upstream and Health Action Economic Wellness, Human Services (Economic Assistance and Job Links), Sonoma County Courts, Probation Department, District Attorney’s Office, Sheriff’s Office, Public Defender, and Family Justice Center to provide comprehensive services to children and families.  Maximize the use the state-managed web-based case management system to improve outcomes, including a reduction in the timeframes for opening and enforcing child support orders, as well as increasing the amount of child support payments collected and distributed to families.  Monitor and implement strategies to meet or exceed the department’s previous accomplishments with the following state and federal performance measures: paternity establishment; support order establishment; percent of child support collected compared to the amount due; number of cases which a payment is made on past due amounts; and cost effectiveness standard of distributed child support collections per dollar of expenditure for department expenses.  Provide excellent customer service by implementing diversified methods for payments and a customer satisfaction tool to allow for feedback; and continue to work collaboratively with parents to increase stipulated child support orders.  Establish an organizational framework to address succession planning, professional development, and streamlined internal services.
 Develop a seismic safety retrofit ordinance to ensure existing structures to be retrofitted to meet seismic standards to reduce damage from seismic and geological hazards.  Partner with the Sonoma County Water Agency and local water providers to determine governance options for groundwater management to sustain and protect important groundwater sources.  Develop policies for wineries and agricultural promotion events in order to balance benefits to tourism and economic development with neighborhood compatibility.  Complete updates to vacation rental ordinance in order to support for County tourism while ensuring neighborhood compatibility and protecting the general welfare of residents.  Develop regulations and policies for medical marijuana cultivation that is consistent with State regulations by balancing the needs of patients and communities to be protected from public safety, environmental and nuisance impacts.  Complete Code Enforcement program improvements to enhance regulation compliance processes and identify funding to clean up for properties chronically in code violation.  Implement the Records Project including electronic document management and digitizing historical records to provide greater access for the public.
 Implement the Housing Plan to Mitigate Homelessness, and the 10-Year Homeless Action Plan.  Promote new and existing housing and shelter options, day labor centers, and services supporting the continuum of care system, including the Homeless Outreach Services Team (HOST) Pilot Project.  Increase the number of housing units that are affordable, accessible, and available to lower-income residents including special needs subpopulations identified in the Sonoma County Housing Element.  Utilize property acquired through redevelopment dissolution to provide affordable housing.  Assist in prevention of homelessness and promote stable housing for nearly 3,000 low-income households by providing rental subsidies through the Housing Choice Voucher and similar programs.  Secure additional federal funding for rental housing assistance programs to assist chronically homeless individuals with disabilities.  Place and manage all affordable housing funds available from County Fund for Housing and federally-funded housing programs via a competitive processes for affordable housing developers.
 Support the Board of Supervisors’ goal of creating a more effective, efficient, and sustainable fire service delivery system throughout Sonoma County through the completion of the Fire Service Project. Recommendations will be made in the fall of 2015, with implementation of changes in FY 2016-2017.  Begin marketing and offering SoCo Alert” (Sonoma County Alert) to the public for voluntary enrollment to receive emergency text warning and notification messages from the Operational Area Telephone Emergency Notification System (TENS).  Develop the local Emergency Operations Center Logistics Plan in accordance with regional guidance and design, and conduct an EOC functional exercise in conjunction with Urban Shield Yellow Command 2015.  Work with the Hazardous Material Program regulated businesses to bring reporting compliance for the California Environmental Reporting System to 90% or better.  Help residents better manage their fire risk by offering free curbside chipping and providing convenient public access to wildland fire hazard maps and educational mitigation materials on the County website.  Conduct an analysis of county emergency response and critical facilities identified as being in wildland fire zones to verify reliable water sources for fire suppression and develop a strategy to make improvements.  Continue to strengthen the level of fire services provided in County Fire CSA #40 by implementing fire apparatus fuel and maintenance programs for Volunteer Fire Company and County Fire owned apparatus; continuing fire apparatus replacement efforts; and launching the construction process for a new fire station in Lakeville as funding allows.
 Implement the Long Term Roads Plan financed with existing and potential new funding sources to address the needs of the entire County road network over time.  Improve pavement condition on an estimated 89 miles of County roads in the summers of 2015 and 2016 based on two year plan approved by the Board in spring 2015.  Work with the contracted Integrated Waste operator, who will construct the material recovery facility at the Central Transfer Station, to process construction and demolition materials to increase diversion of recyclable materials from landfill disposal and provide ongoing landfill capacity.  Plan and implement deferred maintenance projects on the closed landfill sites to correct for settlement and erosion issues.  Evaluate airport terminal remodel opportunities to improve the passenger experience. Continue efforts to attract additional commercial airlines and increase available destinations.  Complete the Healdsburg Intermodal Facility project, readying the facility for future SMART use.  Successfully introduce the regional Clipper Card on Sonoma County Transit. Update Sonoma County Transit schedules and services to coordinate with SMART upon its service commencement in 2016.  Implement enhanced change-out incentive program for woodstoves and fireplaces in the Northern Sonoma County Air Pollution Control District.  Begin energy efficient lighting change out program for streetlights within the county’s unincorporated area.
 Conduct two-year process to develop governance structure for city and county entities and stakeholders under the state Sustainable Groundwater Management Act to ensure that groundwater resources in Sonoma County will be sustainably managed and comply with the requirements of state law.  Complete design and initiate construction on miles two and three of the Dry Creek Habitat Enhancement Project in collaboration with the US Army Corps of Engineers to continue efforts to improve habitat for listed species in compliance with the Russian River Biological Opinion.  Complete construction of the Westside Facility, install educational exhibits, and initiate watershed education classes to teach Sonoma County students about their water systems.  Complete construction of the Mirabel Fish Ladder, Fish Screen, and Viewing Gallery Project and initiate fish monitoring and public tours and improve access for salmonids to the upper Russian River watershed.  Implement the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration funded Russian River Habitat Blueprint to restore habitat for endangered fish species; conduct drought and atmospheric rivers research to inform reservoir operations; and improve community and ecosystem resiliency to flooding and drought.
 Expand the Creative Sonoma program to support non-profit and for-profit arts organizations and individual artists, to improve the creative economy sector.  Encourage business cluster development by focusing on two clusters, Outdoor Recreation and Agriculture, and establishing two councils: an Outdoor Recreation Council that will be charged with developing Sonoma County into an outdoor recreation destination and Ag Business Council that will encourage business partnerships and address common industry challenges.  Expand the bilingual Business Assistance Program to meet the needs of the growing Latino business community.  Expand the Workforce Development Business Services program to include working with Job Link and Sonoma Works programs to meet workforce needs of the local business community.  Continue to improve business development and outreach services to better serve the needs of the business community.  Deliver a progress report on Next Economy Project (NExT 2.0), including efforts to better conne?t key industry clusters in Sonoma County and continue to maintain a future-oriented outlook. Taken together, these efforts will help prepare Sonoma County’s economy for the years to come.
 Transfer designated Sonoma County Agricultural Preservation and Open Space District fee properties including Mark West, Carrington, Poff, Calabasas, Keegan-Coppin and Occidental Road to Regional Parks and open for public access, and expand regional parklands in collaboration with partners.  Address deferred and major maintenance priorities strategically to maintain facilities.  Expand our capacity to manage natural resources to ensure planning, development, maintenance and operation of our parks and trails are done in a manner which supports biodiversity and sustainability.  Partner with state and local park agencies, non-profits, and businesses to increase collaboration and cooperation in providing services and programs, and develop and implement a comprehensive branding approach to increase revenue, visibility and use of regional parks.  Complete and implement Sonoma County Integrated Park Plan recommendations with priority for those that most align with adopted sustainability goals of Regional Parks, and support the outdoor economy of Sonoma County.  Educate the youth of Sonoma County on the value of our environment, and provide extensive opportunities for place-based experiences.  Continue to expand investments along the Russian River to promote safe public access, water safety, tourism and environmental stewardship.
 Develop an integrated, hierarchical planning framework which will produce a long term strategic plan, annual work plans, property-specific plans, summary statistics for messaging and grants, and performance metrics.  Enhance community outreach and focused youth engagement via a new website, stakeholder input, 25th anniversary celebration, community meetings, diverse media strategy, land stewardship, educational programs and hosting of workshops and events.  Complete transfer of Tier 1 properties including Carrington Ranch, Haroutunian North, Mark West Regional Park and Open Space Preserve, and Healdsburg Ridge Open Space Preserve.  Acquire six conservation easements that protect natural and scenic resources while furthering sustainable agricultural, forestry practices, recreational opportunities, and initiate ongoing stewardship of each acquisition.  Present six Matching Grant projects to the Board of Directors that preserve and enhance urban open spaces with opportunities for a variety of recreational enjoyment.  Establish a 2031 funding target for the Stewardship Reserve Fund through development of a model that can be continuously updated as easements are acquired.  Increase the frequency of conservation easement monitoring visits and other opportunities for communication with easement landowners.
 Increase efficiencies and services in implementing new and existing programs within the new Land Stewardship Division. This includes completing development of new work processes and cross-training so that Agricultural Biologist staff achieve expertise in the new area of natural resource protection.  Focus activities related to European Grapevine Moth (EGVM) detection and enforcement so that the remaining area can be removed from quarantine  Enhance consumer protection by pursuing more cases in partnership with the District Attorney’s office and other agencies.  Develop an agricultural waiver that allows growers to comply with State Regional Water Quality Control Board’s requirements using by using work performed for the Department’s existing programs. This will allow growers to streamline their compliance efforts while enhancing environmental stewardship and economic sustainability.
 Increase number of package inspections by approximately 10% (800 additional product inspections) to identify and correct short-weight packages and improperly labeled commodities sold at local businesses. These inspections and investigative activities increase local consumer protection and educate packers on the state and federal Fair Package and Labeling Act requirements.
 Continue to expand activities to prevent the introduction and spread of exotic pests that threaten the economic viability of agriculture. Besides EGVM, recent increased threats include Glassy-Winged Sharpshooter, Asian Citrus Psyllid, and Light Brown Apple Moth.
 Replace essential and specialized weight testing equipment in order to reduce ongoing maintenance costs to ageing equipment and improve safety. This equipment is shared under the Joint Powers Authority with neighboring counties in order to reduce cost to our county cost.
 Explore opportunities to create a Community Food Systems Advocate to promote and support existing and new community food systems to increase food security.  Expand the 4-H outreach program to increase participation of underserved youth, focusing on the Latino community.  Increase Agricultural Sustainability by building networks that integrate sustainable food production, processing, distribution, enhancing environmental, economic and social health through partnerships to assist with permitting for and production from small-scale farming operations.  Evaluate the ecosystem services provided by agriculture and rangelands, in an effort to achieve a more market-based approach to management and decision making while striving to achieve conservation in the face of climate change.  Establish an incubator farm to give aspiring farmers and ranchers access to the land, equipment, and mentorship that they need to begin careers in agriculture.
 Complete a Strategic Plan to address financial sustainability, including the exploration of various financial strategies to mitigate the impact upon revenues associated with the change in the horse racing schedule.  Promote the Event Center at the Fairgrounds as a tourist attraction within Sonoma County and seek funding opportunities that will expand the Fair’s presence in Sonoma County tourism.  Continue developing a Capital Improvement Plan for facility replacement and improvements, including the continuation of fundraising and construction efforts to build the Saralee and Richard's Barn.  Repurpose areas of the Fairgrounds property which are currently underutilized to realize opportunities for highest and best use.  Research funding opportunities to commission an economic impact study to demonstrate the contribution of the County Fair and other Fairgrounds related activities to the local economy.  Maximize revenues for the newly branded Sonoma County Event Center at the Fairgrounds, including increased marketing efforts to bring new business and non-fair rentals.
 Continue to support Economic Development initiatives to improve the County’s tourism and economic vitality.  Establish strong fund balance reserves to minimize the impact on grant recipients and County’s economic development programs and services during economic downturn.
 Construct new Fleet Light Operations and Materials Testing Lab at Russell Avenue site to maintain service continuity.  Implement Phase 1 of the Clerk-Recorder-Assessor office co-location into a single service site at or near the County Administration Center.  Preserve existing assets via: Phase 1 of re-roofing the Main Adult Detention Facility (MADF), resealing MADF recreation yard exterior windows; and start Family Justice Center new re-roofing.  Support changing inmate classification needs at MADF with a new Body Scanner installation, Booking Space Evaluation and Renovation, new Observation Cell and Safety Cell Conversion, and Housing Safety and Security requirements implementation.  Complete the acquisition of Mark West Creek Regional Park & Open Space Preserve.  Complete the master plan and development of Sonoma Valley Regional Park Expansion.  Complete the master plan and development of Moorland Park Phase 1.  Complete construction of the Doran Cove restrooms in fall 2016, after the end of the camping season.
