 Collaborate with Transportation and Public Works and community stakeholders to develop a detailed Sonoma County Roads Plan.
 Implement Economic Development and Jobs Plan with the following components: Improve Regulatory Compliance Assistance, Business Development and Outreach Services, employer-driven Workforce Development Strategy, Business Cluster Development, Financial Resources Program, Facilitate Broadband Deployment, Coordinated Economic Development Resources.
 Continue the pursuit of the Community Choice Aggregation program (Sonoma Clean Power), further efforts around water pipeline/aqueduct projects, and ensure achievement of climate protection goals.
 Ensure Sonoma County has access to the state and federal decision making process by maintaining key leadership positions in the California State Association of Counties, and the National Assoc. of Counties in the area of health and human services, transportation and land use, and services for the elderly.
 Continue the efforts to bring greater fiscal stability by increasing budget information for policy makers; continue Pension Reform efforts; further pursue Shared Services opportunities, and; invest in professional development and educational opportunities through effective succession planning.
 The County Administrators Office will collaborate with the Auditor-Controller and the Information Systems Dept. to complete the Discovery Phase and begin the Implementation Phase of the Finance and Budget System replacement project.
 Work to ensure that funding for vital services is preserved as a result of state Health and Human Services Realignment.
 The Clerk of the Board will purchase and migrate to Megabyte Database System to automate the assessment appeals process and implement online application filing; increase the number of regular Assessment Appeals Board meetings scheduled per year from ten to twenty; and manage resources to increase support for the Assessment Appeals Board.
 Provide legal assistance to the Permit and Resource Management Department, Board of Zoning Adjustments, Planning Commission, and Board of Supervisors on upcoming major land use projects, including the Preservation Ranch Project, Carneros River Ranch Fill Project, and Cornell Winery Project.
 Provide legal support and coordination to the County’s continued efforts to identify a long term regional solid waste disposal and diversion strategy to meet the region’s goals and address unfunded landfill liabilities.
 Continue legal support of the Sonoma County Energy Independence Program, including assisting in resolving litigation with the Federal Housing Finance Administration.
 Provide legal analysis to the Permit and Resource Management Department, Planning Commission, and Board of Supervisors in the development of enhanced penalties for unauthorized growing of marijuana on public and private lands and possible grow regulations.
 Provide legal assistance to the Transportation and Public Works Department to identify funding options for road infrastructure investment.
 Implement an improved litigation management program, in coordination with Human Resources - Risk Management, in order to identify prevention opportunities, and reduce overall litigation costs and risk exposure.
 Coordinate negotiations and provide legal and advocacy support to protect the County from improper tribal fee to trust acquisitions, and insure that impacts of tribal development projects are fully mitigated.
 Provide continued legal support to the Water Agency in exploring and possibly implementing a “Community Choice Aggregation” program a "Sustainable Energy Utility" program, and its implementing of the Biological Opinion.
 Negotiate successor Memorandums of Understanding with all 11 employee organizations.
 Support County goals for pension reform through data gathering and analysis, sharing of information with all employees, collaboration with employee organization representatives, and contract negotiations.
 Scope and develop project plan for the County’s Leadership Development and Succession Planning programs and support countywide core training for managers and supervisors.
 Collaborate with General Services Purchasing Division on the County’s integrated contract management initiative to incorporate centralized contract insurance management, and enhance online insurance toolkit to include automated insurance certificate generation.
 Continue developing and refining HRMS functionality to support efficient, effective processing, tracking, and reporting of data and eliminate remaining duplicative Human Resources systems.
 Develop an online County complex map identifying accessible parking and electric vehicle charging stations, and work to ensure all content published to County web sites is compliant with current accessibility standards.
 Develop blue print for a County Enterprise Risk Management strategic plan based on evaluation of Risk Management’s role within County organization through user group meetings.
 Coordinate with the Administrative Office of the Courts to construct a new Criminal Courthouse at the County Administration Center.
 Initiate Comprehensive County Facilities Implementation Plan; clarify entitlements, develop draft Request for Proposal for surplus land redevelopment.
 Develop the Main Adult Detention Facility interim improvement planning and design to position for needed housing expansion.
 Complete radio tower replacements at Seaview, Mt. Jackson and Siri and begin design on multiple locations for the new Bay-WEB emergency communications system for transmission sites with Sonoma, Marin, Napa and Mendocino counties.
 Explore additional opportunities to develop and provide comprehensive and affordable services to interested local government agencies.
 Coordinate efforts with Regional Parks to assume oversight of the Veterans Buildings.
 Complete Architecture, Facilities Operations and Real Estate divisions consolidation plan and implement initial phase of General Service’s department reorganization transition plan.
 Facilitate a consensus vision for technology planning to guide the development of a comprehensive technology plan.
 Improve long term service delivery management tied to best practice standards and procedures, clear deliverables and equitable costing, and increasing trust of County customers.
 Move forward on the replacement of the existing financial management system by conducting a comprehensive needs assessment and map out a detailed plan on replacement with a new, modern system.
 Launch additional electronic document management system projects with several departments to reduce use of paper, increase staff productivity, and reduce litigation exposure.
 Implement Web Content Management System to improve timeliness and quality of information available, increase publishing efficiency, and ensure ADA compliance of County web sites.
 Update the Geographic Information System (GIS) strategic plan to ensure that the goals and objectives meet with stakeholder expectations and expand regional shared service partners.
 Expand the mobility options with wireless network capability to cover additional locations meeting the anticipated rise in utilization of mobile devices. This could also include coverage outside of County buildings.
 Upgrade internet routers to provide higher capacity, redundancy, and speed necessary to maintain performance.
 Plan for next generation voice, video and data convergence and begin pilot site implementation of new technologies to address replacement of critical telephone equipment.
 Conduct printer surveys and analysis for all County departments, with the goal of consolidating printers at the department level, increasing efficiency, and reducing costs.
 Improve efficiency within the department and increase our ability to provide cost-effective services through a department-wide reorganization.
 Begin implementation of a new financial system.
 Obtain the Government Finance Officers Association’s outstanding achievement awards for the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report and the Popular Annual Financial Report, as well as the Distinguished Presentation award for the County’s Final Budget.
 Establish an audit committee to guide audit planning and a comprehensive, countywide risk analysis in order to strengthen controls and improve oversight. Develop the audit division work plan to include a combination of revenue producing and internal audits utilizing Institute of Internal Auditors’ standards.
 Expand fiscal service delivery to the Sonoma Marin Area Rail Transit District.
 Gain efficiencies from the Human Resource Management System and provide enhanced functionality to employees and managers.
 Guide the County and support successor agencies through a successful implementation of the Redevelopment Dissolution Act.
 Implement e-billing of property tax secured bills to reduce departmental overhead and provide superior customer service.
 Issue the County’s annual Tax Revenue and Anticipation Note to cover cash flow needs prior to the receipt of the December 2012 tax installment, if investment conditions are favorable to the County.
 Continue revaluation of residential properties to reflect the ongoing changes in the real estate market.
 Complete installation of Computer Aided Mass Appraisal System (CAMA), for direct enrollment of transfers to increase the number of re-appraisals completed while utilizing fewer appraisers and gaining efficiencies.
 Increase voter outreach by expanding the Voting Accessibility Advisory Committee, attending community activities to encourage voter registration and participation, and utilizing staff resources to better meet the needs of Hispanic communities; continue program to translate assessment forms.
 Continue working to reduce the backlog of assessment appeals, transfers, and new construction events.
 Install and implement a fully integrated recording, cashiering, and vital records system.
 Provide training and cross training for Micrographics, Document Recording and customer service, and develop a succession plan for these areas.
 Successfully administer Consolidated Presidential/Top Two General Election in November 2012, by increasing public awareness and enhancing voter education of the process.
 Fully implement public safety realignment, including: supervision of new offenders, with appropriate mitigation of risk; assist court in appropriate sentencing of new offenders; work with Sheriff and other partners on enhancement of detention alternatives; determine feasibility of pre-trial program; with CCP partners, evaluate Interim Realignment Plan, and develop year two and ongoing plans.
 Continue Department’s migration toward evidence based practices through improved assessment, case planning, and delivery of research-based interventions and sanctions.
 Collaborate with Court to modify court reports in response to staffing reductions, and to modify sentences for low risk offenders as incentive for positive probation performance.
 Expand use of alternative, non-custodial sanctions and programming, including use of electronic monitoring, cognitive skills training, and work crews, for offenders in technical violation of their probation conditions.
 Enhance collection of restitution through improved collaboration with the District Attorney’s Office, front-end evaluation of offender’s ability to pay, and establishment and tracking of payment plans.
 Implement and develop program with enhanced case-planning and transitional services for residents “serving-time” in the Juvenile Hall.
 Expand and take full advantage of Sonoma County Wrap Around program, as alternative to out of home placement.
 Enhance Evening Reporting Center to provide gender responsive programming for girls, including array of services previously provided at Sierra Youth Center.
 Increase delivery of direct programming services to youth by probation officers, through expanded menu of probation intervention and facilitated group programming.
 Enhance and lengthen Camp aftercare program, as appropriate level of support and accountability at this transition phase is critical for long-term success.
 Collaborate between Juvenile Hall, Juvenile Probation, and community stakeholders to ensure success of Targeted Re-Entry aspect of the Juvenile Hall’s Boys and Girls Program.
 AB 109/117 (Public Safety Realignment) was enacted in FY 11-12. The District Attorney continues to serve on the Executive Committee of the Community Corrections Partnership (CCP). At the time of this writing the partnership is engaging in short-term and long-range planning and will provide recommendations to the Board of Supervisors on programs, management, and treatment of inmates realigned to counties going forward.
 The department will continue to emphasize aggressive prosecution of gang crimes, sexual assaults, domestic violence, and serious and violent felonies.
 The Elder Protection Unit will investigate and prosecute those who prey on elders, handling cases of sexual and physical abuse, the infliction of mental abuse, and neglect, as well as all financial crimes, including fraud, identity theft, and forgery.
 The District Attorney completed business requirements for a case management system, and is working with the County Administrator’s Office and Information Systems Department to develop a system approach and efficient process that will include other criminal justice department’s case management system requirements and seek cost proposals based on the needs assessment.
 The District Attorney will continue to focus on investigating and prosecuting environmental violations, and violations of California's unfair competition and false advertising laws, in order to preserve the quality of life for the community, and maintain a level playing field for businesses. Illegal disposal and handling of hazardous waste, water and air pollution, destruction of natural resources, false advertising, adulterated or misbranded products, and public nuisance abatements are examples of these prosecutions.
 The District Attorney will work to identify new funding sources, such as grants and fee opportunities to help offset the loss of state grants.
 As lead administrative and fiscal agent of the Family Justice Center Sonoma County, the District Attorney will expand collaboration with criminal justice and community partners to serve victims of family violence, elder abuse, and child abuse.
 The department will continue to work with justice partners on proven intervention and prevention programs, such as the Mayor’s Gang Task Force, the Gang Resistance, Education and Training Program, and Gun Information for Teens.
 Facilitate a smooth transition to a new Public Defender and participate in and provide support for the Public Defender’s Management and Benchmark Study authorized by the Board of Supervisors and managed by the County Administrator’s Office.
 As part of the Community Corrections Partnership Executive Committee and Community Corrections Partnership, continue to participate in the process of criminal justice realignment.
 Look for ways to participate in and identify potential cost savings as part of a Sonoma County electronic documents management system.
 Work with the County Administrator, District Attorney and Information Systems Department to assess the feasibility of and steps required to purchase and implement a Public Defender Case Management System.
 In collaboration with other local law enforcement and emergency service agencies, continue to enhance the County’s ability to respond to gangs, terrorism, and other catastrophic events through training and procurement of special equipment with federal grant funding.
 Continue to work with the California State Sheriff’s Association, CAO, County Counsel, and our Criminal Justice Partners on legislative and operational impacts arising from the Governor's realignment plan and efforts to divert low level, non serious, non violent offenders to the local level.
 As part of the Bay Regional Interoperable Communications Systems Joint Powers Authority, deploy a public safety 700 mhz data communication system to improve public safety's communication abilities, directly impacting officer safety and emergency responders' ability to operate more effectively and provide better services to the community.
 Allow the public to receive current inmate incarceration status through the Sheriff's Office public website.
 Focus on community outreach in order to establish new neighborhood watch programs. Additionally, the Sheriff's Crime Prevention Unit will collaborate with “Safety PALS” working with the Sonoma County Fire Chief’s Association in order to educate and empower children on fire and life saving topics.
 Continue to improve upon investigative techniques such as: expanding cell phone forensics techniques, seeking RAN Board approval to implement live scan (finger print transmission technology) throughout the greater Sonoma County area, completing a print storage disaster back-up system off-site, and developing a database system that tracks stolen property and directly communicates with local pawn shops within Sonoma County.
Support ongoing health system improvement consistent with health care reform and collaborate with partners to achieve a comprehensive continuum of care that provides access to affordable high quality services.
 Strengthen behavioral health services through collaboration with Aurora Behavioral Health’s opening of a psychiatric hospital and the establishment of a long-term recovery-oriented residential program alternative to psychiatric skilled nursing facilities in partnership with the Progress Foundation.
 Develop Health information technology infrastructure to improve operational efficiencies, client and community health services including: implementation of remote field inspection capabilities within Environmental Health, a health information exchange system, Behavioral Health electronic health record and client management system, web-based reporting results of clinical laboratory test results, implementation of an on-line certification and recertification system for EMTs, and a system for the accreditation and authorization of paramedics.
 Develop and implement policies to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of our communities, including a Social Host ordinance in partnership with the Sheriff’s Office and the Sonoma County Prevention Partnership to prevent underage drinking.
 Continue to collaborate with the Human Resources wellness program and expand community engagement activities and investments across the county towards Sonoma County being the Healthiest County in the State by 2020.
 Implement Animal Care and Control operational enhancements such as canine behavior assessment program, recommendations from the Best Practices review study, and improve mobile spay/neuter program with emphasis on accessibility and affordability.
 Enhance services for children and families including expanding Nurse Family Partnership to provide early intervention and support to low income, first time mothers and their families; evaluation of the Maternal Child and Adolescent Health home visiting program for high risk low income women; service expansion to pregnant women struggling with drug and alcohol use; support hospital labor and delivery services to promote breast feeding and achieve baby friendly designation.
 Expand the department’s volunteer program.
 Adult and Aging: Increase participation and improve the Multi-disciplinary Team for Elder Abuse in collaboration with the Family Justice Center and other community partners. Continue to develop reliable transportation alternatives for seniors throughout the county. Expand depression and suicide prevention services through the Older Adult Collaborative, which comprises six agencies dedicated to improving mental health of seniors.
 Economic Assistance: Expand outreach for CalFresh, especially to low-income seniors. Continue to encourage the use of CalFresh at local farmers’ markets. Implement the CalFresh Restaurant Meals program, which allows elderly and disabled CalFresh participants to utilize their benefits in restaurants that have joined the program. Through California Welfare Directors Association and in partnership with the Health Department, offer guidance to the state in its preparation to fully implement the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Healthcare Reform) in 2014. Continue Health Department collaborative initiatives such as nutrition education.
 Employment and Training: Expand the Sonoma County Youth Ecology Corps, in partnership with the Water Agency. Implement the new Subsidized and Transitional Employment Program (STEP). Fully implement digital document storage so that a client’s documents are available from any department location.
 Family, Youth and Children: Expand Team Decision Making for target families, involving family and community members to make the best decisions when the agency is considering removing a child from his/her home. Implement new AB12 legislation, by providing continued support for youth who choose to remain in the child welfare system after they turn 18, by giving them services to help them become successful adults in the community.
 Upstream Investments: Continue implementation including significantly expanding resources for upstream investments. Launch an interactive cost-benefit tool to identify expected local savings from Upstream Portfolio programs. Prioritize evaluation technical assistance for the Cradle to Career initiative, and expand upstream principles in County activities. For more information visit www.SonomaUpstream.org.
 Complete state eligibility requirements for 2,000 IHSS caregivers, including investigating criminal histories and providing orientation.
 Match 680 client requests for caregiver services with Registry caregivers.
 Meet and/or exceed performance on federal/state performance measures: (1) paternity establishment – 100%, (2) support order establishment, which sets the amount of child support which should be paid – 93.5%, (3) percent of child support collected compared to the amount of due – 68.5%, and (4) number of cases which a payment is made on past due amounts – 70.9%.
 Improve cost effectiveness, which is the ratio of child support collected to department expenses from $2.28 to $2.54 for the federal fiscal year (FFY) 11-12.
 Pass all state and federal compliance and data reliability audits.
 Implement key recommendations of the PRMD Customer Service Working Group which brought together industry leaders with PRMD staff with the purpose of recommending approaches to further improve PRMD’s customer service.
 Implement a customer education program as part of the next phase of Customer Service Enhancements identified in 2010.
 Initiate public review of the Draft Development Code Update and complete the public hearing process at the Planning Commission to provide a recommendation to the Board of Supervisors. Also initiate public review of the Historic Resources Guidelines for Bodega Bay, Duncan Mills, Freestone and Occidental.
 Initiate public hearings on implementation of the Biotic Resource combining zones for Streamside Conservation Areas and Biotic Habitat.
 Complete an update of the Well and Septic “Blue Book” containing all septic regulations affecting Sonoma County, and complete adoption process for a modernized County Well Ordinance. Continue working with the Water Agency to submit to the state biannual groundwater elevation data pursuant to the California State Groundwater Elevation Monitoring program (CASGEM).
 Work with Regional Water Boards to implement new statewide septic system regulations (AB 885) to ensure local conditions and needs are addressed.
 Complete update of the Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan to reflect the recently adopted Master Plan for the Sonoma County Airport.
 Complete Administrative Draft Review of the Local Coastal Plan with Coastal Commission staff.
 Certify four additional Certified Access Specialists (CASp) to comply with next phase of State Law SB 1608, relating to accessibility for persons with disabilities by January 1, 2014 and certify four additional staff in the CALGreen building standards program.
 Choose new permitting software system to replace Permits Plus and implement plan to update this system.
 Complete implementation of new Microsoft Dynamics project cost accounting system.
 Participate with statewide organizations in the development of the 2013 model building codes.
 Fund non-profit public services organizations, affordable housing and public works projects, housing rehabilitation, and community development projects with available funds throughout the county.
 Raise the community awareness of fair housing issues and the enforcement of fair housing violations through, principally, a new partnership with Petaluma People Services Center as the new provider of Fair Housing Services for the County of Sonoma and the City of Santa Rosa.
 Initiate a new Rapid Re-Housing pilot program using federal Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG) funds to assist homeless persons and households to quickly move back into permanent housing.
 Assist in prevention of homelessness and promote stable housing environments for more than 3,000 low-income households by providing rental subsidies through the Housing Choice Voucher (2,772), HOME Tenant Based Assistance (110), and Shelter Plus Care (130) programs.
 Secure additional federal funding to increase the capacity of rental housing assistance programs, in collaboration with county departments and community based organizations to assist chronically homeless individuals with disabilities.
 Secure additional federal funding, and complete elevation of up to 15 flood-prone residential structures; provide 20-40 loans to owners of qualified residential units to make needed home improvements.
 In concert with the Sonoma County Office of Fire and Emergency Services, pursue FEMA funding for establishment of new local hazard mitigation programs.
 Streamline the administration of rental assistance programs through the implementation of updated software providing electronic document management, computerized file notes, handheld inspection technology, online applications and waitlist management.
 Administer, satisfy and retire recognized enforceable obligations of the former Sonoma County Community Redevelopment Agency, in accordance with ABx1 26 and manage the completion of projects of the former redevelopment agency.
 Administer low- and moderate income housing assets and liabilities acquired as a result of ABx1 26, from the former Sonoma County Community Redevelopment Agency and City of Sonoma Community Development Agency.
 Manage, coordinate, and administer the current and next round of Homeland Security grants for County and city law enforcement, ambulance providers, fire agencies, and other County departments to improve emergency response capability, planning, and preparedness.
 Complete the requirements and objectives of the Federal FY 12 Emergency Management Performance Grant in alignment with Cal EMA priorities.
 Review, revise, and complete an update to the County’s Emergency Operations Plan.
 Review, revise, and complete a revision to the Lower Russian River Response Plan, including integrating operations at Graton Fire as the Russian River Area Command.
 Complete development to enhance the Telephone Emergency Notification System and begin marketing efforts to the public to sign up for text warning and notification.
 Perform training and conduct a functional Emergency Operations Center exercise on the new software for enhanced operations.
 Implement use of on-line database software to replace the current hazardous material business database and provide a link with California Environmental Reporting System. Training on use of the system will be provided to business community to assist them in electronically reporting their hazmat information.
 Assist restaurants that store large quantities of carbon dioxide in complying with hazardous materials reporting requirements and in implementing appropriate safety provisions for their customers and employees.
 Replace outdated hazardous materials response equipment, in particular fully-encapsulating (Level A) suits that have exceeded their manufacturers’ recommended shelf lives.
 Create a roadside hazards abatement program and seek resources to implement the program.
 Coordinate and provide leadership training; training academy opportunities; and evaluation of our current training programs to support the Vision 20/20 Strategic Plan.
 Complete the County Fire Standard of Cover plan for fire protection services in County Fire - CSA #40.
 Implement a County Road Plan financed with new funding sources to address the needs of the entire County Road Network. The plan will:
 Improve Pavement Condition Index, as reported by Metropolitan Transportation Commission, from poor to fair or better.
 Restore or extend useful life of roads
 Continue to expand the County’s backbone/primary road network as additional revenues become available.
 Develop funding partnerships with local, state and tribal jurisdictions for supplemental transportation funding, which may include equipment and resource sharing, sales tax, transient occupancy tax, or vehicle licensee fee.
 Continue efforts to attract additional commercial airlines for service to non-Alaska Air destinations.
 Expand Alaska Air services to include a third Los Angeles flight and a daily flight to San Diego.
 Continue long-term planning for regional solution for solid waste and settling respective responsibility for unfunded liabilities between the county and cities.
 Begin phased construction of expansion (Phase III of Landfill 2) at the Central Disposal Site for continued landfill operations.
 Construct facility improvements including tipping floor repairs or replacements at the Central and Healdsburg transfer stations; and complete Guerneville closed landfill native trees replanting and construction of a burn waste leachate containment and pumping station.
 Negotiate delegation to the Northern Sonoma County Air Pollution District to implement Air Resources Board’s Landfill greenhouse gas rule.
 Develop and implement a change-out incentive program for woodstoves and fireplaces.
 Secure programmed funding to purchase up to six Orion VII low-floor compressed natural gas buses to replace 2000 and 2002 buses.
 Work with Metropolitan Transportation Commission on a regional basis to prepare for 2014 implementation of Clipper, the Bay Area transit fare smart card program.
 Work with Sonoma-Marin Area Rail Transit and local entities to start construction of the Cotati Intermodal and Healdsburg Intermodal facilities in summer 2012 and to support “Bus Bridge” service.
 Implement pilot habitat enhancement to increase capability of Dry Creek to accommodate summer flows while improving conditions for coho salmon and steelhead.
 Identify and secure federal, state and grant funding for implementation of the Biological Opinion and continue to pursue state and federal funding for natural hazard reliability projects. Expanding non-tax and non-fee based revenue sources is a key element in the Water Agency’s strategic plan.
 Continue environmental and technical analyses to modify minimum instream flow requirements as required and to make technical adjustments to existing water rights.
 Review and revise the Water Agency's strategic plan to guide activities for the 2012 to 2017 period.
 Complete implementation of the pilot program for a volume based component to the Sonoma Valley County Sanitation District’s rates.
 Conduct rate studies for water services.
 Move Service Center into Airport Sanitation Zone facility and sell or lease 2150 West College Avenue facility.
 Prepare a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition Master Plan and begin an update to the Information Technology Master Plan.
 Prepare environmental documents for Occidental CSD reclamation system improvements.
 Construct recycled water expansion projects in the Sonoma Valley CSD including components of the Napa Sonoma Marsh and Sonoma Valley Recycled Water projects, and continue replacement of the sewer main into Sonoma Valley CSD treatment plant.
 Complete the planning work with water contractors to cooperatively develop strategic capital projects for the Transmission System, recycled water, and local supplies.
 Continue to develop and implement groundwater studies and Groundwater Management Plans in Sonoma Valley and the Santa Rosa Plain.
 Implement third phase of multiyear project on Laguna de Santa Rosa to reduce flooding in Rohnert Park and ludwigia infestation in nearby flood control channels.
 Continue progress on developing integrated storm water detention and groundwater recharge projects in the flood control zones 1, 2, and 3.
 Review support provided by the County and reach agreement on necessary service levels and service reimbursement.
 Continue exploring potential implementation of Community Choice Aggregation (Sonoma Clean Power).
 Support countywide tourism efforts by managing contracts for services with the Sonoma County Tourism Bureau and various Visitors’ Centers as well as providing assistance in the coordination and delivery of visitor services.
 Develop an expanded business retention and expansion program with the intent of visiting 200 businesses throughout unincorporated area of the county in the first year as well as collaborating with other local partners.
 Build a Cluster Development Program; including partnering with local educational institutions, the Workforce Investment Board, and the Santa Rosa Chamber of Commerce Building Economic Success Together, (BEST) program to provide educational programs and workforce development training specific to the needs to the cluster groups.
 Launch a pilot project focused on providing services to new and existing business customers related to navigating the regulatory environment, and identifying needs and trouble-shooting obstacles to business establishment and growth.
 Following approval by the U.S. Economic Development Agency, the Innovation Action Council will continue to support funding requests made in conjunction with the Sonoma County Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy.
 The Innovation Action Council will continue its work with task forces focused on branding, workforce and regulatory assistance.
 Develop funding sources to create long-term, sustainable park system, allowing completion of several key initiatives that enhance and add to the value of Sonoma County’s Regional Park system:
 Launch the Outdoor Recreation Economic Stimulus Initiative to integrate state and regional parks, trails and available Open Space District lands into a cohesive network to expand ecotourism and recreational opportunities in Sonoma County.
 Execute initiatives to provide value-added programs and special events in County parks, and increase overall membership by 10%.
 Intensify web-based communication, marketing, and e-commerce strategies.
 Work with the Open Space District to acquire Mark West Creek properties for a future Regional Park.
 Develop North Slope Sonoma Mountain trails and park center in partnership with Sonoma County Agricultural Preservation and Open Space District.
 Develop long-term sustainability plan for marinas.
 Support the opening of a Marine Travel Lift to commence haul-out operations at Spud Point.
 Complete the Tolay Lake Regional Park Master Plan.
 Complete Taylor Mountain Master Plan with the Sonoma County Agricultural Preservation and Open Space District and open the park to the public.
 Continue work on Central Sonoma Trail linking Flowery Elementary School to Larsen Park and providing an alternate route to Highway 12.
 Install electronic pay stations in at least 12 parks making it easier to pay parking fees with credit cards.
 Develop a fee lands strategy to refine land management planning and implementation efforts, evaluate property disposition options, and identify areas where volunteers, partnering organizations, and outside funding could be utilized to further District resources.
 Begin implementation of conservation valuation initiative in partnership with County agencies and other collaborators.
 Begin implementation of county wide carbon sequestration analysis of forests and open space lands.
 Develop a District climate mitigation and adaptation strategy.
 Transfer identified fee lands to park agencies or other land management partners that have the capacity and mission to protect the conservation values intended by the District; the District will retain conservation easements over the transferred properties.
 Using strategic conservation planning, prioritize and pursue land and easement acquisitions based on important resource values, partnerships, and available funding.
 Maintain or enhance the department’s most critical programs that protect the health, safety, economy and environment of Sonoma County by researching and pursuing grant funding opportunities and by evaluating opportunities to increase efficiencies.
 Deploy and service detection traps for the European Grapevine Moth and conduct outreach to the wine grape growing community on treatment protocols, which are integral for removing Sonoma County from quarantine status.
 Conduct inspections to ensure compliance with the European Grapevine Moth quarantine requirements to move fruit during harvest. These inspections will help to prevent the reintroduction of European Grapevine Moth into areas eligible for deregulation at the end of 2012.
 Continue pursuing strategies to increase efficiencies for an effective pesticide use program with reductions in field staff hours that are the result of budget reductions.
 Assist producers in complying with quarantine requirements for the Light Brown Apple Moth.
 Implement newly adopted provisions related to tree removal in the Grading, Drainage and Vineyard and Orchard Site Development Ordinance.
 Sustain an effective quantity control inspection program through statistical sampling procedures and closer partnerships with Sonoma County’s Consumer District Attorney and other counties and state agencies.
 Petition the Secretary of the California Department of Food and Agriculture for approval of a variable inspection plan that will allow Weights and Measures resources to be strategically shifted toward areas of the greatest risk for consumer harm.
 Continue to investigate and assist with consumer complaints filed with the Weights and Measures Division.
 Increase awareness of University of California Cooperative Extension through the web site: cesonoma.ucdavis.edu and educational meetings for the agricultural community and the general public.  Implement the County Lands for Food Production Program, working with key County partners, to encourage food production that provides locally grown food on County owned land.  Educate new and existing farmers about the technical aspects of growing specialty crops profitably through short courses, cooperative efforts with the Santa Rosa Junior College Agriculture Department, and one-on-one with hands-on trainings.  Provide support for monitoring and correctly time insecticide treatments for the control of European Grapevine Moth. Study more effective tools to monitor populations under low levels.  Study the uptake of systemic insecticides in vineyards to optimize control of mealybugs and sharpshooters, and develop guidelines for growers and pest managers.  Establish a field trial to evaluate the performance of Pint Noir clones that may be infected with virus that causes “grapevine necrotic union” disease.  Continue to monitor temperatures at key vineyard sites within the Russian River watershed to determine inversion strength and assess the possibility of the use of wind machines for frost protection.  Provide information to grower stakeholders regarding the vineyard conditional waiver for the Sonoma Creek watershed including options for water quality management plans.  The Master Gardner Food Gardening Specialists will continue to partner with the iGrow consortium to teach families how to grow their own food in backyard gardens.  Expand 4-H programs to develop a variety of new projects that address healthy living, science, engineering and technology, and citizenship; provide leadership opportunities for our 1,200 youth and 450 adult volunteers.  Work with the Agricultural Commissioner’s Office to pursue options for shared resources to increase efficiencies and cost effectiveness.
 Create financial management systems and procedures to support continuous improvement in budget management and report creation.
 Launch Sonoma Heritage Collection, online digital exhibits based on the Library’s unique holdings in the Wine Library and the History and Genealogy Library.
 Create a digital library branch that is available 24x7 and upgrade the Library’s web site.
 Complete project evaluating the feasibility of adding e-books to the Library’s collections.
 Complete implementation of RFID for all circulation functions and install security gates where feasible.
 Continue efforts to streamline materials handling processes and reduce staff workload.
 Continue implementation of performance management system, and development of a comprehensive set of policies and procedures.
 Implement new telephone system for entire library.
 Work with County Administrator and cities’ staffs to review the 1975 Joint Powers Agreement in an effort to determine if structure and governance changes will result in service delivery improvements to Sonoma County residents.
 Restructuring of debt related to Photovoltaic system to more favorable terms.
 Multi-year Naming Rights sponsorship opportunity for the new racing paddock.
 Performance of an energy audit to determine if additional upgrades can be effectively made that result in cost savings.
 Development of a charitable foundation to support Fair activities.
 With the addition of the Deputy Fair Manager, a focused effort on booking more public events and consumer shows to the Fairgrounds.
 Research revenue generating uses for the Jockey Club that compliment the satellite wagering operations that currently exist in that facility.
 Repurpose the “Z” Barn property on Aston Avenue to a revenue generating partnership since these stalls are no longer needed for racing.
 Collaborate with other organizations to research bonds or other funding mechanisms to do community benefit facility improvements.
 Further implement physical barrier removal in year four (of twelve) of the County’s updated ADA Transition Plan.
 Continue to promote shared services on construction projects for the County Library system and for other interested public agencies.
 Continue implementation of initial recommendations of the Comprehensive County Facilities Plan, including more efficient space use guidelines, standardized workstation layouts, and mobile work strategies; present full report findings and recommendations to the Board of Supervisors.
 Continue installation of electric vehicle charging infrastructure in support of the county-wide “electric trail” concept.
 Support the delivery of the Phase II solar array at Los Guilicos under a power purchase agreement, helping achieve net energy neutrality for that campus.
 Relocate Fleet Operations and the Transportation and Public Works Material Laboratory from their current location to a new, updated facility, clearing the way for new court house construction activity on their former site.
 Support the Sheriff’s Office Radio Bureau upgrade of existing County radio communications tower infrastructure and related implementation of the BayWEB regional interoperability project.
 Initiate master planning and public improvements to the Roseland project, pending funding.
 Various improvements to the Main Adult Detention Facility to improve inmate population management capability.
 Initiate the phased remodel of the La Plaza A building in support of divisional consolidations and co-locations for improved space utilization and more efficient operations.
 Continue to refine the Criminal Justice master plan in light of latest findings and strategies, and also in light of potential future AB 900 funding that could allow construction of a Community Corrections Center for Sonoma County.
