 Continue to develop long and short term funding to address Roads infrastructure and implement measures to reduce pension
liability while augmenting General Fund reserves. Carry out measures towards Energy & Water Sustainability, Climate Adaption,
Agricultural Stewardship, and a stronger Community’s Safety Net.
 Implement phase one of new finance system for greater accountability to taxpayers. In collaboration with the Auditor-ControllerTreasurer-
Tax Collector and the Information Systems departments the county will complete Phase 1 implementation of core
financial components of the new financial system.
 Coordinate with Health Services and Human Resources departments to implement the first year of the Affordable Care Act both as
an employer and with the community to meet Board goals.
 Participate and communicate with criminal justice departments and county partners to ensure integrated coordination of AB 109
Public Safety Realignment, including facilitation of understanding of system criminal justice system impacts and offender
outcomes to assist long range planning for criminal justice system needs and resources.
 Coordinate efforts to update the Sonoma County Criminal Justice Master Plan due to changes in a lower trend in jail population,
expanded justice system programming and due to impacts on the criminal justice system from AB 109 implementation.
 Lead efforts to advance the County Strategic Plan through the use of outcome and performance measures, and through integration
of strategic initiatives with county fiscal practices.
 Lead effort to provide a review of funding structures for some internally focused services to promote cost effective service delivery
and more equitable funding distribution.
 Provide legal assistance to the Board and PRMD on new regulations and initiatives, including the Development Code and renewable
energy code amendments.
 Continue providing assistance to the Sonoma County Energy Independence Program (SCEIP) to resolve pending issues with the
Federal Housing Finance Agency, and promote a growing, dynamic program.
 Continue legal support to Caltrans and SCTA for Highway 101 improvement project right of way acquisitions.
 Provide legal support to LAFCO and County to address legal and governance issues related to fire and other special districts.
 Assist the Department of Health Service and the Human Resources Department in implementation of the Affordable Care Act.
 Negotiate agreements with tribes to fully mitigate local impacts of tribal development projects.
 Work with Risk Management and Information Systems Department to develop an improved litigation case management program to
reduce overall litigation costs and risk exposure.
 Evaluate alignment of County-sponsored medical plans to Federal Health Care Reform Initiatives.
 Incorporate and train employees on new Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) and other benefit services agreed to through
contract negotiations.
 Revise 2005 Temporary Transitional Duty Policy, to be consistent with industry best practices and current law, and incorporate into
comprehensive Leave Management Program.
 Continue accessibility enhancements and advance an online county complex map identifying accessible parking and electric
vehicle charging stations, and ensure content published to County web sites is compliant with the County’s Web Site Accessibility
Policy.
 Continue development of a County Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) strategic plan to better integrate risk prevention into
County programs, based on feedback from User Group meetings.
 Continue to support County’s Cradle to Career initiative with partners in education and employment to maintain a strong presence
as an employer of choice, and to enhance the County’s internship program to build a path to County careers.
 Complete negotiations with ten remaining labor organizations.
 Establish a robust training program that supports empowering County staff.
 Continue barrier removal projects identified in the updated American with Disabilities Act Transition Plan for County Facilities to
improve public access.
 Develop costs and funding plan for the County Comprehensive Facility Plan to continue developing the plan to invest in the future
by providing the highest and best use of space and facilities.
 Continue Communication Tower improvements to support the Sheriff Department’s critical First Responder communication
network to improve public safety’s communications abilities, directly impacting officer safety and emergency responders’ ability to
operate more effectively and provide better services to the community.
 Relocate the Fleet Operations light equipment facility to accommodate construction of the new courthouse.
 Expand Sonoma County Electric Trail by installing charging stations in north county locations to support economic and
environmental stewardship by reducing carbon emissions.
 Assist public agencies to participate in a regional group purchase of solar electric systems by leveraging economies of scale and
reducing costs through energy and resource efficiency.
 Develop and implement strategies to increase the number of Sonoma County Energy Independence Program projects for
commercial properties.
 Provide a leadership role in integrating procurement services across the County through involvement in the Request for Proposal
process, resulting in efficiencies and cost savings.
 Increase facility maintenance work, to continue to allow the County’s aging infrastructure to be operated in a safe, compliant and
sustainable manner.
 Support the first phase of implementing a new County-wide Enterprise Financial System.
 Expand department use of web content management system to promote a consistent look and feel across County web sites, make it
easier for departments to manage their content, and increase compliance with standards.
 Continue transition to the use of the Electronic Document Management System to reduce reliance on paper-based systems for
managing daily operations, increase staff productivity, and improve availability of information.
 Replace an aging telephone system for all County sites and users. Provide features such as call centers, interactive voice response,
unified messaging (integration with email, fax, pager, video-clips, and voice mail), and improved mobility of the employee workforce
and enterprise data.
 Develop applications to support and enhance Public Safety and Justice, Land Development and Management, Health and Human
Services, and Administrative functions.
 Continue integration of tablets and other mobile device technology in the County environment including adapting business
applications, security, and wireless networking in a safe and secure manner.
 Complete a department-wide reorganization, which will allow the department to better meet the demands of financial reporting,
Treasury Pool fund investment, and countywide debt issuance by integrating the Treasurer and Tax Collector functions under a single
division.
 Continue to maintain the County's public accountability and fiscal transparency by obtaining the Government Finance Officers
Association's awards for the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, Popular Annual Financial Report, and the County's Final
Budget.
 Support fiscal operations Countywide by educating and training accounting staff on required accounting standards and best practices.
 The core project team along with key stakeholders from departments will be working to prepare Phase 1 of the Enterprise Financial
System project to go live by the end of the year, including the General Ledger, Accounts Payable, Purchasing, and Fixed Assets
functions. Activities include core project team training, discovery work, focus group meetings, fit/gap sessions, interface and report
development, configuration of the system, user acceptance testing and end user training. The modules planned for implementation in
Phase 1 will allow for the decommissioning of the County’s mainframe by September 2014.
 Safeguard the economic resources of the County by developing a strategic plan for internal audit based on the performance of a
Strength, Weakness, Opportunity, and Threat analysis. This plan will identify the initiatives, key tasks, and timelines for the
implementation of the County's internal audit program.
 Reduce risk and further strengthen fraud protection measures within the County warrant system by implementing the Payee Positive
Pay service.
 Improve County cash flow projections by transitioning claims payments from the warrant process to an electronic funds transfer
system.
 Provide superior service to County employees by reviewing Flexible Spending Account processing, including exploring options that
will enable a debit card feature.
 Collocate the Clerk and Recorder offices into a single facility to enhance customer service and implement cost efficiencies.
 Develop a succession plan by filling positions, providing training and cross training staff, and create an emergency preparedness plan
for election administration..
 Review new election legislation effective January 1, 2013, and plan steps necessary for implementation prior to the next major
election cycle; collaborate with FoCE (Future of California Elections) to develop more extensive voter outreach programs for underrepresented,
eligible citizens to register and vote; and, through the use of technology increase voter participation and civic involment.
 Complete installation of Computer Aided Mass Appraisal System (CAMA to increase the number of re-appraisals completed while
maximizing staff resources and gaining efficiencies. Also, continue efforts to translate assessment forms in Spanish to provide better
customer service to a larger segment of Sonoma County taxpayers.
 Maintain and enhance aggressive training programs spanning the full range of Probation’s mission, from assuring officer safety
while supervising high-risk offenders, to providing effective evidence-based practices designed to reduce recidivism.
 Continue Department’s enhancements of evidence-based practices by:
 Taking full advantage of a range of programming offered by Community Based Organizations;
 Providing proper programming dosage and level of probation supervision based on assessed risk to reoffend;
 Enhancing detention alternatives for technical violations, ensuring swift, certain, and just consequences, without
excessive incarceration;
 Launching customized automated case plans;
Developing quality assurance of officers’ skills and work products;
 Implementing structured supervision model, Effective Practices in Community Supervision;
 Developing sanctions and incentives matrices for adult and juvenile offenders.
 In collaboration with key partners in criminal justice, health and human services, and education, continue to lead efforts to develop,
refine, and assess county’s response to criminal justice realignment.
 Through collaborations within and across Departments, enhance success during transitions, such as re-entry, Camp Aftercare, and
Probation termination. Work with Sheriff’s Corrections staff to identify the high-risk adult target population for prerelease
programming, and assist with developing a continuum of services for transition from custody to probation supervision, and
participation in the Day Reporting Center.
 Restructure policy/practice, train staff, refine infrastructure to assure compliance with the Prison Rape Elimination Act.
 Implement a special programming and re-entry unit to target transitional age youth who will be returning to the community
following long terms of detention in the Juvenile Hall.
 Fully implement Camp Mentoring Program for which solid foundation was laid in FY 2012/13, and, working with the “Imagine
Bus Project”, develop an art program for Camp youth.
 Expand the use of wraparound services for more youth who are at risk of home removal; use wraparound services as a step-down
for youth who can transition from out-of-home placement; and use anticipated savings to fund additional upstream services.
 Maintain current SAC business, and develop additional contracts, in particular with Regional Parks, despite extremely challenging
public sector budget climate; and complete work on communication towers, and construction of electric vehicle charging stations.
 The Elder Protection Unit will continue to investigate and prosecute those who prey on elders, handling cases of sexual and physical
abuse, the infliction of mental abuse, and neglect, as well as all financial crimes, including fraud, identity theft, and forgery. Outreach
efforts will continue to educate seniors about scams and how to avoid them, and to raise awareness on services.
 The District Attorney will work with justice partners to implement procedures for conducting Parole Revocation Hearings and
represent the People’s interests at those hearings, which pursuant to the recent legislation on Criminal Justice Realignment will be
held at the local level beginning this fiscal year.
 The District Attorney will establish a Real Estate Fraud unit that will be funded through a recording fee pursuant to Government Code
Section 27388. This unit will aggressively prosecute crimes such as forged deeds transferring ownership, fraudulent businesses
offering assistance with refinancing or help in avoiding foreclosure, and other real estate fraud crimes. These crimes are often targeted
on the most vulnerable, including the elderly and non-English speaking citizens, and the District Attorney will prosecute offenders to
the fullest extent of the law.
 Implement a Case Management System which can support the goals of the office and better align the office with our criminal justice
and community partners.
 The District Attorney will expand collaboration with criminal justice and community partners to serve victims of family violence,
sexual assault, elder abuse and child abuse as the lead administrative and fiscal agent of the Family Justice Center Sonoma County.
County of Sonoma
FY 2013-2014 Adopted Budget
 Implement a Case Management System which can support the goals of the office and better align the office with our criminal
justice and community partners.
 Continue implementing the recommendations from the management review audit performed in FY 12-13.
 Develop and implement process to handle parole revocation hearings that have been realigned from the State.
 Continue to partner with the Auditor’s Office to increase revenues through fee and registration collection when ordered by the
Court.
 Continuing legal education and training of staff.
 Reduce recidivism through participation in the implementation of Public Safety Realignment programs.
 Complete pending radio tower and vault construction projects and begin the process of installing electronics at nine new remote radio
sites, as well as complete pending radio system expansions for County Park, Animal Control, TPW, the Water Agency, the Airport,
and at Lake Sonoma.
 Develop a Sheriff’s Office website program where the public can access current inmate incarceration status.
 Continue to improve upon investigative techniques through: new updated software and hardware for our cell-phone forensics
program, introduction of a new computer enhanced program that assists investigators with internet crimes against children (ICAC),
implementation of new finger print technologies that will allow law enforcement agencies to search against other county identification
databases while in the field, and completion of the 2nd half of the DNA Bar Code project.
 Develop a comprehensive plan to relocate the Main Adult Detention Facility and the North County Detention Facility kitchens in the
most efficient and cost effective manner possible, and evaluate whether ongoing costs associated with the preparation and service of
meals to inmates can be reduced.
 Work closely with our criminal justice stakeholders to fully implement a Detention Pre-Trial Services Unit.
 Make critical adjustments to the jail classification system in order to safely provide more out of cell time for inmates and more
programming opportunities to a greater number of inmates in order to reduce recidivism.
 In collaboration with other government agencies and community partners, develop effective policies to reduce the rate of underage
drinking through the development of a Social Host Ordinance.
 In collaboration with key partners in criminal justice, health and human services, and education, continue to lead efforts to develop,
refine, and assess county’s response to criminal justice realignment.
 Continue to work closely with our criminal justice partners to efficiently manage realigned inmates.
 Coordinate local communication about the implementation of the Affordable Care Act in Sonoma County including: collaborating
with the Human Services Department, Economic Development Board, other County departments, health care providers, and
community based organizations; supporting ongoing health system improvements consistent with implementation of the Act and a
comprehensive continuum of care that provides access to affordable high quality services; and maximizing opportunities under the
Act to implement parity and expand behavioral health services.
 Fully implement the Department of Health Services Strategic and Communication Plan, expanding awareness through proposal and
contract development processes, data collection and reporting processes, and internal and external communication strategies.
 Conduct a Community Health Assessment and complete a comprehensive Community Health Improvement Plan that benefits
community health and supports the department achievement of National Public Health Accreditation.
 Implement a performance management system and quality improvement program that builds a culture of continual quality
improvement and supports the successful attainment of National Public Health Accreditation.
 Implement a data management system that will consolidate performance measures to promote outcome-based reporting and
community health improvement that furthers Sonoma County’s Strategic Plan and investments toward becoming the Healthiest
County in the State by 2020.
 Continue to collaborate with the Human Resources wellness program and other County partners to expand community engagement
activities and investments towards Sonoma County becoming the Healthiest County in the State by 2020.
 Continue to implement a new Elder Financial Protection Team to provide timely, comprehensive services to victims of financial
abuse; Increase services to Veterans and their families through additional staff in the Veteran Services Office; Expand senior
nutrition programs through three service providers contracts covering all geographic areas of the county.
 Implement the Community Care Transitions Program (CCTP), funded through the Affordable Care Act. The CCTP is a partnership
with Health Services and a coalition of health care providers to serve high risk Medicare clients who are being discharged from the
hospital. The focus of the program is to prevent readmissions.
 Implement all changes relevant to Medi-Cal and publically subsidized health insurance as described in the Patient Protection
Affordable Care Act.
 Implement the CalFresh Community Connections outreach initiative, extending CalFresh outreach into Sonoma County
communities outside of Santa Rosa, with an emphasis on reaching non-English speaking, working families and senior citizens.
 Expand our Subsidized Employment Program (SEP) to include more participants. SEP provides clients with an opportunity to build
skills while earning money. It also helps businesses by providing a 50% wage subsidy for 6 months for every SEP employee.
 Define the Workforce Investment Board’s (WIB) strategic direction and plan for Sonoma County. The goals and priorities
established by the WIB will be used in county-wide workforce development efforts and in the completion of a state-mandated
Workforce Investment Act Strategic Plan.
 Complete a smooth transfer of responsibility for all Sonoma County Adoptions services from California Department of Social
Services to the Family, Youth and Children’s Division.
 Complete the Sonoma County Self-Assessment, Peer Quality Case Review and System Improvement Plan (SIP), and present the 5
year SIP to the Board of Supervisors regarding how child welfare and probation services will be provided through 2018.
 Strengthen the Department’s integration of evidence-informed services and evaluation of the impacts of these services for clients
and the community.
 Develop and implement a shared outcomes measurement system used by more than half of the County’s early childhood educators
and primary school districts.
 Mail Department of Justice background check packets to 2,000 new caregiver applicants. Provide orientation to 1,600 new caregiver
applicants.
 Approve 1,585 new caregiver applicants eligible to work for IHSS clients.
 Match 780 client requests for caregiver services with Registry caregivers.
 Add 180 new caregivers to the Registry.
 Meet and/or exceed performance on performance measures, including the following federally established target rates: (1) paternity
establishment – 100%, (2) support order establishment, which sets the amount of child support which should be paid – 94.1%, (3)
percent of child support collected compared to the amount of due – 73.2%, and (4) number of cases which a payment is made on
past due amounts – 72.2%.
 Maintain cost effectiveness ratio for Federal FY 13-14.
 Pass all state and federal compliance and data reliability audits.
 Develop departmental career skills enhancement and succession planning implementation plan.
 Increase new case initiation by expanding outreach to community agencies, courts, private family law attorneys and schools.
 Purchase and implement new permitting software system to replace the current system, Permits Plus, in conjunction with an
internal review of permit processes to maximize efficiencies and streamlining capabilities recognized by the new system.
 Continue to implement a customer education program as part of the next phase of Customer Service Enhancements identified in
2010.
 Initiate public review of the Draft Development Code Update and complete the public hearing process at the Planning Commission
to provide a recommendation to the Board of Supervisors.
 Complete an update of the Well and Septic “Blue Book” containing all septic regulations affecting Sonoma County.
 Complete adoption process for a modernized County Well Ordinance.
 Continue working with the Water Agency to submit to the state biannual groundwater elevation data pursuant to the California
State Groundwater Elevation Monitoring program.
 Work with Regional Water Boards to implement new statewide septic system regulations (AB 885) to ensure that local conditions
and needs are addressed.
 Complete update of the Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan once the FAA has approved the adopted Master Plan for the Sonoma
County Airport.
 Work with Regional Climate Protection Authority to develop multi-jurisdictional community-wide greenhouse climate action
program.
 Assist in prevention of homelessness and promote stable housing for nearly 3,000 low-income households by providing rental
subsidies through the Housing Choice Voucher and similar programs.
 Secure additional federal funding to increase the capacity of rental housing assistance programs, in collaboration with County
departments and community based organizations to assist chronically homeless individuals with disabilities.
 Utilize technology to streamline the administration of rental assistance programs through the implementation of electronic document
management, computerized file notes, and handheld inspection devices.
 Establish a new Coordinated Assessment program in concert with community partners to assist homeless persons in identifying and
accessing appropriate shelter and other homeless services county-wide.
 Secure full renewal homeless services funding and some additional federal funding through the Continuum of Care funding process
by providing leadership, coordination, data management, and technical assistance to the local Continuum of Care consortium of
homeless services providers.
 Place and manage all affordable housing funds available from County Fund for Housing and Federal programs via our competitive
process for affordable housing developers.
 Successfully manage the ongoing redevelopment agency dissolution process including the management of housing assets,
responsibilities and requirements transferred through the dissolution process from the cities of Sebastopol and Sonoma but without
administrative funding.
 Develop a plan for a successful transformation of the Roseland Shopping Center, owned by the CDC and left in limbo by the State’s
dissolution of redevelopment, into a viable economic and community resource.
 Develop and implement a plan in concert with other County departments to secure alternate funding sources to continue key
redevelopment activities such as, but not limited to, the State Highway 12 project in Sonoma Valley, mixed-use development of the
Roseland Village site, Monte Rio wastewater feasibility studies, and Guerneville area homeless shelter and services.
 Complete 15 flood elevation and 20 housing rehabilitation projects, mitigating future damage for flood prone properties and
benefitting low-income owner-occupant households in the removal of health and safety hazards.
 Continue to deliver Fire Emergency Services in accordance with the Standards of Coverage Response Plan.
 Continue the development of standardized operations for all Fire Companies within County Fire in accordance with industry
standards.
 Coordinate and provide leadership training; training academy opportunities; and enhancement of in-service training criteria.
 Provide leadership to all fire departments and districts within Sonoma County in the tri-annual adoption of the California Fire
Code, California Building Code the California Residential Code and the County Fire Safe Regulations.
 Draft a countywide weed abatement program for densely populated areas of unincorporated Sonoma County, which will enhance
vegetation management and reduce the threat of wildland fires.
 Begin offering ALERT SONOMA to the public for voluntary enrollment to receive emergency text warning and notification
messages from the Operational Area Telephone Emergency Notification System (TENS).
 Update the County Operational Area Emergency Operations Plan (EOP).
 Work with public safety organizations throughout Sonoma County to assist them in gaining access to the hazardous materials
information available through the California Environmental Reporting System for the sites within their respective jurisdictions.
 Begin the 3-year update of the Sonoma County Hazardous Materials Incident Response (Area) Plan.
 Complete development of a response plan for releases of petroleum and other hazardous materials into the Russian River, in
conjunction with the federal Environmental Protection Agency and other community groups.
 Construct new fire station in Annapolis.
 Continue planning for new fire station in Lakeville.
 Participate in effort to support Board goal of analyzing Fire Service governance.
 Implement a County Road Plan and work to identify new funding sources to address the needs of the entire County Road Network.
The plan will strive to improve Pavement Condition Index, as reported by Metropolitan Transportation Commission, from poor to
fair, restore or extend useful life of roads and continue to expand the County’s backbone/primary road network as additional revenues
become available. Develop funding partnerships with local, state and tribal jurisdictions for supplemental transportation funding.
Increase lobbying efforts geared towards transportation funding reform at federal and state level.
 Improve citizen access and involvement by exploring technology available for mobile devices that will allow for easy reporting/status
of maintenance related issues such as potholes, vegetation complaints, signs down, or signal/streetlight outages.
 Continue long-term planning for regional solution for solid waste, including implementation of a Master Operations Agreement
(MOA) and flow commitment agreements with the Cities, and settlement of respective responsibility for unfunded liabilities between
the County and cities.
 Begin phased construction of expansion (Phase III of Landfill 2) at the Central Disposal Site for continued landfill operations through
the MOA including beginning of construction of the partial final cover for the Central Landfill.
 Continue efforts to attract additional commercial airlines for service to non-Alaska Air destinations. Expand Alaska Air services to
include the return of a third Los Angeles (LAX) flight on a year round basis and work on increasing the frequency of the San Diego
and Seattle flights.
 Continue construction and mitigation efforts related to the runway safety enhancement project. Prepare and release bid for terminal
remodel project, to improve the passenger experience and enhance security to accommodate increased commercial service in
conjunction with runway improvements scheduled to be completed spring 2015.
 Continue to work with other local transit operators to improve fare and schedule coordination. Continue coordinating with SMART in
support of “Bus Bridge” service for northern Sonoma County.
 Finalize implementation of the NextBus and NextStop passenger information system to allow for mobile access to schedule
information.
 To increase efficiency, negotiate an agreement with the California Air Resources Board (ARB) so the District can locally implement
ARB’s Landfill regulation for greenhouse gases.
 Develop and implement a change-out incentive program for woodstoves and fireplaces.
 Complete design plans and environmental permitting for Stage 2 of the Hwy 12 widening and pedestrian improvements and submit to
Caltrans for approval and potential funding. Upon state approval and the allocation of construction funds, the project will be bid and
awarded for implementation.
 Secure grant funding for continued implementation of the Biological Opinion and continue to pursue state and federal funding for
natural hazard reliability projects, as a way of reducing costs to rate payers. Continue to pursue strategic partnerships and alliances to
leverage staff and funding resources.
 Continue environmental and technical analyses to modify minimum instream flow requirements and to make technical adjustments to
existing water rights.
 Conduct further rate studies for water services.
 Complete the move of the Service Center into Airport Sanitation Zone facility and sell or lease the 2150 West College Avenue
facility.
 Prepare a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition Master Plan and begin an update to the Information Technology Master Plan.
 Prepare environmental documents for Occidental County Sanitation District reclamation system improvements.
 Construct recycled water expansion projects in the Sonoma Valley County Sanitation District including components of the Napa
Sonoma Marsh and Sonoma Valley Recycled Water projects.
 Continue to implement groundwater studies and Groundwater Management Plans in Sonoma Valley and the Santa Rosa Plain.
 Continue developing integrated storm water detention and groundwater recharge projects in the flood control zones 1, 2, and 3.
 Continue potential implementation of Community Choice Aggregation (Sonoma Clean Power).
 Work with Sonoma County Youth Ecology Corps to expand programs to local parks.
 Continue to grow and expand the business retention and expansion program launched this year with the intent to visit over 150
businesses throughout the county with a focus on the unincorporated area of the county.
 Continue to grow and expand the Business Assistance Program and Hotline to assist businesses in navigating the regulatory
environment and troubleshooting any roadblocks to doing business with the goal of servicing over 50 existing or startup businesses
and responding to approximately 260 business assistance hotline calls.
 Provide continued support to countywide tourism efforts by managing contracts for services with the Sonoma County Tourism and
various Visitors’ Centers.
 Continue sponsorship of Sonoma County Restaurant Week.
 Complete an arts sector strategic plan to encourage economic development through the coordination and promotion of the arts and
cultural activities sector.
 Expand education and outreach efforts for Green Business Program and certify up to 25 new businesses.
 Launch a new Workplace Wellness program that promotes the business and community value of healthy workforce initiatives
among Sonoma County employers, and that recognizes employers for developing and implementing exceptional employee
wellness programs.
 Continue the next phase with the Innovation Action Council in developing permit process improvement actions through a multiagency
public/private partnership; coordinate the efforts of over 40 educational institutions, along with workforce development
providers and business groups to create the region’s first employer-driven workforce strategy; and through a new “Marketing
Alliance,” connect over 30 groups that currently market Sonoma County’s assets to provide enhanced opportunities to market local
goods and services.
 Develop the Sonoma County Integrated Park Plan to align Regional Parks and trails with state parks, city parks, publicly accessible
Sonoma County Agricultural Preservation and Open Space District (SCAPOSD) lands, and other public access lands into a cohesive
network to expand recreational opportunities, tourism and build on Health Action goals.
 Increase community engagement and increase overall park membership by 5%.
 Intensify web-based communication, marketing and e-commerce strategies.
 Implement a long-term sustainability plan for the Marinas properties.
 Develop and open the Taylor Mountain Regional Park trailhead at Petaluma Hill Road.
 Begin construction of Riverfront Regional Park Phase 3 and Steelhead Beach Campground.
 Complete Bay Area Ridge Trail at Los Guilicos and Hood Mountain Regional Park.
 Develop and open the SMART Bikeway between the Joe Rodota Trail and Hearn Avenue.
 Accept the transfer of the 1,610 acre Tolay Creek Ranch Property from the Sonoma Land Trust.
 Provide the Board with a comprehensive analysis and program to address system-wide deferred maintenance projects, associated
costs, and funding strategy.
 Complete transfer from the SCAPOSD of high priority properties pursuant to the adopted SCAPOSD fee lands strategy. These
include the North Sonoma Mountain Regional Park & Open Space Preserve, and the Lawson property on Hood Mountain.
 Prioritize and pursue land and easement acquisitions based on important resource values, partnerships, and available funding, and
initiate ongoing stewardship of each acquisition.
 Continue statewide efforts through the Working Lands Coalition to advocate for funding for agricultural land conservation.
 Complete implementation of the Board-approved Fee Lands Strategy including transfer of several fee properties to park agencies or
other land management partners.
 Continue planning, resource management, habitat, and public access projects at District-owned properties, including Montini
Preserve, Calabazas Creek, Healdsburg Ridge, and North Slope Sonoma Mountain.
 Continue implementation of county-wide carbon sequestration analysis of forests and open space lands developing a set of maps,
analyses, tools and policy recommendations that address the role of land conservation in reducing Greenhouse Gas (GHG)
emissions.
 Develop a strategy to support efforts to address climate change, both through actions that reduce GHGs actions such as trail and
bikeway development, and actions that protect Sonoma County lands, native species, and residents from expected impacts of
climate change.
 Develop a habitat mitigation policy for District-protected lands.
 Work with partners to create an incubator farm site on publicly owned land in Sonoma County to help support the long term
economic viability of local agriculture.
 Support continued urban open space conservation through the Competitive Matching Grant Program.
 Measure and publicly report progress on accomplishing the actions outlined in the District’s 2012-2015 Work Plan.
 Conduct various activities to help remove the remaining 5,600 acres of the county from the EGVM quarantine and prevent reinfestation.
 Implement the agricultural grading and drainage permitting process previously performed by PRMD. Grading and drainage review
will now be performed in conjunction with VESCO review, allowing a more streamlined process.
 Expand working partnerships and funding opportunities with other state agencies and district attorney’s offices in order to
proactively pursue consumer protection cases that have implications of consumer harm across county lines.
 Continue partnering with the State Regional Water Quality Control Boards and private industry for opportunities to leverage the
standards and practices already implemented under VESCO to meet the Water Boards’ requirements for agricultural producers to
submit plans to comply with clean water standards.
 Improve services in core agriculture programs mandated by the California Food and Agriculture Code. Specifically, target weed
eradication focusing on the highest priority noxious and invasive weeds not yet widely established, prior to these weeds gaining a
foothold and spreading to rangelands, open spaces, and recreational areas.
 Work to meet inspection requirements for all registered devices, complete the annual inspections at retail businesses for the price
verification program, and respond to all consumer complaints and conduct investigations as necessary.
 Enhance the Agricultural Ombudsman program for the expansion of niche market and local food production, increasing
agricultural economic viability and jobs.
 Develop a model for local incubator farms to increase food production and economic opportunities for local farmers and
ranchers.
 Introduce new specialty crops to local farmers through various demonstration plantings of mandarin, Meyer lemon, heirloom
apples, figs, oil and table olives, mulberry, raspberries, tomatoes, and blackberries.
 Monitor distribution and abundance of endangered Coho salmon in the Russian River and document stream conditions and
water flow needed to facilitate ongoing recovery.
 Monitor Sudden Oak Death in Sonoma County and educate landowners, arborists, and the general public about its biology,
spread, and control procedures.
 Conduct educational outreach in home gardening practices that promote water conservation, reduce landfill inputs, and reduce
the amount of toxic garden pesticides in the urban landscape, through Master Gardeners program.
 Train 4-H volunteers in the area of Bully Prevention in order to identify targeted youth, educate parents and address the needs
of all involved.
 Introduce the Diversity and Leadership Initiative through the 4-H program, increasing opportunities for youth to build career
skills for the future.
 Support completion of review of Library JPA.
 Implement systems and tools to support improved financial management and reporting.
 Develop a schedule of fixed asset replacement with costs to assist.
 Complete pilot project to evaluate tools to support patron-initiated interlibrary loan with other Northern California libraries.
 Complete evaluation of open-source integrated library system and implement if appropriate.
 Implement the vision for a “digital branch,” an enhanced web site and suite of online services.
 Partner with North Bay libraries and museums in the “Discover & Go” museum pass program for library cardholders.
 Complete the information gathering phase of a strategic planning process.
 Complete a classification and compensation study.
 Pursue multi-year naming rights sponsorships for portions of the racing facility.
 Perform energy and water use audits to determine if additional upgrades can result in cost savings.
 Collaborate with other organizations to research bonds or other funding mechanisms to do community benefit facility improvements,
particularly in the area of sustainability.
 Further implement physical barrier removal in year five (of twelve) of the County’s updated ADA transition plan.
 Begin implementation of Comprehensive County Facilities Plan recommendations, including planning for future development.
 Realize detention services central kitchen concept.
 Support Sheriff Radio Bureau upgrades to County radio communications tower infrastructure and implementation of BayWEB
regional interoperability project.
 Complete Electric Vehicle Charging Stations – Phase 2, north County locations.
 Complete Board of Supervisor’s Audio/Visual System Upgrades.
 Complete assessment of Department of Health Services’ interim space needs.
 Assist Human Services with expansion at Apollo Way to support Adoption Services.
 Continue to support Sheriff with improvements in MADF and NCDF supporting improved security and operational needs.
 Plan and execute relocation of Fleet and Materials Lab as required by agreement with State for new Courthouse.
 Complete design and construction of Phase 1 improvements for Taylor Mountain Regional Park & Open Space Preserve to open a
new trailhead on Petaluma Hill Road.
 Completion of the Hudeman Slough preliminary design and environmental document for performing facility and accessibility
improvements.
 Completion of ADA renovations at Larson Park.
 Complete ADA renovations to the Jetty Day Use Area at Doran Beach Regional Park.
