The 2016-2017 Proposed Budget recommends $205,952,964 in appropriations for this
priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $75,312,376 in
department revenue, $126,808,186 in a contribution from the General Fund and
$3,832,402 in fund balance.
The CEO – Office of Emergency Services/Fire Warden will maintain all core service
functions and expand the Countywide Security Program with support of an additional
Deputy Sheriff in the upcoming year. Additional funding of $305,965 is provided to
support increased costs for fire dispatch, which are fully offset by a corresponding
decrease in General Fund law enforcement dispatch costs charged to the Sheriff.
Funding to restore a previously unfunded position for compliance with Homeland
Security requirements is recommended, for a total additional General Fund contribution
of $456,852.
The District Attorney is working toward enhancing overall support, supervision and
performance of prosecutors and investigators with the implementation of Public Safety Restoration. They will also continue to expand the use of electronic data in order to
reduce reliance on paper filings and discovery and to increase efficiency. Included in
the Proposed Budget is funding for three existing positions in the Consumer Fraud Unit
that have been previously funded from revenues received from prosecution of consumer
fraud cases. The District Attorney will present the “business case” for continuation of
this function prior to Mid-Year. Further, funding is provided for the purchase of portable
radios, IT storage and software and the
reclassification of a Clerical Manager to an IT
Manager II.
The Probation Department anticipates maintaining
current service and staffing levels as well as filling
all of the approved Public Safety Restoration
positions. The Department continues to work on
improving data collections and evaluating juvenile
justice programs. Included in the Proposed
Budget is $29,000 to support Emergency Vehicle
Operations Course (EVOC) training for 116 staff
members and the purchase of a replacement
server funded by the Integrated Criminal Justice
Information System (ICJIS) project. Two additional
positions are recommended using Corrections
Performance Incentive Funds. The Department
has requested a proxy card system at the Adult
Probation Office that will be evaluated for future
budget consideration.
The Public Defender anticipates maintaining current service levels and staffing positions
supported by Public Safety Restoration funding in 2016-2017. The Department
continues to receive funding from the Community Correction Partnership to support two
Attorney positions and a Legal Clerk, as well as funds for the Indigent Defense budget
to address increased demands as a result of realignment.
The Sheriff anticipates increasing current service and staffing levels with the use of
funds received from Public Safety Restoration. The Department has undertaken an
ambitious effort to fill the Department’s remaining vacant positions and fill an additional
seven Deputy Sheriff positions and two Cook positions that will be implemented as a
part of Phase II of the Public Safety Restoration program. The Department expects to
be able to complete several service restorations within the 2016-2017 Budget Year
which are full deployment of the Sheriff’s Team Investigating Narcotics and Gangs
(STING), restoration of the Community Resource Deputies, and increasing the number
of Detectives devoted to General Crimes Investigations. Funding in the amount of
$46,560 is recommended to supplement several advanced training programs for new
Academy graduates to support streamlined training efforts. Included in the budget is
funding in the amount of $250,000 to install a 160’ radio tower in partnership with the
City of Waterford. This installation will fix a dead zone in the Sheriff’s radio
communication footprint, allowing deputies to respond faster in the area of Waterford
and support officer safety. The Sheriff’s Department identified $981,395 of one-time
costs for replacement/upgrade in safety equipment and facilities; the Chief Executive Office is recommending funding in the amount of $500,000, to allow the Sheriff to
prioritize spending on the most critical projects.
 The 2016-2017 Proposed Budget recommends $557,593,950 in appropriations for this
priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $533,578,685 in
department revenue, $6,832,342 in fund balance/retained earnings and $17,182,923 in
General Fund revenue contribution. The net General Fund revenue allocation for
Behavioral Health and Recovery Services’ programs, including Mental Health and
Public Guardian, is $1,980,924; for the Community Services Agency programs,
including General Assistance, In-Home Supportive Services Provider wages, Public
Authority Benefits, Public Authority Administration, Public Economic Assistance, and
Services and Support, the net General Fund revenue allocation is $8,802,661; for the
Health Services Agency programs, including Clinics and Ancillary Services, Indigent
Health Care, and Public Health, the net General Fund revenue allocation is $5,767,375;
for the Area Agency on Aging and Veterans the net General Fund revenue is $631,963.
The Department of Aging and Veterans Services Proposed Budget totals over $4 million
and includes sufficient Older American Act (OAA) funding that will provide through
Howard Training Center (HTC), the Senior Meals Program provider, five days per week
of meal service at all 13 Congregate Meal sites located throughout the County. The
Department continues to partner with the Veterans Advisory Commission to develop a
Veterans Center Facility.
Behavioral Health and Recovery Services, with a total Proposed Budget of $109.9
million, continues to work with the Chief Executive Office on implementing strategies
that reduce costs and preserve scarce reserves. The final component of the strategic
plan for the 24/7 Secure Mental Health Services that was approved by the Board of
Supervisors in November 2012, implementation of a Crisis Stabilization Unit (CSU) has
been accomplished. The CSU opened at the beginning of March 2016.
In Community Services Agency (CSA) the Proposed Budget totals $338.8 million. This
includes Federal and State funding in support of Health Care Reform and Welfare to
Work early engagement, family support and subsidized employment. It is estimated
that 1 in 2 persons residing in Stanislaus County now have access to health care and
nutritional assistance. At the same time, the number of persons on cash aid
(CalWORKs and General Assistance) have decreased from a high of one in 16.3
persons receiving services in Fiscal Year 2010-2011, to one in 21 persons receiving
services through December 2015. The Health Services
Agency’s Proposed
Budget totals $81.2
million and reflects a
permanent reduction of
over $10 million in 1991
Health Realignment
funding as the result of
the State’s redirection of
funding from the
implementation of the
Affordable Care Act and
Medi-Cal expansion,
which began January 1,
2014.
The 2016-2017 Proposed Budget recommends $31,091,045 in appropriations for this
priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $29,701,277 in
department revenue, $491,810 in revenue from the General Fund and $897,958 in fund
balance.
Alliance Worknet will begin
experiencing the effects of the
Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act (WIOA)
requirements in Budget Year
2016-2017. WIOA is requiring
the Department to procure
Business Services, One Stop
Operator Services and Career
Services. The Business
Services procurement has
taken place and will be
provided through a vendor
beginning July 2016, therefore
requiring a Reduction-in-Force
(RIF) of six positions.
Additionally, the Department
will begin the Request for Proposals process for the procurement of One Stop Operator
and Career Services during the Budget Year with a corresponding RIF to ensure full
compliance with WIOA by July 1, 2017.
The Library is primarily
funded by a voter
approved 1/8-cent sales
tax, which represents
approximately 87% of
the Library’s total
revenue to support the
Library operations in
Budget Year 2016-2017.
The voter approved 1/8-
cent sales tax sunsets
on June 30, 2018. In
Budget Year 2016-2017,
the Library will increase
its hours and will be
open on Fridays at an
estimated cost of $600,000 annually, beginning in July 2016.
The 2016-2017 Proposed Budget recommends $5,007,020 in appropriations for this
priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $3,556,510 in
department revenue, $1,434,310 in General Fund contribution and $16,200 in fund
balance.
The Agricultural Commissioner will be able to maintain the current level of service
provided to the community through the use of a portion of the Net County Cost savings
from prior years and the use of increased State funding to protect the County’s valuable
agricultural resources. Net County Cost savings from prior years will be used to
upgrade a service road and add off-road parking at the Agricultural Center. The University of California
(UC) Cooperative Stanislaus
County provides funding for the
Department’s operational
expenses, including the
facilities that house UC
Cooperative Extension,
vehicles and support staff that
work with the UC Cooperative
Extension advisors and
paraprofessionals in program
delivery. Included in the
Proposed Budget is a
recommendation to fund a
seasonal Agricultural Assistant
to assist UC Cooperative
Extension advisors.
The 2016-2017 Proposed Budget recommends $115,516,734 in appropriations for this
priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $92,748,326 in department revenue, $4,875,731 in a General Fund contribution and $17,892,677 in
fund balance/retained earnings.
The Department of Environmental Resources will continue to provide for mandated
education, investigation and inspection services for programs. Restoring positions will
increase service levels in the Code Enforcement, Environmental Health, and Landfill
Divisions. In 2016, the Department received a Sustainable Groundwater Planning
(SGWP) Grant for Stressed Basins from the California Department of Water Resources.
The SGWP is designed to encourage sustainable management of groundwater
resources by providing funding for projects that support the Sustainable Groundwater
Management Act (SGMA) through planning and implementation.
The Department of Parks and Recreation will continue to maintain parks and facilities
with an expanded level of service. Re-evaluating priorities and adjusting the workforce
to the priorities identified will result in the continued ability to efficiently carry out their
mission and provide basic levels of services at neighborhood parks, cemeteries,
bridges, County Centers and office buildings, Woodward Reservoir and Modesto
Reservoir Regional Parks. Further, the marketing plan developed in Fiscal Year 2015-
2016 focuses on improving the park system's performance, to include special events as
well as target audience knowledge and awareness campaigns with the goal of
increasing patron/park visits.
The Planning and Community Development focus for the upcoming fiscal year is on
maintaining core services while fulfilling all State and Federal mandated requirements
relating to land use activities, building codes, special revenue grants, and the
administration of the Stanislaus County Successor and Successor Housing Agencies (of
the former Stanislaus County Redevelopment Agency). The Department will also focus
on land-use and subdivision application processing, local oversight of permitted surface
mining operations, implementation of the Williamson Act, and maintenance of the
County General Plan in compliance with State mandates and local needs.
The Department of Public Works, funded through Federal and State transportation
funding sources, will
maximize use of these
funds for the operation and
maintenance of the
transportation infrastructure
in Stanislaus County.
Current funding is
inadequate to maintain the
roadway system in a
sustainable manner.
Maintenance efforts will
include repairs,
improvements, and
preventive maintenance
performed on an annual
basis.
The 2016-2017 Recommended Proposed Budget includes $203,857,372 in
appropriations for this priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of
$136,932,602 in department revenue, $65,547,356 in contributions from the General
Fund, known as Net County Cost, and $1,377,414 in fund balance/retained earnings
usage.
The Assessor budget provides funding for the addition of three positions. An Account
Clerk III will provide the necessary staffing to complete tasks in a timely manner,
decreasing the lag time between the processing of recorded documents and the actual
recording time and increasing the efficiency in providing homeowner’s exemption claims
to new owners. An Appraiser Technician will help complete tasks generated by a sharp
increase in plantings and improvements to agricultural properties, as well as track and
assess new subdivisions resulting from an uptick in housing industry activity.
Additionally, an Application Specialist III will assist in digitizing assessor map books into
a geodatabase, develop map layers and applications that will allow the data to be more
accessible, and provide more real-time updates to the Geographical Information
Systems base parcel layer. The $183,504 cost is funded through additional net county
cost. The Auditor-Controller budget includes $5,000 in additional net county cost contribution
to fund an extra help Confidential Assistant III, which will provide the necessary support
for the administrative division within the Department.
The Board of Supervisors anticipates maintaining current service and staffing levels
through the use of all remaining net county cost savings earned in prior years.
Additionally, as a result of increased salary and benefits costs and the full use of prior
year savings, the Department requires an additional General Fund contribution of
$62,826 to fully fund currently filled, authorized positions, thereby moving to Phase II of
the Net County Cost Savings program.
The Chief Executive Office – Operations and Services division anticipates maintaining
current service levels for existing programs and projects the use of all (approximately
$1.3 million) remaining net county cost savings earned in prior years.
The Chief Executive Office – County Operations budget includes recommended funding
for one-time costs associated with opening the new Stanislaus Veterans Center and
projects in the Plant Acquisition budget. Additionally, increased appropriations in
Appropriations for Contingencies are recommended to provide funding to cover the 5%
vacancy rate at year-end for those departments who are successful at filling their
allocation positions; funding for the initial opening of the AB 900 Phase II Public Safety
Center Expansion Projects estimated for March 2017; funding for expert witnesses for
the District Attorney; and funding for the Presidential election in November 2016.
The Clerk-Recorder – Elections Division anticipates a large turnout for the Presidential
General Election in November 2016. Preliminary quotes by vendors project costs in
excess of the Proposed Budget by approximately $145,000. Voter participation for the
June 2016 Presidential Primary will provide an indicator of the potential turnout in
November. It is recommended that these costs be monitored and re-evaluated in a
subsequent budget cycle to better appropriate election funding. Funds in the amount of
$150,000 have been reserved in Appropriations for Contingencies for the potential
increase in costs for the Presidential Election.
The General Services Agency is adding three new Maintenance Engineer II positions to
the Facilities Maintenance division in Budget Year 2016-2017. Two positions will
provide general maintenance of buildings, and the third position will provide support to
the lock shop. In the Fleet Services division, fund balance will be used to purchase fleet
management software that will support GPS tracking to improve vehicle utilization and
tracking.
Enhance and extend the County Security Program to include additional training, assessments
and responses to security issues
 Train Operational Area partners on the use of the Mass Notification System to improve local
notification in the event of an emergency
 Update the County Hazard Mitigation Plan to comply with the Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000 as
well as Homeland Security and Emergency Management Performance grant guidelines.
 Develop an Operational Flood Response Plan
 Partner with the Capital Projects team to develop a plan for the Alternate Emergency Operation
Center site(s)
With the funding from the Strategic Technology initiative, the Department anticipates purchasing
scanners to speed up the process of importing cases into the electronic document management
system. The Department anticipates increasing the eDiscovery process for more efficient
delivery.
 Continue implementation of the Fire Investigation Unit (FIU) to model collaboration between city
and county law enforcement and fire agencies in order to establish the fiscal, professional and
ethical benefits of this approach to fire investigation and arson prosecution.
 Reduce backlog of open homicide cases to honor the rights of crime victims and reduce county
costs associated with lengthy pre-trial incarceration.
 Pursue grant opportunities that would enhance services to crime victims by placing specially
trained and qualified victim advocates in positions to work more closely with victims of gang
violence, elder abuse and/or where other gaps in services are identified. Expected results would
include better delivery and connection to service providers, which would lead to increased
willingness to cooperate with and participate in the criminal prosecution of offenders.
Concealed Carry Weapons module integration in the Sheriff System.
 Implement Enhanced Electronic Document Management (EDM) at the Sheriff’s Office.
 Develop Minute Order integration with the Courts in the Sheriff System.
 Upgrade the Probation System with the latest ICJIS Core Security System.
 Upgrade the Public Defender System to be compatible with modern Internet Browsers and
Mobile Devices.
 Implement EDM and integrate EDM within the Public Defender’s System.
 Upgrade the District Attorney System to the Oracle 12c database.
 Migrate the District Attorney System to a virtualized infrastructure.
 Implement the Deputy District Attorney Case Review and Issuance Module in the District
Attorney System.
 Develop new record sealing features to comply with an amendment signed into law under the
781 Welfare and Institutions Code (781WIC) in the Probation System.
 Upgrade the Probation System with the latest ICJIS core security system.
 Upgrade the EDM Interface in the Probation System.
 Contributed to a safe and secure community by providing local law enforcement, County
Departments, and other agencies vital, real-time, criminal justice information.
Implement Probation Violation Matrix Grids for Adult and Juvenile Divisions to aid officers in
decision-making process.
 Implement community based strategies and prevention programs to increase protective
factors in young people and the community as a whole.
 Improve services for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) youth through
increased training and awareness.
 Implement e-Payment system giving Probation clients the opportunity to pay fines/fees and
victim restitution from any internet enabled device.
Continue rebuilding the investigative branch of the office as part of the Criminal Justice
Restoration Initiative.
 Continue filing petitions for sentence reductions under Proposition 47.
 Provide excellent representation to all the clients of the Stanislaus County Public Defender.
Complete the second phase of Public Safety Restoration which will provide an additional seven
Deputies to the Operations Division and two Assistant Cooks to the Detention Division.
 Finish Construction of the AB 900-Phase II Project, to include the Day Reporting Center, Inmate
Medical Mental Healthcare Units, two Maximum Security Housing Units, Central Control and
Clinic Administration, as well as the County-funded companion project, which is comprised of an
Intake/Release/Transportation/Administration Building.
Select a construction firm and break ground on the SB-1022 Project, which is comprised of the
Re-entry and Alternatives to Custody Training Center (REACT).
 Implement phased staffing plan to occupy the AB 900 Project Units and functions.
 Review and revise Court Security staffing levels to meet the needs of court services while
ensuring public safety needs are met.
 Assist with planning and build out of new Courthouse project.
 Enhance public safety communication by identifying dark areas and planning installation projects
to expand the radio footprint of the Sheriff’s communication system.
Continue the successful collaboration with city and county governments and non-profit agencies
to alert seniors and caregivers to numerous scams and other forms of elder abuse.
 Continue to recruit volunteers to assist with various programs, particularly seeking bi-lingual
volunteers
 Plan greater number of outreach events to low income seniors, increasing their awareness of
services and programs available to assist them
 Collaborate with the Healthy Aging Association to expand the Green Bag program of free fresh
fruits and vegetables to low income seniors, to Patterson and Riverbank
 Promote the establishment of Senior Community Gardens and Senior Walking Groups to
increase healthy lifestyles for seniors
 Assist seniors who participate in the Home Delivered Meals Program to understand and
participate in other programs such as Project Hope. Students from the California State
University, Stanislaus or Modesto Junior College will do in-home assessments of seniors for
these programs
 Coordinate veterans services in the County with the various private and non-profit organizations,
formalizing partnerships with these organizations so they can provide services at the new
Veterans Facility
 Transition the operation of the Veterans Transportation program from the Veterans
Administration to MOVE and the Veterans Services Office, to increase the number of veterans
being served and will expand the volunteer driver base
 The Veterans Services Office will continue to participate in the Board of Supervisors’ Focus on
Prevention Initiative, particularly as it relates to homeless veterans in Stanislaus County.
Work closely with the Veterans Foundation to identify and write grants to expand services for all
veterans in Stanislaus County
Decrease the number of children being hospitalized through the implementation of the Crisis
Intervention Program and Full Service Partnership for children
 Hire a consultant and complete the department-wide plan to accommodate space needs, both
short-term and long-term
 Complete implementation of the Managed Care Operations module and the Ultra-Sensitive
Exchange platform in the Electronic Health Record
 Develop a fiscally sound, compliant plan for the implementation of a Drug Medi-Cal Organized
Delivery System
 Integrate new Parent Partners into the Children’s and Transitional Age Youth Systems of Care
 Increase access to assessments for services by establishing walk-in clinic hours
 Improve overall quality of care in the Forensic System of Care through the development of a
Quality Improvement Committee for this System of Care
 Increase participation of consumers and family members in various BHRS Committees
 Increase training opportunities for community members around suicide prevention and mental
health awareness
 Decrease no show rates in BHRS programs
Maintain collection and distribution at $50,000,000 of child support to families
 Collect 69.5% of current court ordered support
 Continue to obtain a support order on 96% of cases
 Maintain the high ranking of 13th among all 51 counties for cost effectiveness
 Continue to actively participate with other agencies in the countywide Focus on Prevention in
the area of Strengthening Families
 Complete year four of Pathways to Self-Sufficiency grant project and anticipate enrollment of
1500 participants into the program
Implement Year 2 of the 2015-2017 Strategic Plan
 Maintain positive trends in the reduction of repeat child maltreatment reports
 Increase the number of children who are cognitively, socially, and behaviorally ready to enter
school
 Maintain access and maximize utilization of children’s preventative and ongoing health care
 Increase the number of healthy births from high risk pregnancies
Provide a customer focused culture that supports self-reliance and is responsive to the needs of
the community
 Encourage and expand community partnerships and collaboration opportunities
 Enhance operational efficiencies and effectiveness through innovation and continuous service
delivery improvement
 Encourage and support the Strengthening Families Framework
 Support a healthy, diverse and engaged workforce
 Enhance financial management practices to maximize funding and ensure program sustainability
Develop new Strategic Business and Facility Plan addressing the changing healthcare
environment, and current and future organizational and community needs
 Achieve Public Health Accreditation and fulfill responsibilities of the Ten Essential Public Health
Services
 Achieve annual recertification of the Federally Qualified Health Center Look-Alike designation
and develop upcoming Five-Year Project Plan for the Renewal Application
 Conduct an Emergency Preparedness exercise with community partners
 Receive renewed and new grant support to enable multiple initiatives
 Continue efforts to improve efficiencies, enhance revenue, and address workforce development
issues and facility needs, while meeting fiscal targets, programmatic objectives and achieving
compliance
 Attest for Meaningful Use Stage Two, Implement Electronic Medical Record Care Management
Module, Implement Data Exchange capability between Behavioral Health and Recovery Services
and Health Services Agency, and Develop Plan for community-wide Health Information
Exchange
Prepare and release a Request for Proposals (RFP) for Workforce Innovation and Opportunity
Act (WIOA) Career and One-Stop Services. Alliance Worknet will be transitioning to a new
service delivery system as well.
 Ensure WIOA internal services and contracted services are fully migrated to the State CalJOBS
Database and workforce management system.
 Prepare for and ensure WIOA transitional process has minimal impact to customer base.
 Ensure new Workforce Development Board is well-orientated in their role and responsibilities and
has a good understanding of WIOA rule, requirements and departmental services.
Develop a new five year Library Strategic Plan that will serve as a flexible management tool,
representing the vision and values of Stanislaus County communities now and into the future. In
addition, it will set a vision for library service that is both inspiring and innovative, and guide the
organization to achieve selected priorities.
 Create a Maker Space at the Modesto Library in support of academic and career paths, and to
help customers explore and develop 21st century skills and experience STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering and Math) learning through self-directed, collaborative and creative
hands-on activities and crafts in an informal environment.
 Expand children’s computer areas to include additional early literacy learning stations (ELS), and
have laptops and mobile devices available for children and teens to search, discover and learn at
their libraries.
Implement the new State of California mobile application (CalPEATS) designed to track all field
related pesticide enforcement activities.
 Implement a mobile application (CalTrap) designed to track all field related pest detection
activities.
 Support the Asian citrus psyllid quarantines established by the State and any related pest
detection activities.
 Enhance building security through the addition of video cameras and expand the keyless entry
locations.
Deliver precise, weekly, crop water use reports to local growers and consultants. This information
can be used to increase irrigation efficiency.
 Carry out nine research projects covering various aspects of pest management in walnuts,
almonds, cherries, and tomatoes. Some projects have a multi-state and national significance
(e.g. Brown Marmorated Stink Bug, a new invasive insect pest of agricultural crops).
 Continue Medusahead research and add projects focusing on management practices to control
Barbed Goatgrass, another non-native invasive annual grass with no forage value for livestock.
 Determine baseline data of sorghum silage currently utilized on California dairies.
 Increase outreach and programmatic delivery to underserved youth, families and communities in
order to serve more diverse audiences and establish an urban farm/science literacy program in
the airport area of Modesto.
Select a consultant to prepare the Programmatic EIR for groundwater
 Implement an improved residential curbside recycling program
 Construct Ash Cell 4 at the Fink Road Landfill
 Continue the implementation of the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act
 Re-evaluate the County’s historic “evergreen” Franchise Refuse Agreements
Development and construction of the Modesto Reservoir Fuel Pump Project
 Assistance with the completion of the ADA Self-evaluation and Transition Plan
Continue to actively participate in the County’s Focus on Prevention efforts by partnering with
others to explore best funding award models and identify opportunities for improvement through
collaboration.
 Continue working with the local development community to identify process improvement
opportunities.
 Review development processes, to include the zoning and subdivision ordinances, in an effort to
streamline permitting requirements.
 Establish the infrastructure and processes for implementation of electronic plan check review for
building permits.
 Update the Department’s records retention policy to reflect electronic storage.
Complete the Claribel Road and BNSF Signal Project
 Complete the Hatch Road and Santa Fe Avenue widening and signalization project
 Complete the Sperry Road reconstruction project
 Complete the St. Francis Bridge Replacement Project
 Complete the Shiells Ave Bridge Replacement Project
 Complete the McHenry Road Bridge over the Stanislaus Replacement Project
The Assessor plans to begin using the Megabyte “Appraisal Suite” for the valuation of residential
properties. This will include direct sale enrollment, an appraiser transfer analysis module, and
the ability to automatically value and enroll values for the annual January 1st market valuation of
properties assessed below their Proposition 13 value.
 The Department plans to implement/begin the migration of Assessor mapping from the current
AutoCAD platform to the creation and maintenance of Assessor maps in the Geographic
Information System (GIS) geodatabase parcel fabric, as outlined in the IT Innovations Program
agenda item approved by the Board of Supervisors on March 8, 2016. This transition will
improve overall efficiency of service to the public and Stanislaus County departments via the GIS
system.
 Implementation will proceed on the scanning of microfilm and microfiche into searchable digital
formats and the scanning of paper appraisal files as outlined in the IT Innovations Program
agenda item approved on March 8, 2016 by the Board of Supervisors. This program will make
resources readily available at various work stations, significantly reducing the time required to
retrieve data.
 The Department is set to upgrade current Commercial-Industrial valuation databases to create
interactive rather than static working copies of appraisal records in order to facilitate more
efficient appraiser valuation and supervisor review processes and reduce overall cost.
Complete the in-house upgrade process of the Oracle PeopleSoft version to 9.2
 Continue the in-house upgrade process of implementing the Oracle PeopleSoft Absence
Management module
 Implement Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB) Pronouncements 73 & 74
 Revise entries in the Oracle fixed asset module to clearly identify specific assets as a whole
 Comprehensive review of the assumptions and methodologies used to prepare the annual Cost
Plan
Focus on Prevention - Continue support for the Stewardship Council to include all four priority
areas: preventing homelessness; strengthening families, investing in children and youth and
reducing recidivism. Specifically, hold a second Community Convening, finalize goal metrics,
continue work with the Homeless Action Council to reduce homelessness and consider support
for Post Release Services to reduce recidivism that could include housing.
 Invest in Technology – Continue to evaluate enterprise solutions to improve technology
infrastructure and countywide automated efficiencies in business operations.
 Enhance Public Information - Build upon the newly designed Stancounty.com website to provide
information to the Public that is connected to an expanded Social Media presence to deliver our
own message(s) directly to the Community.
 Stimulate Economic Development - Consider infrastructure investments in areas that will bring
jobs to our Community with positive return on investment for the County.
 Advocating for Unimpaired Water Flows - Continue to monitor and aggressively lobby for
Stanislaus County Irrigation Districts and residents regarding Federal and State agencies that
are engaged in attempting to influence the amount of unimpeded flows on rivers in the Central
Valley. The County is opposed to any law or regulation that inappropriately increases unimpaired
flows or that does not appropriately address non-flow alternatives.
Continue a re-evaluation process around the County’s Mission, Vision and Values to develop
priorities and goals that will take the County to Budget Year 2020 and beyond
 Refine the County Budget as a policy document, to include return on investment and
performance outcomes
 Lead the County in performance visioning and reporting of business results
 Design a two-year budget strategy for implementation in 2017-2018
 Implement Phase II of Technology Innovation to include enterprise-wide automation projects and
Department projects designed to move customers on-line instead of in-line
 Strengthen the connection between County Department services and Focus on Prevention
priorities and results areas
 Implement Phase II of Public Safety Restoration
 Complete construction of AB 900 Phase II Public Safety Center Expansion projects
 Lead several key business visioning and facility planning efforts for departments in A Healthy
Community
Disability Management – work with Chief Executive Office Human Resources staff to revamp the
pre-employment drug testing and physical evaluation process that comports to State and Federal
legal requirements, and supports the County’s mission, vision, and core values
 Employee Benefits – evaluate, and implement if possible, a standard process for retirees, COBRA
enrollees, and employees on unpaid leaves of absences to make automated payments for
healthcare premium costs
 Liability and Insurance – continue to work with County Counsel and California State Association of
Counties (CSAC) – Excess Insurance Authority (EIA) on implementing the County’s updated
insurance requirements and contract language templates
 Safety – continue to track department training compliance, review and revise existing safety
policies as appropriate, and continue to promote safety throughout the organization to maintain the
County’s lower-than-average Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) incident rate
Conduct the 2016 Presidential General Election
 Implement the electronic filing system as part of the “on-line not in-line” initiative
 Place Vital Record images into electronic viewing status
Provide State mandated training on preventing workplace harassment and bullying
 Provide State mandated ethics training to elected and appointed officials
 Maintain compliance with County safety policies
 Enforce bail bond forfeitures
 Provide timely legal support for County programs and projects
Complete roll out of new facility work order system, including mobile functions
 Finalize GPS tracking software implementation in Fleet Services
 Update and revise County Purchasing Policies and Procedures
Geographic Information Services (GIS) – Work closely with GIS internal and external customers
to develop a GIS Strategic Plan. Update the GIS website to incorporate features and functionality
that will accommodate the customer’s needs. Develop and implement a new billing methodology
for Proposed Budget 2017-2018 CAP cost.
 Oracle Financial System to version 12.2 – Upgrade will be completed using County Staff.
Implement online patching ability for the application to eliminate down time.
 Connectivity Wide Area Networks – Complete the conversion from AT&T Customized Switched
Metro Ethernet Service (CSME) to AT&T Switch Ethernet (ASE) connectivity. These conversions
for existing sites will allow for improved connectivity at higher bandwidth and lower cost.
 Countywide Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) – Server infrastructure will be upgraded and
upon completion SBT will begin implementing the strategy for 10th Street Place VoIP.
 Innovation Projects – Development and implementation of the Probation Mobile ICJIS; Probation
E-Payments; Animal Services Customer Portal; and Public Defender Electronic Document
Management solution projects.
Facilitate a means to notify new owners of secured tax bills in a more timely manner
 Take pre-emptive steps in contacting delinquent tax sale property owners in order to reduce the
number of properties going to tax sale
 Enhance collection measures to reduce the current unsecured property tax delinquency rate
 Continue skip tracing project in Revenue Recovery to include an additional 50,000 accounts
 Enhance Revenue Recovery staff’s technical capabilities through training and increased
knowledge of system functions to improve operational efficiencies
