The 2013-2014 Final Budget recommends $189,403,998 in appropriations for this
priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $76,809,831 in
department revenue, $111,345,489 in revenue from the General Fund and $1,248,678
in fund balance.
In 2011, Assembly Bill 109 made fundamental changes to California’s correctional
system. It realigned custodial and community supervision responsibility for non-serious,
non-violent, and non-sex offenders, as well as supervision of lower level adult parolees
returning from state prison sentences to counties. In Fiscal Year 2011-2012, counties
received nine months of funding; Stanislaus County’s allocation was $6.6 million. In
Fiscal Year 2012-2013 the County received funding of $12.4 million. The base
allocation for Fiscal Year 2013-2014 funding is $14.5 million. In addition to the 2013-
2014 base allocation, counties will be receiving growth allocations that will be distributed
in early fall. The 2013-2014 Fiscal Year base allocation is included in the
Recommended Final Budget.
Stanislaus County partnered with the State of California to build a 60-bed Juvenile
Commitment Facility. The project was funded with a combination of State grant funds
and local match, and achieved substantial completion in February 2013. The Probation
Department began transitioning minors to the newly completed facility in June 2013. To
reflect the appropriations needed to operate the new facility, a new budget, Probation –
Juvenile Commitment Facility is included in the 2013-2014 Budget.
The District Attorney continues to be challenged in providing services due to increases
in felony filings and a reduction from 45 to 33 attorney positions over the last five years.
The net county cost contribution for the Vertical Prosecution Block Grant for the 2013-
2014 Fiscal Year has been transferred to the Criminal Division.
The Public Defender – Indigent Defense Fund saw an increase in appropriations in the
2012-2013 Fiscal Year. The proposed level of funding in the 2013-2014 Fiscal Year
may be insufficient to pay the cost of providing these services for the entire fiscal year.
While the cost of providing these services is hard to predict, it seems likely that the
costs will be substantially the same as last fiscal year. The Department has received an
additional $90,000 in funding as part of the AB 109 Community Corrections Partnership
funding allocation. If this additional funding is not sufficient, the Department may need
to address the shortfall during the 2013-2014 Fiscal Year.
As part of the 2013-2014 Fiscal Year budget, the Sheriff’s Department moved the Court
Security Budget from the General Fund to a non interest bearing Special Revenue
Fund. This fund requires a General Fund net county cost to cover the Cost Allocation
Plan (CAP) charges that are not allowable under the Trial Court Funding Act.
The Chief Executive Office – Office of Emergency Services, District Attorney, Probation,
Public Defender and Sheriff’s Department were able to carry forward 100% net county
cost savings from prior fiscal years and 75% of their 2012-2013 net county cost savings.
These increases are reflected in the 2013-2014 Recommended Final Budget.
The 2013-2014 Final Budget recommends $505,565,716 in appropriations for
this priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of
$481,060,001 in department revenue, $20,189,676 in revenue from the General
Fund and $4,316,039 in fund balance/retained earnings. The net General Fund
revenue allocation for Behavioral Health and Recovery Services’ programs
including Mental Health, and Public Guardian is $1,949,372; for the Community
Services Agency programs including General Assistance, In-Home Supportive
Services Provider wages, Public Authority benefits, Public Economic Assistance,
and Services and Support, the net General Fund revenue allocation is
$11,314,440; for the Health Services Agency programs including Clinics and
Ancillary Services, Indigent Health Care, and Public Health, the net General
Fund revenue allocation is $6,369,959.
Area Agency on Aging (AAA) will receive a reduction in Older Americans Act
(OAA) funding of $132,853. Although this reduction of approximately 8% is
significant, contracting service providers will utilize other funding sources, such
as donations, to offset the funding reductions to prevent an impact to program
service levels. Howard Training Center (HTC), the Senior Meals Program
provider, has committed to using community and participant donations and
fundraising revenue to provide one additional day per week (for a total of four
days a week) of meal service at ten of the fourteen Senior Meals sites. The cost
of providing the additional meals will be covered by HTC, and is above the
amount of meals contracted with the AAA.
BHRS continues to work with the Chief Executive Office on implementing
strategies that reduce costs and preserve scarce reserves. This includes
implementation of elements of the strategic plan for the 24/7 Secure Mental
Health Services that was approved by the Board of Supervisors in November
2012, that recommended development of a continuum of care. The centerpiece
of the continuum is the development of a 16-bed Psychiatric Health Facility
(PHF) to provide a lower cost option for hospitalizations to help mitigate the
County’s costs for services needed. The PHF is anticipated to be ready for full
operation in 2014. Development of a crisis stabilization unit that would relieve
certain hospital admissions and emergency room pressure is also in process of
being implemented. Although such cost-reduction strategies are underway, it is
anticipated that there will be significant exposures in Managed Care in the
upcoming budget year. Additionally, County Match of $547,436 was included the
in the Adopted Proposed Budget for the Public Guardian. This mandated match
requirement was historically funded by BHRS departmental fund balance, but is a
General Fund obligation.
In Community Services Agency (CSA) the Final Budget totals $305.8 million, an
overall increase of approximately $6 million over the 2013-2014 Adopted
Proposed Budget. This increase is funded by new allocations provided through the Final State Budget, primarily for the implementation of Health Care Reform
and Welfare to Work early engagement, family support and subsidized
employment. Also included in this budget is $49,500 for three additional Sober
Living beds. County Match for this non-mandated service totals $14,850 and will
be paid through a partner contribution by Nirvana.
The Health Services Agency’s Final Budget totals $89.7 million and includes a
reduction of $3.3 million in the Indigent Health Care Program for the
implementation and first six months of the Affordable Care Act and Medi-Cal
expansion, set to begin January 1, 2014. Also included is an increase of $3.2
million in the Clinics and Ancillary Services division to implement an
Intergovernmental Transfer program. Similar to Fiscal Year 2012-2013, the
Health Services Agency anticipates that it will be unable to maintain the required
level of services to qualified Medically Indigent Adults (MIA) or meet the County’s
mandated requirements without an additional General Fund contribution during
the fiscal year. In Fiscal Year 2012-2013, retained earnings from Clinics and
Ancillary Services were used to address the full exposure, however, for Fiscal
Year 2013-2014 it is anticipated that a significant County contribution will be
required.
Funding is not included for the additional needs identified for Behavioral Health
and Recovery Services and the Health Services Agency; however, the Match
Contingency Fund funded initially at approximately $4.8 million has been
reserved as a possible source for these increased exposures and funding of
these critical programs for the upcoming fiscal year.
The 2013-2014 Final Budget recommends $27,551,362 in appropriations for this priority
area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $26,175,472 in department
revenue, $491,810 in a General Fund contribution and $884,080 in fund balance.
For Fiscal Year 2013-2014, Alliance revenues are up slightly from Fiscal Year 2012-
2013 but will continue to result in strict limitations on the number of individuals referred
to vocational training programs as well as limiting the funding available for on-the-job
training reimbursements to employers. Training referrals will have to be limited to
programs that prepare individuals for only those occupations that are in very high
demand by local businesses. The Library is primarily funded by a voter approved 1/8-cent sales tax, which represents
approximately 91% of the Library’s total revenue to support the Library operations in
Fiscal Year 2013-2014. The voter approved 1/8-cent sales tax did sunset on June 30,
2012, but was extended through a successful local measure for an additional five years.
In past years, State Public Library funds were combined with County Library funds to
contract with the Stanislaus Literacy Center to provide literacy services funded at
$100,000 annually. The Library does not expect State Public Library funds will be
received in Fiscal Year 2013-2014, and as such, the contract has been reduced to
$70,000. The Library and the Literacy Center are committed to working closely together
to ensure individuals and families continue to receive literacy services.
The 2013-2014 Final Budget recommends $5,395,918 in appropriations for this priority
area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $3,000,457 in department
revenue, $2,372,146 in General Fund contribution and $23,315 in fund balance.
The Agricultural Commissioner will be able to maintain the current level of service
provided to the community through the use of a portion of the Net County Cost savings
from prior years, and the use of increased State funding to protect the County’s valuable
agricultural resources. This is primarily funded through increased State contracts and
unclaimed gas tax and mill tax reimbursement revenue materializing higher than
originally budgeted. This additional State funding will allow the Department to conduct
egg inspections at production and wholesale facilities, surveillance activities of the
glassy-winged sharpshooter, trapping activities for the detection of the light brown apple moth, conduct surveillance and agricultural inspection activities of cantaloupe fields, and
to spot check flea markets and swap meets for gunny sacking activities in Stanislaus
County.
The University of California (UC) Cooperative Stanislaus County provides funding for
the Department’s operational expenses, including the facilities that house UC
Cooperative Extension, vehicles and support staff that work with the UC Cooperative
Extension advisors and paraprofessionals in program delivery. At the proposed level of
funding, the Department will be able to maintain the current level of service through the
use of Net County Cost savings from prior years.
The 2013-2014 Final Budget recommends $134,084,966 in appropriations for this
priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $122,342,834 in
department revenue, $3,856,650 in a General Fund contribution and $7,885,482 in fund
balance/retained earnings. The Department of Environmental Resources will continue to provide for mandated
education, investigation and inspection services for programs. The Department of Parks
and Recreation will continue to maintain the identified parks and facilities at the current
level of service. Re-evaluating priorities and adjusting the workforce to the priorities
identified will result in the continued ability to efficiently carry out their mission and
provide basic levels of services at all general funded neighborhood parks, cemeteries,
bridges, County Centers and office buildings, Woodward Reservoir and Modesto
Reservoir Regional Parks.
The Planning and Community Development focus for the upcoming fiscal year is on
maintaining core services while fulfilling all State and Federal mandated requirements
relating to land use activities, building codes, special revenue grants, and the
administration of the Stanislaus County Successor and Successor Housing Agencies (of
the former Stanislaus County Redevelopment Agency).
The Department of Public Works, funded through Federal, State and local transportation
funding sources, expects to maintain the County’s roadway system in a reasonably safe
and cost-effective manner. This includes repairs, improvements, and preventive
maintenance performed on an annual basis. The Public Works – Road & Bridge budget
includes funding of $44 million for two significant roads projects: State Route 99/Kiernan
Interchange and Claribel Road Widening.
The 2013-2014 Recommended Final Budget recommends $180,985,771 in
appropriations for this priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of
$118,429,170 in department revenue, $61,117,826 in revenue from the General Fund
and $1,438,775 in fund balance.
A November 2012 ruling of the California Supreme Court changed the methodology
used to calculate the property tax administration fees on property taxes attributed to the
Triple Flip and the Vehicle License Fee Swap. This decision significantly reduced
revenue in the Assessor’s department, as well as in the Auditor-Controller and
Treasurer-Tax Collector departments. The Assessor’s department, as part of the
Adopted Proposed Budget, received an increase of $487,336 in General Fund net
county cost, in order to maintain the staffing level needed to perform mandated duties
and in light of an increase in market activity throughout the County.
The Chief Executive Office – Mandated County Match budget includes an increased
County Match contribution of $2.7 million in the Community Services Agency – Public
Economic Assistance base amount for Foster Care programs, funded by County Match
Contingency. The Adopted Proposed Budget included additional funding in the
Behavioral Health and Recovery Services (BHRS) – Public Guardian budget to address
the exposure historically funded by BHRS departmental fund balance.
As part of the Adopted Proposed Budget, the Sheriff Department’s Court Security
budget was moved from the General Fund to a non interest bearing Special Revenue
Fund. Certain overhead costs are not allowable expenses that can be charged under
the Trial Court Funding Act of 1997 Rule of the Court 810. This fund will require a
General Fund net county cost to cover the Cost Allocation Plan (CAP) charges that are
not allowable under the Trial Court Funding Act. The Chief Executive Office – General
Fund Contribution to Other Programs added funding to the Sheriff’s Department to
continue to provide the Stanislaus County Superior Court with security services as mandated by Assembly Bill 118 (AB 118). In addition, the net county cost contribution
for the District Attorney - Vertical Prosecution Block Grant was transferred to the District
Attorney – Criminal Division to assist with the need as State funding has ceased for the
program.
Historically, the County has funded the costs of one election each fiscal year by
including it in the base budget. The Adopted Proposed Budget included funding of
$686,809 for the Clerk Recorder – Election Division for election supply costs and
equipment maintenance to conduct the June 2014 State Primary Election.
In Fiscal Year 2012-2013, three of Risk Management’s self-insurance funds, General
Liability Self-Insurance, Medical Self-Insurance, and Workers’ Compensation Self-
Insurance, accumulated significant deficits. A plan to address each of these deficits
was included in the 2013-2014 Proposed Budget as described below.
In the General Liability Self-Insurance Fund, a deficit repayment plan was adopted in
the 2012-2013 Proposed Budget that included paying back the deficit over five years in
the amount of $350,000 per year. On June 30, 2012, an additional $618,000 was
recorded as a liability, further increasing the fund’s retained earnings deficit. As a
result, the deficit repayment is recommended to increase to $450,000 for Fiscal Year
2013-2014 and the remaining three years of the repayment plan. In addition, all
revenue that is received in excess of expenditures will be applied to the deficit to
decrease the liability for current and future losses.
The Medical Self-Insurance Program completed its first calendar year of operation in
2012. The financial analysis of the program for that year resulted in a projected deficit
of approximately $3.3 million. In addition, the 2012-2013 Fiscal Year ended with a $6
million deficit. During the fiscal year, on January 1, 2013, medical self-insurance rates
were increased by 3.75% and dental and vision self-insurance rates were decreased by
10% and 50%, respectively. The decreases in dental and vision rates partially offset the
medical rate increase, resulting in total health insurance increases of approximately 2%
in departmental budgets. In order to address the projected fund deficit at fiscal yearend,
possible corrective actions will be formulated including both plan changes and
expected annual premium rate increases to be effective January 1, 2014.
The Workers’ Compensation Self-Insurance Fund accumulated a deficit at the end of
Fiscal Year 2011-2012 due to an increase in the value of its liability for claims that have
been incurred but not yet reported or paid. That deficit was partially recovered in Fiscal
Year 2012-2013 through decreased claims costs. However, it is anticipated that overall
claims costs in this budget will increase due to recent workers’ compensation reform
legislation. As a result, departmental charges are recommended to increase in Fiscal
Year 2013-2014 to begin to repay the fund’s deficit and fully fund increased costs.
The Auditor-Controller, Board of Supervisors, Chief Executive Office-Operations and
Services, Chief Executive Office-Risk Management, Clerk Recorder, and Treasurer-Tax
Collector were able to carry forward 100% of net county cost savings from prior fiscal years and 75% of their 2012-2013 net county cost savings. These increases are
reflected in the 2013-2014 Recommended Final Budget.
As part of the Final Budget, County Counsel is requesting an increase of $254,108 in
their General Fund net county cost contribution, in order to maintain current attorney
staffing levels needed to meet the demand of County departments for legal services.
Develop sustainable staffing plan for the
division. With retirements and the end of
funding for personal service contractors with
Homeland Security Grant Funding, the OES
division will need to re-establish its
organizational structure and staffing.
 Due to uncertain funding streams from the
State and Federal government, OES will reevaluate
service levels during the fiscal year
commensurate with funding available. OES
will identify partnerships, collaborations and
options with the nine cities and other
partners specific to the emergency
management function for the Operational
Area.
 Continue to maintain the Emergency
Operations Center and its alternate site in
Ceres at Operational level. This includes
developing, training and exercising EOC
plans and processes, ensuring equipment is
functional and identifying and training
personnel to work in the EOC.
 Continue moving towards the MRFA Board’s
objective of becoming a “stand-alone”
agency defined in the Modesto Regional Fire Transition Plan.
 Provide enhanced support to local fire
agencies through better communications, fire
prevention and fire investigations services.
Interface with Superior Court to allow the
population of Integrated Criminal Justice
Information System (ICJIS) database with
information from court minute orders.
 Obtain approval and establish connectivity to
Modesto Police Department Records.
 Coordinate with Superior Court to implement
process for Parole Revocation Hearings as
mandated by AB109 Realignment.
 Maintain current service and staffing levels.
ICJIS will implement additional electronic
interfaces with internal departments and
external entities to reduce redundant data
entry and improve operational performance.
 ICJIS will continue to enhance its feature set
and maintain a technical posture that
facilitates ease of use, flexibility and
interoperability.
 ICJIS will contribute to a safe and secure
community by providing local law
enforcement, County Departments, and
other agencies vital, real-time, criminal
justice information.
Approval and implementation of the
Community Corrections Partnership Plan for
Phase III of AB 109 Realignment.
 Develop an effective base line for budget
and operations at the new Juvenile
Commitment Facility.
 Utilization of evidence-based practices in
meeting the Department’s mission.
Continue to provide effective representation
to our clients.
The Sheriff’s Department will activate the
newly constructed 192-bed replacement
facility in the fall of 2013. Upon this
activation, the dated and deteriorated Honor
Farm will permanently close as a detention
facility.
 Complete the Design Phase of the 456-
inmate custodial and medical/mental health
bed expansion and move forward to the bid
and award phase to select a design build
team to construct this facility.
 Submit an application under the provisions of
SB 1022 for a state grant of up to $40 million
for a medium-sized county to construct
additional inmate bed capacity and add
substantial inmate program opportunities.
The County is “shovel ready” for this project
and has the requisite 10% match funding
required by the legislation set aside.
 Implement street crime reduction team
focusing on gangs and narcotics.
 Restructure organizational command to
move the Civil Division from Adult Detention
to Operations. Add a Lieutenant position to
the Civil Division to evaluate, modify or
change processes to enhance efficiency and
safety for both staff and the community.
 Reduce the rate of Part 1 Crimes. Identify serious, prolific offenders, and develop
operations designed to disrupt their criminal
activity and/or arrest them for violations of
the law. Use data from past and emerging
crime trends to concentrate resources at the
point of greatest need to prevent crime and
arrest offenders. Increase stops for unlawful
behavior, disorderly violations in
concentrated areas.
 The Sheriff’s Department will contribute
$10,000 to the Stanislaus County Police
Activity League (PAL) per fiscal year for the
next five years towards the annual
maintenance of the Regional Water Safety
Training Center in Empire. This contribution
will come from the net county cost carry
forward in the current fiscal year.
Continue programs and services listed
previously as well as work with local radio
stations to produce public service
announcements regarding available
programs and services of the Area Agency
on Aging.
 Recruit additional bilingual volunteers to
serve on the Commission on Aging and
assist with the various programs of the Area
Agency on Aging.
 Coordinate with Adult Protective Services to
handle special cases that are referred
through the Prevention and Early
Intervention Programs and our Information
and Assistance Program.
 Continue to give staff support for the monthly
meetings of the Veterans Advisory
Commission.
 Work with the Veterans Advisory
Commission Transportation Committee and
the Consolidated Transportation Services
Agency to develop a transportation program
that will serve the needs of home-bound
veterans to access medical services.
 Coordinate with the staff of the Multipurpose
Senior Services Program (MSSP) to utilize
social work and nursing student interns in the
Prevention and Early Intervention Programs.
“Go-live” with the assessment component,
Doctor’s Home Page and Managed Care
Operations of the Electronic Health Record
throughout Fiscal Year 2013-2014.
 Implement document scanning of all existing
paper charts into an electronic document
management system.
 Transition and train three new Senior
Leadership staff replacing the Adult System
of Care Chief, the Assistant Director, and the
Executive Assistant who are retiring.
 Implement the provisions of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA)
in January 2014.
 Continue to implement the strategies
detailed in the Strategic Plan for 24-7 Secure
Mental Health services including design and
construction of a Psychiatric Health Facility
and Crisis Stabilization Unit on the
Stanislaus Recovery Center campus by
February 2014.
Maintain collection and distribution at
$49,300,000 of child support to families.
 Collect 61.9% of current court ordered
support.
 Obtain a support order on 94.7% of
cases—slight increase from prior year.
 Maintain collections on 63.3% of cases with
an arrears balance.
 Meet the State required collection to cost
ratio.
Implement Year 2 of the 2012-2014 Strategic
Plan.
 Maintain positive trends in the reduction of
repeat child maltreatment reports.
 Increase the number of children who are
cognitively, socially, and behaviorally ready
to enter school.
 Maintain access and maximize utilization of
children’s preventative and ongoing health
care.
 Increase the number of healthy births from
high risk pregnancies.
Expand Mental Health services to a wider
population of Child Welfare Services for
children served in Emergency Response,
Family Maintenance, Family Reunification
and Permanent Placement. Services will
include assessment and treatment.
 Expand Medi-Cal to include eligibility
services, optional extended population
(Medically Indigent Adults), and subsidized
health insurance enrollment through Covered
California.
 Implement the Consortium IV Region 4 Hub
to take calls transferred from Covered
California for Medi-Cal services for residents
of Stanislaus, Napa and Marin counties.
 Implement targeted employment services
based on employability readiness to meet
WtW Early Engagement requirements.
 Expand In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS)
in the community in support of Health Care
Reform while strengthening Quality
Assurance for Program Integrity.
Prepare for Federal Health Care Reform
changes.
 Transition the Medically Indigent Adult
program participants to Medi-Cal and/or
Cover California.
 Continue progress on Public Health
accreditation to protect future funding.
 Achieve annual recertification of the
Federally Qualified Health Center Look-Alike
designation.
 Achieve renewed and new grant support to
enable multiple initiatives.
 Continue efforts to improve efficiencies,
enhance revenue, and increase staff
development, while meeting fiscal targets,
programmatic objectives and achieving
compliance.
 Will complete implementation of an upgrade
of the VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol)
phone system which should be finalized in
Fiscal Year 2013-2014. Transitioning to this
new technology will significantly reduce the
Agency’s overall telephone expenses on an
annual basis.
100 individuals will successfully complete the
new Warehouse/Logistics Training Program
with 80% obtaining employment.
 70% of the individuals who successfully
complete the Pre-Apprenticeship Training
Program will enter a paid-internship position
within the first twelve months after training
completion.
 Conduct special outreach efforts to
unemployed residents with special emphasis
on Dislocated Workers and Military Veterans
with the objective of enrolling 250 additional
participants.
 Improve Welfare-to-Work (WTW) Work
Participation Rates (WPR) by at least 10%
as part of the department’s partnership with
the Community Services Agency (CSA).
 Increase the number of individuals receiving
Welfare-to-Work (WTW) employment
services under the re-designed program by
800.
100% of public service staff will receive
additional technological training enabling
them to provide better customer assistance
to those with electronic devices.
 Virtual web portal views will increase by 10%
by creating a more user-friendly web page.
 An evaluation tool for measuring outcomes
will be added to the Summer Reading
Program for a more targeted approach to
outreach efforts.
 Many technology deficits as noted in the
Strategic Plan report will be addressed by
adjusting the library’s Information
Technology budgeted 3-year plan.
 Purchases of eBooks will increase, and the
library’s mobile application will be enhanced
with additional functions to meet customer
demand.
 Enriched content with reviews, cover images,
tables of contents, summaries and awards
data about books and materials will be
added to the library’s online public access
catalog. It will make finding information
easier and result in more relevant and useful
search results for customers.
Partner with CDFA and the egg industry in
rolling out a new retail inspection protocol for
eggs.
 Establish for local nurseries a Pre-
Quarantine agreement for Asian Citrus
Psyllid.
 Establish an enhanced communication
procedure between schools and the
agricultural community.
Continue to develop local, research-based
information and extend it to the residents of
Stanislaus County.
 Continue to conduct a nutrition education
program for low income residents of
Stanislaus County, both independently and
in cooperation with CSA.
 Continue to coordinate the Stanislaus
County 4-H program.
Implement the County’s new groundwater
mining ordinance.
 Implement the State mandated Commercial
Recycling Program (AB 341).
 Implement the State mandated Cottage Food
Operations Program.
 Begin the process to develop plans and
specifications for Ash Cell 4 at the Fink Road
Landfill.
Develop a marketing plan for Regional
Parks.
 Installation of a picnic/shade shelter at Laird
Park.
 Continuation of the Frank Raines Water
System Project.
 Woodward Reservoir Park improvements.
 Modesto Reservoir Regional Park sewage lift
station upgrade.
Maintain core functions and a high level of
customer service within budget.
 Continue the effective implementation of
existing State and Federal Grants.
 Pursue new grants to cover needed
infrastructure construction costs.
 Implement the Citizen Access Online
Permitting and Interactive Voice Response
components of the new Accela permit
software package.
 Realign staffing levels to reflect current
workload activities.
Conduct a Transit Planning Study of all
StaRT services to identify possible service
and efficiency enhancements.
 Resurface 75 miles of roadway with
conventional chip seal.
 Begin construction of the Claribel Road
Widening Project (McHenry Ave. to Oakdale
Rd.).
 Begin design of Morgan Shop Heavy
Equipment Shop.
 Board adoption and implementation of a
Local Traffic Mitigation Fund Program.
 Develop and finalize the finance plan for the
Parklawn Sewer Project.
Complete a timely assessment roll.
 Begin a project to digitize the appraisal
records.
Continue to work on developing electronic
time sheets within the Oracle PeopleSoft
system (Punch Time).
 Develop further electronic documentation for
efficiencies and ease of use such as
Signature Authorization Forms for vendor
payments, Wire Transfer Forms and our
Deposit Permit process.
 Provide electronic Form W-2 option in
PeopleSoft to promote use of self service
resulting in availability and ease of use.
 Continue to partner with PeopleSoft Team
Lead group to provide secure internet access
for self service options.
The Board will continue to guide the priorities
for the County and set expectation levels for
departments.
With significant capital projects work
underway, 2013-2014 will be primarily
focused on public safety. The Honor Farm
Replacement Bed project is anticipated to
achieve completion in the Fall. Throughout
the budget year, work will continue on the AB
900 Phase II Jail Expansion projects of a two
192-bed maximum security housing units, a
72-bed medical/mental health unit, a
Programs/Day Reporting Facility and related
facilities. A companion project will provide
intake and release facilities. A new funding
opportunity – SB 1022, was approved by the
State on June 27, 2012 and will make
available up to $500 million in funds for
construction of adult local criminal justice
facilities. Stanislaus County would be
eligible for up to $40 million and would
require a ten percent match that has already
been set aside by previous Board action. If
awarded, these funds would move the
County closer to closing the aging Downtown
Jail and provide much needed Detention
Program space needed for realignment
offenders and inmates.
Staff will continue development of a long
range model to assist in the preparation of
multi-year budget strategies. Staff will also
review best practices of other Government
Finance Officers Association (GFOA) awardwinning
organizations and work on improving
budget preparation and submittal process.
 Chief Executive Office staff will be working to
complete the validation of the classification
study and implement recommendations. This
will include validating job descriptions,
communicating outcomes to County
Department heads and managers and
recommending changes to the Board of
Supervisors.
 Increased focus on the County’s recruitment
process will be a priority during the 2013-
2014 Fiscal Year. Chief Executive Office staff
will be working with departments to review
processes and identify efficiencies as well as
evaluating recruitment practices to assure
appropriate outreach and advertising of
positions is occurring. Improved efficiencies
should result in quicker turnaround times in
filling positions. This along with improved
outreach should allow the County to better
develop a workforce for the future and be
better prepared for succession planning.
 Chief Executive Office staff will continue to
promote economic development through
active partnerships will all cities (Regional
Transportation Impact Fee (RTIF)
development, Stanislaus Council of
Governments (StanCOG) Management and
Finance Committee, Transit Cost Share
Committee), the Workforce Alliance
(marketing and community outreach, Expect
More Stanislaus initiative), and the business
sector. Staff will also continue to work
toward developing the former Crows Landing
Air Facility into a major job creation center for
Stanislaus County and the region.
Disability Management: 1) Continue to work
with Chief Executive Office and departmental
Human Resources staff on ensuring that
departments are effectively working with
disability and accommodation issues related
to the County workforce; 2) Explore the use of
Absence Management module in PeopleSoft
to improve the use of technology related to
leave of absence administration.
 Employee Benefits: Staff will continue to work
on the implementation of health care reform
and the development of a new employee
wellness program in the coming year. Staff
will also implement a new process for
conducting benefit orientation for new
employees in order to improve the
communication and efficiency of the benefit
enrollment process.
 Liability Program: 1) Maintain loss insurance
programs to minimize risk exposure and
control liability; 2) Increase awareness on the
importance of risk transference through
vendors providing adequate insurance when
doing business with the County.
 Safety: 1) Maintain low OSHA incident rate
as compared to other counties; 2) Train all
staff on new Global Harmonization Standard
through revised Hazardous Communications
Training; 3) Assure departments’ compliance
with new Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS)
Online requirements.
Conduct the Consolidated Election in
November 2013 and Gubernatorial Primary
Election in June 2014.
 Complete the following items of the Film
Conversion Project:
o 1980 to present images and Index
o Vital Record images back to 1940
 Implement e-recording.
 Start on Office Remodel Project.
Provide continued legal support for
implementing Public Employees’ Pension
Reform Act of 2013.
 Provide State mandated training on ethics to
elected and appointed officials receiving
reimbursement for travel expenses.
 Provide State mandated training to
managers and supervisors on preventing
workplace harassment.
Maintain 100% compliance with County
safety program and policies, and ensure a
safe working environment for employees.
Analysis of GPS software for improved vehicle
data.
 Building Equipment Inventory completed and
uploaded to the Intranet.
 Continuation of Electronic Data Management
pilot program.
Complete request for proposals for mobile
device management and a web filtering
solutions; implement both.
 Continue to upgrade County core switches.
 Implement Voice over Internet Protocol at
Behavioral Health Services and Health
Services Agency.
 Leverage Business Continuity Services
available at the SBT Data Center.
 Update the 2007 Business Technology
Strategy.
Improve cash flow analysis to manage
timing of payments for capital projects
such as the jail expansion and adjust for
State deferments.
 Increase direct contact with delinquent
customers through field visits, enhanced
collections including bank account
seizures.
 Improve functionality of current database
by reorganizing the data fields and
standardizing input to increase efficiency
in collections.
