The 2012-2013 Adopted Final Budget recommends $177,572,828 in appropriations for
this priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $67,163,316 in
department revenue, $109,412,067 in revenue from the General Fund and $997,445 in
fund balance.
Probation, Sheriff, District Attorney and the Public Defender’s Department included in
their 2012-2013 Budget realignment funding from the State. On April 4, 2011,
Assembly Bill 109 (AB 109) was signed by Governor Brown. AB 109 realigned
custodial and community supervision responsibility for non-serious, non-violent, and
non-sex offenders, as well as lower-level adult parolees returning from State sentences
to counties. Funding received in Fiscal Year 2011-2012 was for nine months of
operation given the October 1, 2011, implementation date in the Sheriff and Probation
Departments.
The Sheriff’s Department will begin the process of reinstating the Sheriff’s Team
Investigating Narcotics and Gangs (STING) unit. This will provide a much needed
presence in the community in suppressing gang activity. The reinstatement of this unit
will have a direct impact to the District Attorney and Public Defender’s Department.
The DNA Identification Fund Prop 69 is included in the Chief Executive Office County
Operations budget this fiscal year. Government Code section 76104.6 directs California
Courts to levy a $1 penalty for every $10 or fraction thereof upon every fine, penalty and
forfeiture levied on criminal offenses including traffic offenses, but excluding parking
offenses, to implement the DNA Identification Fund. These funds are used to reimburse
law enforcement to collect DNA specimens. In Fiscal Year 2012-2013, the Sheriff’s
Department requested $108,000 and the Probation Department requested $200,000.
The Chief Executive Office – Office of Emergency Services, District Attorney, Probation
and Sheriff’s Department were able to carry forward year-end savings from the 2011-
2012 Fiscal Year to the 2012-2013 Fiscal Year. In addition to the carry forward, the
Probation and Sheriff’s Department increased revenue and appropriations to reflect the
2012-2013 funding for the Community Corrections Partnership Phase 2 Implementation
of the 2011 Realignment Plan. Sheriff – Jail Commissary increased appropriations and
revenue to account for an increase in commissary supplies purchased by inmates as a
result of opening additional beds. Probation - Corrections Performance Incentive Fund
increased revenue and appropriations to replace field radios.
Support the Modesto Regional Fire Authority
by identifying efficiencies within the
organization.
 Continue to maintain the Emergency
Operations Center (EOC) and its alternate in
Ceres at Operational Level. This includes
developing, training and exercising EOC
plans and processes, ensuring equipment is
functional, and identifying and training
personnel to work in the EOC.
Enhance scanning capacity for EDM
purposes.
 Interface with the Superior Court to allow the
population of ICJIS database with
information from court minute orders.
 Migrate from Word Perfect to Word.
 Obtain approval and establish connectivity to
Modesto Police Department Records.
 Avoid any Reductions in Force.
ICJIS will implement additional electronic
interfaces with internal departments and
external entities to reduce redundant data
entry and improve operational performance.
 ICJIS will continue to enhance its feature set
and maintain a technical posture that
facilitates ease of use, flexibility and
interoperability.
 ICJIS will contribute to a safe and secure
community by providing local law
enforcement, County Departments, and
other agencies vital, real-time, criminal
justice information.
Approval and implementation of the
Community Corrections Partnership Plan for
Phase II of AB 109 Realignment.
 Complete construction of the new juvenile
commitment facility.
 Utilization of evidence-based practices in
meeting the department’s mission.
Continue to provide effective representation
to our clients.
Work in conjunction with the CEO’s Office to
break ground and begin construction of the
192-bed replacement facility and to facilitate
expansion of inmate beds and administrative
spaces under the provisions of Assembly Bill
900.
 Initiate the provisions of Assembly Bill 109-
Phase II on July 1, 2012, including the reactivation
of 72 beds at the Honor Farm,
additional support staffing requirements and
expansion of hours of service for the Jail
Alternatives Unit.
 Implement street crime reduction team
focusing on gangs and narcotics violations.
 Strive to reduce or eradicate the pervasive
prostitution activity occurring along South 9th
St. and at South 9th St. motels which act as
houses of ill repute. Will work in collaboration
with other law enforcement and community
partnerships to accomplish this goal.
 Ensure all field training officers, supervisors
and managers attend County and/or
P.O.S.T., supervisory courses to minimize
agency and County risk and to further
develop staff for career advancement.
The 2012-2013 Adopted Final Budget recommends $454,382,273 in
appropriations for this priority area. These expenditures are funded by
$446,430,536 in department revenue and $7,951,737 in fund balance. For Fiscal
Year 2012-2013, as part of the Budget Strategy, only those budgets with fixed
costs associated with contracts or budgets with mandated match or maintenance
of effort funding requirements were recommended to receive a General Fund
revenue allocation in the Healthy Community priority area. Consistent with Fiscal
Year 2011-2012, the net General Fund revenue allocation for Behavioral Health
and Recovery Services’ programs including Alcohol and Drug, Mental Health,
and Public Guardian received $1,458,942; for the Community Services Agency
programs including General Assistance, In-Home Supportive Services Provider
wages, Public Authority benefits, Public Economic Assistance, and Services and
Support, the net General Fund revenue allocation is $8,578,143; for the Health
Services Agency programs including Clinics and Ancillary Services, Indigent
Health Care, and Public Health, the net General revenue allocation is
$6,369,959.
Area Agency on Aging-Veterans’ Services received funding to reflect the carry
forward of net county cost savings earned in prior fiscal years. Behavioral Health
and Recovery Services received funding for the Community Corrections
Partnership Plan, Phase 2 Implementation (AB 109), and an estimated increase
in the 1991 Realignment allocation. The increase in the 1991 Realignment
allocation will assist in offsetting the dramatic increase in hospitalization costs. In
the Community Services Agency, an overall decrease in appropriations and
estimated revenue is attributed to the shift in funding from StanWORKS to Adult,
Child and Family Services programs due to final State Budget impacts. This will
be offset by the use of departmental fund balance and an additional County
Match to appropriately fund the IHSS Fraud Program Integrity. The Health
Services Agency received funding, offset by State and Federal funding, for the
Pandemic Influenza and Teen Pregnancy programs.
Significant unmet needs remain in A Healthy Community priority programs
including: an additional $1,530,135 exposure in the Community Services Agency
In-Home Supportive Services wages and benefits; an additional $3,337,728
projected exposure in CSA Public Economic Assistance due to the increase in
Foster Care costs; $182,142 in CSA Services and Support to continue fraud
investigations and program integrity efforts for the IHSS Program in the absence
of State and Federal funding; and $3,800,000 in the Health Services Agency
Medically Indigent Adult Program due to increased enrollment and utilization, and
increased reimbursements to specialty providers. Funding is not included in
these budgets; however, the Match Contingency Fund has been adjusted for the
majority of the increased exposure.
Make available to seniors, caregivers, and
veterans, information regarding services and
agencies that will assist them to achieve or
maintain a beneficial lifestyle.
 Promote better health and well-being for the
senior citizens of Stanislaus County through
attention to life transitions, physical and
emotional needs.
Roll out Department’s Transformation Project
to all BHRS staff by June 30, 2013.
 Finalize a Strategic Plan related to 24-Hour
Secure Mental Health services and begin
implementation.
 Implement three additional modules of the
Anasazi Electronic Health Record:
Assessment and Treatment Planning,
Physician’s Home Page and Managed Care
Operations.
 Implement document scanning of all existing
paper charts into an electronic document
management system and a data warehouse
to enable collection of outcome measures.
 Continue Community Capacity Building
(CCB) Efforts. Award contracts for specific
projects to be completed by June 30, 2013.
Begin work in 4 more rural communities to
have community lead initiatives supported
through CCB.
 Finalize implementation of all Alcohol and
Other Drug Stakeholder recommendations
including Community-Based Outpatient
Services.
Maintain collection and distribution at
$47,500,000 of child support to families.
 Collect 59.1% of current court ordered
support.
 Continue to obtain a support order on 92.8%
of cases.
 Receive collections on 63.3% of cases with
an arrears balance.
 Increase the current collections to cost ratio
of $3.19.
Increase the number of children who are
cognitively and socially-behaviorally ready to
enter school.
 Maintain access and maximize utilization of
children’s preventive and ongoing health
care.
 Increase the number of healthy births from
high risk pregnancies.
 Implement the narrowed focus of the 2012-
2014 Strategic Plan (which was built on
projections showing that Commission
resources will continue to decrease in the
forseeable future).
Develop and initiate a County Request for
Proposal to solicit bids from agencies for
Welfare-to-Work (WtW) services and
activities to enhance self-reliance and selfsufficiency
outcomes to increase the number
of Welfare-to-Work customers engaged and
participating in the WtW program resulting in
an overall increase the County’s Work
Participation Rate (WPR).
 Implement a new service efficiency business
model that will redesign and improve
customer flow through the StanWORKs
lobby to improve customer service, maximize
available resources and streamline internal
operations.
 Initiate partnerships within the community to
assist with services and resources needed
for foster care youth due to the extension of
AB 12.
 Implement State health care initiatives to
benefit services for IHSS recipients.
Monitor and Prepare for Federal Health
Reform changes.
 Effectively manage the Medically Indigent
Adult program with limited resources and
funding constraints.
 Implement the Health Plan of San Joaquin
as the new Local Initiative health plan for
Medi-Cal beneficiaries
 Achieve 5-year renewal of the Federally
Qualified Health Center Look-Alike
designation
 Continued progress on preparation for Public
Health accreditation to protect future funding
 Achieve renewed and new grant support to
enable multiple initiatives
 Accomplish strategic initiatives within the
Obesity/Diabetes prevention campaign
 Continued collaborative efforts with
organizations in the community for improved
population health.
 Continue efforts to improve efficiencies,
enhance revenue and increase staff
development, while meeting fiscal targets, programmatic objectives and achieving
compliance.
The 2012-2013 Adopted Final Budget recommends $23,392,144 in appropriations for
this priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $22,569,318 in
department revenue, $491,810 in revenue from the General Fund and $331,016 in fund
balance.
For Fiscal Year 2012-2013, Alliance revenues are down from Fiscal Year 2011-2012
that result in strict limitations on the number of individuals referred to vocational training
programs as well as limiting the funding available for on-the-job training reimbursements
to employers. Training referrals will have to be limited to programs that prepare
individuals for only those occupations that are in very high demand by local businesses.
The Library is primarily funded by a voter approved 1/8-cent sales tax, which represents
approximately 91% of the Library’s total revenue to support the Library operations in Fiscal Year 2012-2013. The voter approved 1/8-cent sales tax did sunset on June 30,
2013 but was extended through a successful local measure for an additional five years.
The Library does not expect to receive any Public Library funding or Transaction Based
Reimbursements in Fiscal Year 2012-2013 from the State. The Stanislaus Literacy
Center is also uncertain if the State will provide funding for the partnership
ReadingWorks adult literacy program at the Library but received emergency funding
awarded from the California Library Literacy Services for preserving local literacy
services.
Successfully complete an initiative to create
1,000 new jobs in Stanislaus County.
 Partner with local businesses and Modesto
Junior College to fully develop the
Manufacturing Apprenticeship Program.
 Customize the Warehouse/Logistics Training
Program to meet the requirements of existing
and new employers.
Improve literacy for all ages by designing
services to help ensure the underserved
population of children, from birth to five, will
enter school ready to read, write and listen.
Provide a vibrant summer reading program.
Maintain funding and a partnership with the
Stanislaus Literacy Center and the library’s
ReadingWorks adult literacy program.
 Provide safe and serviceable library facilities
by laying the foundation for a library
technology and facilities master plan.
 Connect residents to the online world by
maintaining a convenient and relevant web
portal, and by increasing the proficiency of
staff in helping those who need to learn how
to use technology.
 Develop programs and services that will
improve workforce readiness for unemployed
and underemployed residents by offering
classes, career training materials, and
wireless internet access.
The 2012-2013 Adopted Final Budget recommends $5,236,768 in appropriations for this
priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $2,922,381 in
department revenue, $2,292,065 in revenue from the General Fund and $22,322 in fund
balance.
The Agricultural Commissioner will be able to maintain the current level of service
provided to the community through the use of a substantial portion of the Net County
Cost savings from prior years. Because of the reduction in or the elimination of a
number of Federal and State contracts, the Agricultural Commissioner budgeted less
revenue in Fiscal Year 2012-2013. The contract for Cantaloupe Surveillance has been
eliminated and the contracts for Light Brown Apple Moth trapping, High Risk Pest
Exclusion, Glassy Winged Sharp Shooter trapping, Sudden Oak Death monitoring, and
Pesticide Application Reporting have all been reduced. UC Cooperative Extension is running at a structural deficit which will be covered in
Fiscal Year 2012-2013 by utilizing General Fund Net County Cost savings carried from
the previous years. The proposed level of funding for the Department is not sustainable
without the use of prior year savings. Previous budget cuts have reduced staffing by
approximately 40%, seriously impacting UC Cooperative Extension’s ability to carry out
its mission.
Maintain invasive pest detection program in
consideration of reduced State funding.
 Initiate a grower based pesticide spray safe
outreach program.
 Partner with grower coalition to assist with a
best management practices approach to
address water quality exceedences.
Continue to develop local, research-based
information and extend it to the residents of
Stanislaus County.
 Continue to conduct a nutrition education
program for low income residents of
Stanislaus County, both independently and
in cooperation with the Community Services
Agency.
 Continue to coordinate the Stanislaus
County 4-H program.
The 2012-2013 Adopted Final Budget recommends $143,430,183 in appropriations for
this priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $129,566,161 in
department revenue, $10,116,275 in revenue from the General Fund and $3,747,747 in
fund balance/retained earnings. The Department of Environmental Resources will continue to provide for mandated
education, investigation and inspection services for programs. The Department of Parks
and Recreation will continue to maintain the identified parks and facilities at the current
level of service. Re-evaluating priorities and adjusting the workforce to the priorities
identified will result in the continued ability to efficiently carry out our mission and
provide basic levels of services at all general funded neighborhood parks, cemeteries,
bridges, County Centers and office buildings, Woodward Reservoir and Modesto
Reservoir Regional Parks.
The Planning and Community Development focus for the upcoming fiscal year is on
maintaining core services while fulfilling all State and Federal mandated requirements
relating to land use activities, building codes, special revenue grants, and the
administration of the Stanislaus County Successor and Successor Housing Agencies (of
the former Stanislaus County Redevelopment Agency). The Planning and Community
Development Department received approval to modify its public operating hours
(phones and counters) from 8:00 a.m. – 5:00 p.m. to 8:30 a.m. – 4:30p.m that is
expected to result in operational efficiencies.
The Department of Public Works, funded through Federal, State and local transportation
funding sources, expects to maintain the County’s roadway system in a reasonably safe
and cost-effective manner. This includes repairs, improvements, and preventive
maintenance performed on an annual basis. Proposition 1B funding was approved by
voters in Fiscal Year 2007-2008. The final allotment of these funds was received in
Fiscal Year 2011-2012. Proposition 1B funds accounted for approximately 15% of
annual revenues. In preparation for the termination of this funding source, the
Department implemented a 4-year plan to reduce expenditures by 15% over all
divisions from the baseline year of 2009-2010.
A significant change in the Well Planned Infrastructure System priority area in recent
years was the reclassification of the Environmental Resources Waste-To-Energy
budget. Historically classified as an Enterprise Fund, the Board adopted the
reclassification of this budget to an Agency Fund consistent with Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles. Over time, this change will remove the reporting of the Waste-
To-Energy budget entirely from the Stanislaus County Budget.
Contained in the Adopted Final Budget, both the Parks and Recreation and Planning
and Community Development Departments received funding to reflect the carry forward
of Net County Cost savings earned in prior fiscal years. Additionally, Public Works
received funding to address capital needs at its main office location.
Meet or exceed State and Federal mandates
for all programs.
 Implement State Mandatory Commercial
Recycling Program mandated by AB341.
 Work collaboratively with respective Building
departments to implement Department of
Justice’s new ADA requirements for Public
Swimming pools effective May 15, 2012.
 Streamline the food facility inspection
process by utilizing personal computer
tablets to print official notices and placement
of the computer-generated notices online.
 Look for additional opportunities, within the
Department, to streamline inspections
electronically.
 Implement State mandated Safe Body Art
Act.
 Implement California Electronic Reporting
System requirements for facilities that store
hazardous materials.
 Complete all requirements of the Geer Road
Landfill Cease & Desist Order, issued in April
2011.
 Work cooperatively with the Regional
Agency Cities toward the development of
Waste Disposal Agreements to assist in
future planning efforts.
Complete a Request for Proposals process
for the environmental monitoring and
reporting services for the Fink Road and
Geer Road Landfills.
 Secure Regional Water Quality Control
Board approval to begin waste placement in
the Fink Road Landfill, Cell 5.
Construction of non-potable wells in various
community parks within County Service Area
10 in Salida.
 Woodward Reservoir Regional Park
Improvements.
 Modesto Reservoir Regional Park
Improvements.
 Laird Park Improvements.
 Completion of the Frank Raines Water
System Project.
Maintain core functions and a high level of
customer service within budget.
 Continue the effective implementation of
existing State and Federal grants.
 Pursue new grants to cover needed
infrastructure construction costs.
 Implement the day-to-day use of the new
permit software package.
Start construction of the Geer Road Bridge
over the Tuolumne River and begin the initial
studies for the 7th Street Bridge replacement.
 Secure funding and begin construction of the
SR99 at Kiernan Interchange and Claribel
Road Widening Projects.
 Develop and implement a Local
Transportation Improvement Program (LTIP).
 Provide County GIS intranet/site applications
to all of the cities within Stanislaus County.
 Resurface 50 miles of roadways with
conventional chip.
 Evaluate existing transit service to develop
short and long range transit plans, as well as
purchase three new buses for service
improvements and expansion.
The 2012-2013 Adopted Final Budget recommends $180,147,478 in appropriations for
this priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $113,072,661 in
department revenue, $64,432,530 in revenue from the General Fund and $2,642,287 in
fund balance.
During the last three years, the Chief Executive Office – Risk-Management General
Liability Self-Insurance fund has experienced a significant increase in its deficit in
retained earnings due to litigation cases resulting in a projected year end deficit of
approximately $3.9 million based on the most recent actuarial analysis. The Department
has a deficit repayment plan in place that includes paying back the deficit over five
years in the amount of $350,000 per year. In addition, all revenue that is received in
excess of expenditures will be applied to the deficit to decrease the liability for current
and future losses.
The Chief Executive Office – Risk Management Division Purchase Insurance has been
renamed to Medical Self-Insurance with the implementation of the self-insured medical
program effective January 1, 2012. A thorough cash and retained earnings analysis will
be performed in the beginning of calendar year 2013 once the program has completed
its first year and the program has developed enough data to analyze trends for future
reserves.
Historically, the County has funded the costs of one election each fiscal year by
including it in the base budget. The Clerk Recorder – Election Division as part of the
Adopted Proposed Budget received $268,983 for election supply costs and equipment
maintenance to conduct the November 2012 Presidential Election. Even with the carryover from Fiscal Year 2011-2012, County Counsel projected a
shortfall of approximately $67,450. To balance the Department budget, County Counsel
initiated a reduction in force to eliminate a Confidential Assistant III position.
General Services Agency is completing the final phase of their reorganization in Fiscal
Year 2012-2013. This includes the Administration budget no longer receiving a general
fund contribution and instead charging out all costs to the other GSA divisions. In
addition, the Purchasing division is included under Central Services beginning Fiscal
Year 2012-2013. As an Internal Service Fund now all costs of services are charged
based on the level of service provided.
Strategic Business Technology/Telecommunications continues to use retained earnings
to assist in keeping charges to departments at a reduced level. In Fiscal Year 2012-
2013 the Department has budgeted to replace the County core Wide Area Network
(WAN) services switch, upgrade Internet services and data connectivity services.
The Assessor, Auditor Controller, Board of Supervisors, Chief Executive Office, Clerk
Recorder, County Counsel and Treasurer-Tax Collector were able to carry forward yearend
savings from the 2011-2012 Fiscal Year to the 2012-2013 Fiscal Year. In addition
to the carry forward, the Assessor decreased estimated revenue and appropriations due
to a decrease in anticipated penalty revenue, the Auditor-Controller received additional
net county cost for positions, and the Board of Supervisors received a decrease in net
county cost, as a result of transferring $30,000 in funding to the Chief Executive Office.
Both the Chief Executive Office – Airport and County Facilities budgets received an
increase in appropriations for capital improvements. The Chief Executive Office –
General Fund Contribution to Other Programs increased funding to the Local Area
Formation Commission to remain compliant with State law and appropriations were
increased to fund the IHSS Fraud Investigations Program funded by the Chief Executive
Office – Mandated County Match. There was an additional increase in Mandated
County Match to replace two vehicles in the Public Guardian program.
Implement a paperless system to file
Business Property Statements and
Agricultural Property Statements.
 Expand the IT Department.
 Automate the Calamity application process.
 Improve efficiency by making all Department
vehicles lap top adaptable.
Ensure Workflow procedures are in place
within the Oracle PeopleSoft system.
 Develop electronic time sheets within the
Oracle PeopleSoft system.
 Implement the use of an electronic filing
system for payroll records.
 Develop reports within Oracle Financial
Management System.
The Board will continue to guide the priorities
for the County and set expectation levels for
departments.
With significant capital projects work
underway, 2012-13 will be primarily focused
on the County’s award of $80,000,000 in
State Lease Revenue Bond Funding (AB 900
Phase II), State funding for local jail
expansion in response to the significant shift
in responsibilities known as Realignment
2011 which shifts incarceration and parolee
responsibilities to local jails and Probation
Departments. The local jail expansion plan
adds two 192 bed Maximum Security
Facilities as well as a 72 bed medical/mental
health unit, a Programs/Day Reporting
Facility and related facilities. An additional
project funded by Public Facility Fees will
provide additional support facilities and the
192 bed Honor Farm Replacement will begin
construction in summer, 2012.
 Chief Executive Staff will continue to promote
an economic development agenda through
active partnerships with all cities (Regional
Transportation Impact Fee (RTIF)
development, StanCOG Management and
Finance Committee, Transit Cost Share
Committee), the Workforce Alliance (marketing and community outreach, Expect
More Stanislaus initiative), and the business
sector (active participation in Chamber of
Commerce, Convention and Visitor Bureau
and Planning Department
ombudsman/project liaison interaction). In
addition, staff will continue work toward
developing the former Crows Landing Air
Facility into a major job creation center for
Stanislaus County and the region.
 Chief Executive Office Senior Staff will
continue to work closely with County
Departments on the continued development
of budget strategies that focus on the
preservation of critical services, establish
fiscal stability, ensure the highest level of
fiscal integrity, and address continuing
challenges in health and social services
programs.
 A classification study on the Manager I-V
series is currently underway and will be
completed during the 2012-2013 Fiscal Year.
The County originally established the broad
classification series for Manager I-IV to
streamline the pay administration system in
1998, by consolidating sixty management
classifications into four broad classifications
of work. The next step is to develop formal
job specifications. This will allow
departments to ensure equity among staff in
these classifications, provide a tool for
measuring performance and allow the
County to clearly articulate the duties and the
qualifications of these positions during
recruitments. Additionally, the study will
assist in ensuring compliance with merit
systems; and, the Fair Labor Standards Act
(FLSA).
 There will be four Stanislaus County
Department Head vacancies to fill: Director
of Planning and Community Development;
Director of Child Support Services; Director
of the Department of Environmental
Resources and Parks and Recreation, and
the Community Services Agency Director
has notified the Chief Executive Officer of her
intent to retire. Filling these critical positions
with quality individuals and succession
planning is a key objective of the
organization.
Disability Management: Provide additional
training to Payroll and Human Resources staff
on Family Medical Leave Act and other leave
law compliance through which the County
would experience reduced litigation cost.
 Employee Benefits: Continue implementation
of new self-funded medical plans.
 Liability Program: Maintain loss insurance
programs to minimize risk exposure and
control liability.
Complete tasks 1 & 3 of the Film Conversion
Project.
 Complete restoration of Retained Pages and
Maps.
Provide State mandated training to
managers and supervisors on preventing
workplace harassment.
 Provide State mandated training on ethics to
elected and appointed officials receiving
reimbursement for travel expenses.
 Maintain 100% compliance with County
safety program and policies, and ensure a safe working environment for employees.
Complete the Internal Service Fund (ISF)
business model to include GSA – Purchasing.
 Expansion of the EDM program, with a goal of
50,000 scans/month.
 Expand the Building Equipment Inventory and
Maintenance Schedules project, moving the
books on-line.
Partnering with Capital Projects, Stanislaus
Regional 911, and Office of Emergency
Services will complete the new SBT Data
Center project.
 Upgrade County core Cisco 6509 Switch that
is reaching end of life. This equipment
provides WAN services at an enterprise level
and is mission critical to ensure networks
services are available.
 Upgrade and increase core internet speed
and data connectivity speed to ensure core
services remain reliable and meet the
demands of utilization.
 Partnering with Health Services Agency and
Behavioral Health & Recovery Services,
continue the collaborative approach with the
deployment of Voice over Internet Protocol
(VoIP) to the Scenic location and remote
locations.
 Upgrade both the hardware and software for
County core Voice over Internet Protocol
telephony systems including the Call Center
platform to version 8.5, the Call Manager to version 8.6, and Asterisk Voicemail System.
Improve customer service by continuing
the cross training and rotation of staff so
staff can handle more customer needs.
 Explore the use of technology to allow a
workstation to handle both the Tax system
(Megabyte) and the Revenue Recovery
system (CUBS) to enable staff to handle
multiple customer needs and reduce lines.
 Improve efficiencies and control of
documents by allowing accountants to
concentrate on priorities with the help from
volunteers to assist on projects like
document imaging to store material
electronically.
