Department Wide Administration
1. Maintain full staffing levels, and increase and improve emphasis on staff
development and training as a means to increase retention, productivity and
customer experience
2. Responsibly utilize Federal, State and Local revenues
3. Pilot combined Public Health and Adult Services unit to focus on health and
wellness for vulnerable populations; elder, 0-5 and disabled
4. Explore use of social media for community education and communication
5. Train all employees in Incident Command System (ICS) respective to their
functional role per guidelines
6. Automate time study and timecard processes
7. Complete establishment of new Hayfork office for Eligibility and Employment
Services
8. Continue data storage project for close cases in each unit
9. Develop internal fiscal/administration procedures and cross train staff
10. Maintain high morale and productivity, with none to minimal personnel and
adverse departmental experiences
11. Complete the Hayfork expansion project allowing consistent and accessible
assistance to community members residing in or closer to the Hayfork area
12. Continued focus on excellence in customer service, both internally and
externally
Adult Services/ In Home Supportive Services / Public Guardian
1. Incorporate Public Health Nurse Services in Adult Services Program areas to
address need for medical consultation and case management related to elder
and dependent adult abuse and chronic disease
2. Continue to develop Public Authority program to expand recruitment and training
of providers of In-Home Supportive Services
3. Address recent increase in financial abuse and scams in the county. Victims are
losing tens of thousands of dollars to perpetrators outside of the county. Continue
community education and outreach with local law enforcement and financial
institutions, FBI and FTC to address financial scams
Child Welfare Services
1. Increase the Management oversight and capacity for Child Welfare Operations,
case review, protocol integrity to minimize safety risk and increase success of
families and youth
2. Train and develop staff in the Safety Organized Practice model as a means to
strengthen social work practice
3. Work to streamline processes with the local Court
4. Continue to review and revise practice around timely eligibility determinations
and payment to foster families
5. Promote/recruit foster family homes and emergency placements in Trinity County
Eligibility
1. Continue to determine best practices and develop written procedures in line with
State and Federal policies as they are developed for the implementation of the
Affordable Care Act and all changes surrounding the Act
2. Develop policy and process to best address Medi-Cal eligibility and coverage for
the inmate population to ensure that all eligible inmates are enrolled into medical
coverage effective the first day of release
3. Maintain full staff and increase staff retention over prior years’ retention rates
4. Meet compliant benefit issuance timeframes
5. Begin implementation of a task-based model for program administration
Employment Services
1. Work towards full implementation of Family Stabilization regulation
2. Quickly identify and work with families coming into the Welfare To Work program
to stabilize them thru case management and agency referrals to eliminate
barriers
3. Expand the Subsidized Employment program and look at transitioning into
Expanded Subsidized Employment to reach more participants providing
opportunity to be self-sufficient thru employment
Public Health
1. Implement Adult Protective Services Home visiting Program and Home Visiting
program for High Risk Mothers and Infants
2. Explore implementation of Fluoride Varnishing Program
3. Increase community education strategies to align with desired health outcomes
4. Prepare and secure continued WIC funding application
5. Place a generator in Public Health Department to ensure vaccine safety during
power outages and also being able to run Department Operations Center (DOC)
6. Placement of HAM Radio Antenna in the Public Health Department to strengthen
Public Health ability to communicate to outside entities in disaster incident
7. Update Communication system California Health Alert Network for Emergency
Preparedness partners

TCBHS will focus extensively in the coming year on crisis response activities.
With the award of the SB 82 Triage Grant funding from the Oversight and Accountability
Commission, TCBHS is in a position to expand our Crisis Service. Hours of operation will
be extended to reduce the need for the local emergency room creating a more community
friendly response. In May of 2014, TCBHS will launch a community campaign against the
myths around mental illness that can lead to suicide. To support this campaign a new
webpage is being developed on the County system that will provide community support. It is
apparent there will be much to do to streamline programs so TCBHS can meet the needs of
the community.
Time line: This project will take most of 2014 to complete.
Funding Source: SB 82 Grant funding; Medi-Cal reimbursement from service billings; 1991
Realignment Dollars; MHSA Funds.
Justification: Suicide rates in the county are high, and many services to support residents in
need are stretched thin. As a County Behavioral Health organization, TCBHS must update
our business plan for the future.
Responsible Persons: The Leadership Team at TCBHS will be primarily responsible.
Outcomes:
 Increased hours of live crisis intervention, especially on weekends.
 Increased capacity to serve more community members.
 Relief for the local ER and Sheriff.
 Reduction in suicide attempts and a quicker response when they happen.
 Improved quality of life for Trinity County residents.
2. Activity: TCBHS will continue to focus more extensively on the reorganization of the
Clinical Services Division in the coming year. With the hiring of a clinical supervisor, it is
the Agency’s intent to add depth to the clinical services provided both in Weaverville and
Hayfork. In the past year, as a way to measure the Agency’s success, TCBHS introduced
three (3) new outcome measures. TCHBS will be analyzing this new data to learn ways we
may be able to improve services. Evidence-based practices will continue to be a primary
focus. We will be sending five (5) persons to Seattle for training because of a grant received
from the Child Abuse prevention Council. We also hope to send at least two (2) therapists to
training for Functional Family Therapy.
More experienced presence in Hayfork.
 Outcome measures to be in place for all clients served.
 A more developed licensed crisis response backup team.
 Evidence-based practices employed by TCBHS.
 Better clinical outcomes for the clients of the Agency.

TCBHS will focus on projects related to the Quality Improvement (QI) Program in
the coming year. With a Quality Improvement Coordinator in place, the hope is to collect
and analyze the data that the outcome measures produce. TCBHS will participate in an
External Quality Review process on April 10, 2014, as facilitated by the APS Health
Organization. The Federal Government mandates this review since TCBHS is a Medi-Cal
provider. TCBHS will also participate in a tri-annual audit system wide with the Department
of Health Care Services (DHCS) beginning during the week of May 19. In order to support
the data needs of the Agency, a data plan has been developed in conjunction with the County
Administrative Office (CAO) to reorganize the Information Services (IS) utilized by TBHS
shifting our Agency Network from Kings View to County IS and purchasing a new server.
TCBHS is also participating in a state learning collaborative as a project of the QI Committee
that is focusing on ways to understand and support recovery in our Agency.

Noel J. O’Neill will take the lead but all managers and staff at TCBHS will
participate in a variety of ways. The QIC Coordinator, Tanya Menezes-Cooper, will
be immersed in this entire activity.
 Mary Emory will interface with Kings View Business Services to provide the various
reports and data that are needed in the reviews.
 Pam Thayer, a Quality Assurance Contractor, on contract with TCBHS from North
Valley Catholic Social Services (NVCCS), and Sue Sirlin, on contract with TCBHS
from Outlook Associates, will interface with APS Health Organization and focus on
the two (2) Primary Intervention Projects (PIP) that are required to evaluate certain
clinical and administrative practices.
 Julie Ashton-Boyd and Anne Lagorio will respond to questions about access and
crisis and quality of clinical services.
 Joyce Ott, Patient Rights Advocate, and Boe Anna Gorsuch and Rosalyn Santos, as
consumer Peer Specialists, will describe consumer involvement in TCBHS programs.
Justification: These are required activities that are associated with the Managed Care
Contract that TCBHS has with the State Department of Mental Health.
Outcomes:
 The hope is that services will be improved and that better quality and delivery of
services are the result of the efforts of the review.
 The final report may contain recommendations that could improve various aspects of
clinic functioning.
4. TCBHS will continue to support the Wellness Center’s Client Drop-In Centers (Milestones in
Weaverville and Horizons in Hayfork) to generate a wider variety of activities than are
currently available, especially activities that promote Recovery Principles that might lead to
prevocational and vocational outcomes. The development of a new Innovation Plan to be
submitted to the Oversight and Accountability Commission will be accomplished. As an
Innovative Program, Milestones Outreach Support Team, or M.O.S.T., is a team of
individuals who have completed a leadership program with Milestones, and who typically are
extra hire employees, providing support and follow-up case management for other peers of
the Agency. The goal in the coming year is to see how this remarkable effort may be able to
benefit clients of the Clinic in such a manner that more members of the Drop-In Centers can
benefit from their services. TCBHS will greatly expand this program in our new Innovation
Program request to be submitted to the Oversight and Accountability Commission. Our desire
is to train Peer Specialists to have the skills they need to offer initial contacts with persons
frequenting the Clinic and Wellness Centers so there is never a wait by the county resident
for an intervention. This past year, a Work Readiness Program was developed and offered in
the fall by the Occupational Therapist on staff, and this concept will be greatly expanded and
offered at no charge to any community member who desires to better prepare themselves for
the workforce.
Timeline: This is an activity that will take the full fiscal year to address.
Funding Sources and Status: The primary revenue for this activity will be MHSA;
Community Supports and Services, and Innovation dollars will be utilized. Both of these
funding streams are approved and available as budgeted.
Justification: The Wellness Center’s Drop-In Centers are meant to be more than just an
environment for acceptance and socialization. Peer Support and Recovery from mental
illness are primary goals. The Drop-In Centers should promote activities that will assist
clients to take better control of their lives and potentially, in some cases, lead to gainful
employment, either in sheltered or open market settings.
Responsible Persons: The Mental Health Board; the Mental Health Services Act Manager,
Marlinda Butler; the Board of Directors at the Wellness Center’s Drop-In Centers; the
Occupational Therapist, Dr. Anne MacRae, the Leadership Team of the Agency; and the
clients themselves.
Outcomes:
 More opportunities for consumers and family members to participate in the activities
at the Wellness Center’s Client Drop-In Centers which will lead to Recovery and will
potentially lead to work settings, either sheltered or on the open market.
 A better and stronger partnership between the public mental health system and the
consumers of services so the strengths of consumers and family members can be
utilized in filling gaps in service that currently exist.
 Development of a stronger and independent client community at the Wellness
Center’s Client Drop-In Centers where the daily census is on the rise.
Continue to pursue increasing our State & Federal Performance Goals as assigned by
the State.
 Continue to work on inventory listing and disposing of old no longer used equipment &
furniture after the remodel has been completed and room furnished.
 Work to continue to increase collections through Early Intervention with the
wireless computer system used in court.
 Continue updating our office procedure manual to keep it up to date with required
State & Federal instructions and changes.
 Work more closely with the local Health & Human Services agency and Behavioral
Health Services Department to help develop more interaction with the three
agencies to enhance greater services to the citizens of Trinity County.
 Streamline our processes to work more efficiently and effectively with fewer
employees.
Despite the fact that Trinity County is now reporting the lowest “Unemployment Rate” in
seven years, it is suspected that these numbers actually reflect numbers of unemployed
individuals who have timed out of unemployment benefits, because our actual caseload data
does not reflect non-custodial parents returning to regular paid work. Many, however, do
appear to have gone to work in Trinity’s underground economy, and our efforts to draw these
individuals into child support compliance are being increased.
Trinity County, along with seven other Northern Counties are participating in a pilot project,
training staff in Moral Reconation Therapy (MRT). The cost to train local staff will be low,
than each county will seek to partner with its local Behavioral Health Department in
implementing a Child Support MRT pilot project in each county.
We are are planning on maintaining the current 2.5 FTE of University paid staff in Trinity
County.Major goals for the coming fiscal year include continuing to develop corps of Master
Gardener volunteers across the county. Staff are planning on conducting workshops on fruit tree
and garden maintenance, food preservation and nutrition, forest fuels, water measurement and
other needs identified by the community.
Trends
The current drought situation has intensified the importance of quantifying water use on
irrigated farms and ranches. The CalFresh staff will be working in classroom across the County
conducting food and nutrition lessons and working in the community promoting healthy eating.
It the past few months we have been able to fill three vacant patrol positions. With the hiring of these
new deputies, and as a condition of employment, I was able to place them in our more remote communities
as resident deputies. It had been over a decade since the communities of Southern Trinity, Down River and
Trinity Center had adequate Sheriff’s Office coverage. Having deputies embedded in these areas will
provide the Sheriff’s Office with much needed intelligence regarding criminal activity that may have not been
captured while these positions were vacant.
We have also had an open detective position for over a year. My plan is to fill this position in
September. The Detective Division has been overwhelmed with violent and property crimes and the
assistance of another detective has been needed for quite some time.
The Narcotics Division continues to do outstanding work. While understaffed for the size and scope of
illegal narcotics cases that exist in Trinity County they have joined forces with various local and federal
agencies to expand their ability address the ever expanding drug trade. These relationships are vital for a
small law enforcement agency like ours.
The Trinity County Jail continues to be a major area of concern that constitutes significant liability for
the County. The jail is an antiquated and outdated facility that presents substantial safety concerns for both
staff and inmates alike. The number of bookings into the jail has decreased slightly but the average daily
population is consistently above the jail’s rated capacity level of fifty-three. In fact the only way we have
managed to hold the population close to the authorized level is through early releases and increases in the
electronic monitoring program. In an effort to address safety concerns we have filled all allocated
correctional officer positions this past year. Unfortunately, attrition in the jail is an ongoing concern as
current officers are continually seeking enhanced opportunities with other agencies. However, our goal is to
overcome these obstacles and provide an effective and efficient jail operation. Also, we will continue to
pursue state funding sources for a new jail facility.
Another area of concern is our vacant Evidence Tech position. We currently have a retired Sergeant
assisting part-time with our evidence handling and storage. This is a full-time position that requires constant
attention to insure that evidence vital to the prosecution of criminal cases is properly handled and stored. I
would hope that the funding would be provided to fill this very important position.

This year the staffing level in the Probation Department is not expected to change although the budget
reflects a request for an additional $54,177. This is attributed to the anticipated decrease in revenues from
$1,138,859 FY 13/14 to $1,126,560 14/15, as well as an increase in salaries, benefits and indirect costs. As
a cost savings measure our contract with Candor Consulting for ongoing staff training in risk/needs
assessment, case planning and supervision strategies was not renewed.
The adult felony probation caseloads, including the AB109 cases, are expected to remain relatively level.
Ideally we would like to add two additional Deputy Probation Officers to allow for increased supervision ability
for community safety, but short of obtaining additional grants, this is very unlikely. If adequately funded we
intend to continue to operate and supervise the Home Electronic Monitoring Program which as noted in last
year’s accomplishments provided 1100 beds days of relief to the adult jail at a savings to the county of
$84,700. The program is staff intensive and would require we retain at a minimum our present staffing level.
With regards to juvenile delinquency prevention, intervention, and treatment, given severe budget
restrictions, we will continue to evaluate and identify the best method of providing comprehensive
community-based juvenile correctional prevention, intervention, and programming with the resources we are
provided. This includes the creation of an exploratory committee for implementing a native American-based
correctional treatment program in the juvenile hall/camp facility that could generate additional operating
revenue to serve Trinity County youth as well as seek to improve long-term outcomes to all youth served by
the program. Additionally, we will continue to explore every alternate funding source to supplement juvenile
justice services. Further, we are completing final arrangements of contracts with CDCR-DJJ for state
placement of delinquent youth, as well as seeking additional contracts with neighboring counties to ensure
adequate services are in place to meet community protection and individual correctional treatment needs of
youth.
In order to retain all available options for juvenile justice programming, we will continue to maintain the
juvenile hall facility and all state-required inspections to ensure a smooth transition back to full or partial
operation if adequate funding becomes available. This includes continued operation of the Court School
program to both support the local school districts in managing problem youth, as well as providing the courts
with a valuable in-county educational resource.
In an effort to enhance our relationship and commitment to our schools, we plan to bolster our juvenile field
services and provide more effective support to our schools and communities we are training two existing
Deputy Probation Officers as School Resource Officers this fall. Our ability to provide more effective early
intervention services to the schools may also assist the Sheriff’s already limited ability to respond to low level
issues. Although there’s no guarantee, in moving our very limited juvenile justice resources to more
prevention functions, we hope to avert more serious juvenile crimes that would quickly erode our budget.

- Continue training Biologist/Inspector I on various programs, such as Pesticide Enforcement, Organic
Program, and Weights and Measures.
-Seek out grants for invasive weed control.
-Emphasize inspections of plant materials for Pierce’s disease, glassy-winged sharpshooter, and Sudden Oak
Death (Phytophthora ramorum).
-Map pest and disease locations using camera and GIS mapping techniques.
-Work with the Weed Management Cooperative to develop effective weed control programs.
-Survey areas of diffuse & spotted knapweed, plumeless thistle, and hoary cress infestations.
-Survey different areas of the county for the gypsy moth which have not been trapped recently.
-Increase Quantity Control and Weighmaster inspections in Weights & Measures.
-Conduct inspections of weighing and measuring devices.
-Obtain a scale to perform more quantity control work.
-Obtain a cart to carry two 5 gallon test measures to perform retail fuel pump inspections.
-Continue pesticide use monitoring inspections on Agriculture and Structural Companies.
Provide banking services for all county departments, county schools and special
districts
 Disburse funds by paying county warrants, electronic payments and electronic payroll
 Manage the county portfolio while maintaining principal and providing an effective
cash flow to meet expenditure needs
 Invest idle funds and increase portfolio diversification
 Working with financial institutions on conversions and effects from merger
 Working with schools and special districts to meet payment requirements as a result of
the Obama care implementation
 Completion of bulk mailing permit to create savings for mailings
 Recruit and hire an Assistant Treasurer-Tax Collector
 Provide training for countywide fiscal staff on cash handling procedures and safety
 Continue cross-training to streamline internal departmental processes
 Continue updates for our department webpage to provide more information to the
public
 Work with vendors of the online tax bill host for required changes
 Planning the next tax-defaulted property auction
 Meet mandated deadlines for bills, notices, reporting requirements and publications
 Assist with the conversion of our accounting software and ensuring our financial
institution requirements are met and compatible
 Planning and implementation of additional collection methods
 Planning and implementation of conversion from warrants to checks
 Continue research and planning for tax software updates or alternatives

The Department continues to maintain a reserve of $5.2 million, along with a budget that would
take us through a transition period if we were to lose Forest Reserves. It is expected another one
year extension will be approved, however, the vehicle (bill) to provide that extension has not been
identified.
With the passage of MAP – 21, the Forest Highways Program was eliminated. This in turn
discontinued the Emergency Relief for Federally Owned Roads (EFRO). This means that the
County is now required to provide all repairs to County Roads within the National Forest where it
used to be done by the Federal Highways Administration (FHWA). While this did not show a
significant decrease in our budget, we now assume approximately $1M of road maintenance
annually that was covered by other agencies. Map-21 also eliminated the Transportation
Enhancement (TE) program for Bike and Pedestrian project and replaced it with the competitive
Alternative Transportation Program (ATP).
Further impacting the road budget this year is decreased funding from the 5C program and the
Highway Users Tax (HUTA) Program being stagnant due to overpayment in previous years.
Finally, the Proposition 1b Program concluded this year. It needs to be pointed out that HUTA
had a one-time repayment for a 2008 loan, and a misappropriation of the diesel tax. This
correction gave the road department a one-time bump of $278k.
Overall, this results in a loss to the road fund of approximately $200k of discretionary funding, or
about 5%. This was offset by cuts to materials and equipment.

There is a big change in this year’s operating budget. All construction is now reflected in a
construction reserves account. By having construction within the operating budget, it was hard to
compare spending one year to the next. The construction component of the budget fluctuated by
a couple of million dollars every year depending what is scheduled for construction. This
modification accounts for the decrease in the Road Fund and an increase in the Construction
Reserves.
The biggest issue continues to be maintaining funding for rural roads in California. With the
passage of MAP-21, the state is taking a wholesale look at how things are funded, but with the
dilemma of the Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO’s), and now special interest from the
bike and pedestrian community are pushing for an even larger share. Working with Rural
Counties Task Force (RCTF), North State Super Region (NSSR), and County Engineers
Association of California (CEAC), we are looking for ways to ensure that we continue to receive
our fair share without losing further ground, and seeking ways to correct current inequities for
rural area road funding. Fortunately we have had some limited success such as increasing our
Regional Surface Transportation Program (RSTP) to be based on a formula considering road
miles vs. just population.
Cash Flow will be a significant issue over the next three years as we construct significant road
projects in the County. The Department, working with the CAO, Auditor, and Caltrans will seek
out resolutions to assist as we proceed forward.
SUMMARY
Roadway maintenance is, and will continue to be, a challenge as our roadways become older and
funding becomes less available. The Department will continue to look for opportunities to
procure funding for all divisions, road, transit, and airports, whenever the opportunity presents
itself. Also, in the interest of maximizing the effectiveness of available funds, the department
will utilize a new system that will outline high accident locations and direct effective pavement
repairs with available resources.

Planning: Indirect cost for the Planning Department has decreased significantly now that
basic policies are in place. These policies reduce the need for assistance from County
Counsel. The bulk of the work in the following year will be allocated to updating the 2014
Housing Element. Planning is committed to provide a full and comprehensive update for the
Board to take action upon within mandated time frames. Planning is now responsible for the
General Plan Update Fund and Budget ensuring that fees collected for this activity are used
for the purposes of updating the General Plan.
Environmental Health: The long empty Environmental Health Officer vacancy funded with
Health Realignment and departmental funds is expected to be filled should funding allow.
Building: It appears that building is picking up though out the state. Trinity County has yet
to see indicators of this increase. The number of permit fees is anticipated to remain
stagnant, however there has been an increase in the cost of building structures of the last
couple of year. To account for this increase, the department is increasing the valuation,
which in turn will increase the overall amount collected by approximately 7%.

Utilize current resources to effectively process applications while maintaining the best level
of service. Without revenues and limited general fund contribution, the Department staffing
continues to be below minimum standards in all sections. The outcome of this issue has been
problematic follow through, reduced counter hours, and delays in permit processing, plan
check and inspections. This will not be resolved until construction and planning activities
and funding return to previous levels. For example in Planning, we are currently at 40% of
what the discretionary planning activities were in 2007 but holding study. On a positive note,
additional funding that has been provided allowed for a 50% increase in counter time
allowing for the office to remain open through lunch time.

Update the General Plan. The current priority, due to State imposed guidelines, is to update
the Housing Element during FY 2014/15. The RCD is completing an update to the Safety
Element. The Department will continue to also investigate and pursue means to fund a more
comprehensive update of the General Plan.
Find ways to encourage property owners to get building permits. This has been a long
standing issue in the County where a large amount of buildings in the County are unpermitted
structures. Working with the Assessor’s Office and Code Enforcement, develop a program
where unpermitted structures can be identified and brought into compliance. We will also
evaluate an amnesty program to encourage owners to be compliant. This will only be
possible as time and resources allow.
Code Enforcement requires an identified funding source. Earlier the program was funded by
not hiring an Environmental Health Officer (EHO) for a three year period of time. This has
been problematic as the workload has not diminished, and the types of preventable incidents
have increased. Further, for succession purposes, a new EHO needs to be hired and trained
to understand the issues Trinity County faces. This means to continue the Code
Enforcement, external funding is required.
Succession Planning is required. Soon many of leading members of this Department will be
leaving County Service. It is expected that the Principle Planner will depart sometime
around the end of this Fiscal Year. In order to facilitate this transition, a new staff member
needs to be considered soon.

Checking plans and proposals, inspecting buildings and health issues, and enforcing the code
is, and will continue to be, a challenge as our department funding continue to limited. The
Department will continue to look for opportunities to procure funding to assist in any of the
responsibilities, whenever the opportunity presents itself. Also, in the interest of maximizing
the effectiveness of available resources, the department will utilize GIS mapping for
identifying zoning requirements and permitting issues.
Again, with a stagnant General Fund contribution and increasing cost, this Department will
not have sufficient staffing to deliver all of the basic needs, and struggles to be able to sustain
basic services.
A new funding source needs to be identified in order to continue with the Code Enforcement
Program. The inability to recover cost associated with zoning violations related to permit
violations and the marijuana industry continues to be problematic and is a critical item to
funding and continuing this position.

The biggest issue this year is to continue applying for and maintaining operational and capital
funding for Trinity Transit's service. As a rural county, public transportation is extremely
important for local residents and intercity travelers. The 5311F program covers 55.33% of
operations. Securing toll credits for FY 2015/16, will cover approximately 44.67% of
operations. Our hope is the new Federal Funding does not have any drastic effects on the FTA
5311 program. It is expected credits will be available in future years.

There is a need for significant pavement maintenance at several airports. In order to keep
the airports in good shape, maintenance is required at all airports. This will continue to
be the first priority for all future airport projects. For this fiscal year, the AAC has
directed the DOT Director to make application with the Ag Commissioner and the Health
Officer for a permit to apply herbicides within the paved areas of all airports. This will
be done with coordination from the weed committee to provide appropriate mitigations.
Caltrans Aeronautics has identified several issues concerning trees and poles that
could/have lead to operational restrictions at the airport. Staff and the AAC have met
with the Shasta Trinity National Forest Staff to discuss removal of trees within the
approach to Trinity Center. Requirements were outlined, and Staff will be working
through the winter on gaining the required permitting.
Trinity Center still has part of the airport on USFS property. Staff and the AAC met
with the Shasta Trinity National Forest Staff to discuss what is needed to acquire this
property. Staff will continue to work on this through the year. First step will be to
clearly determine what property could be exchanged.
We have received grants to repair the pavement at Ruth, Hayfork and Trinity Center
Airports. The first airport to have repairs constructed with be Ruth Airport. Work
involved includes; repairing all large cracks in the runway, sealing the smaller cracks,
then overlay the runway and place runway pavement markings. The grant requires a 10%

match, nearly $50,000, which will be funded with excess in the construction account, and
an allocation from the hangar fund. The hangar fund needs would be offset with
revenues collected from airport rental during firefighting activities.
Several of the existing hangar contracts are not consistent with the FAA Assurances.
When accepting airport grants, we are required to provide assurances that we will run the
airport equitably for all uses. One of the assurances requires that we protect against
economic discrimination. The Board has established the following monthly rates, $0.14
sq. ft. for hanger space, $0.10 sq. ft. for hangers with lease extensions, and $0.05 sq. ft.
for land for private individuals to build hangars. These funds are distributed to
operations, construction and set aside for hangar rentals. There are several existing
agreements that do not conform to this requirement and require modification. This
correction could result in an increase in revenues about 20%, or about $10-12k. This will
help offset higher than expected AWOS (weather station) expenses, and help with
construction matches that are needed in the upcoming years.
Further, Residential Through the Fence (RTTF) Agreements will have to be entered into
to memorialize all through the fence operations in Trinity County. This will also
generate some additional revenue in order to align it with FAA Assurance requirements.
Mowing was a significant issue this last spring. The AAC wants to see a better program
in place similar to what was set up in Hyampom with the Volunteer Fire Department for
the last couple of years. Further, equipment will be identified for purchase allowing for
proper budgeting next year’s budget.

Fill Assistant Auditor position within the department which has been vacant since November 1,
2013.
? Continue to conduct business with the highest ethical and due diligence standards.
? Continue to provide respectful and professional customer service.
? Continue to train and support staff on the various facets of this department.
? Continue to provide transparency and useful information to the County Administrator and Board
of Supervisors.
? Continue to meet all reporting deadlines.
? Continue to work with our consultant to prepare new or update existing financial reporting
templates
? Submit Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) for the period ending June 30, 2014 to
Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) award program.
? Continue with the implementation of the financial system upgrade. Installation and go-live date
are tentatively scheduled to occur this fiscal year.
? Work with consultant to ensure compliance with Internal Revenue Service (IRS) fringe benefit
and 1099 reporting requirements.
? County-wide Cost Allocation Plan training.
? Continue to review, update and implement when appropriate, policies and procedures.
? Staff development and training.
? Update the Auditor’s website to provide easier access to County financial and property tax
information.
? Increase support to the Citizens of Trinity County, County Departments and Special Districts.

The Department’s goals and objectives for this coming year include: Reduce the cost of
workers’ compensation claims by training representatives from each department to conduct
ergonomic evaluations for all employee workstations. This will minimize repetitive motion
injuries which have increased over the past few years. Continue to evaluate and revise current
County contract insurance requirements, review and update employee handbook policies,
conduct risk assessments in each department and provide trainings, resources and support in loss
prevention efforts to all county staff.

Going forward into 14/15 General Services will continue to maintain a structured preventive
maintenance program. This program is imperative in maintaining mechanical and structural
integrity throughout our service areas. The preventive maintenance program includes identifying
and documenting facility needs that can be prioritized for repair as resources are available. The
County’s older daily use public buildings need constant oversight to correct conditions before
they become much larger and more expensive repairs. General Services will continue to identify
and implement cost saving alternatives and opportunities to become more efficient. As
committed in years past, general services will continue working with county departments,
community service groups and volunteers supporting ways to minimize general fund impacts
while keeping public facilities open.

Our goals for 14/15 are to revise the Solid Waste Facility Permit for hours of operation at the
Hayfork Transfer Station to streamline collection/transfer operations and aid in keeping the site
in compliance and cleared of trash; replace two garbage trucks that are at the end of their lease
term or end of their useful life; provide staff with additional training to enhance operational
activities and remain in compliance with state regulations, while looking for new and/or
improved diversion methods.

Complete Trinity Center project by connecting to the integrated library system and
providing staff training.
? With new connectivity, enable the Trinity Center Branch to provide wired and wireless
Internet access as well as printing, copying, faxing and scanning services.
? Apply for a library broadband augmentation grant to connect to the CENIC network.
? Utilize CLSA funding to continue effecting improvements in the library’s communications
and delivery infrastructure.
? Continue purchasing new materials using the funding allocated for the second year of the
Zip Books program.
? Initiate and promote the new grant funded Enki digital collection.
? Provide access to self-directed work productivity tutorials and implement computer classes
for the public.
? Pursue ways to collaborate with other departments in offering services of benefit to the
community.