Safety and Security
Goal 1: Evaluate options related to the County Marijuana
Ordinance.
 Objective 1 - Move forward with any necessary revisions to
the Marijuana Ordinance with the assistance of County
Counsel and other county departments.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Adopt Developer Impact Fees.
 Objective 1 – Complete Developer Impact Fee studies in
relation to fees by June 2015.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Continue to explore solutions for our communities that
have water quality issues.
 Objective 1 - Finalize the Tulare Lake Basin Disadvantaged
Community Water Study by August 2014.
 Objective 2 - Abandon up to 80 unused water wells in the
Kaweah River Sub-Basin as part of the Kaweah Integrated
Regional Water Management Planning group's
Implementation Grant by June 2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Initiate the County’s five year 2006-2011 Strategic
Business Plan to ensure continued alignment between
community priorities and County services.

Objective 1 – Evaluate and update County initiatives by
June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Adopt and update five year Strategic Business
Plan by June 2015.
Goal 2: Work with community partners and stakeholders to
develop a Strategic Plan for the Step Up Initiative.
 Objective 1 – Create a planning document that will guide
the Step Up Program for the next 3–5 years by June 2015.
Goal 3: Review all County real property holdings and evaluate
the future needs of County departments.
 Objective 1 – Evaluate County real property holdings to
determine the need for retention or sale.
 Objective 2 – Evaluate the need for additional structures
and time frame for acquiring such structures.
Goal 4: Identify optimal solution for increasing radio reception in
Three Rivers for public safety by June 2015.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Begin the restructuring of our Pest Detection program
so that by June 2015 information is gathered, utilized, and
disseminated in the most expedient manner possible taking
advantage of new technology and the creation of an e-trapping
program.
 Objective 1 – Use Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
technology to enhance the accuracy of our trapping data as
well as move towards a paperless program. Complete the
first phase by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Purchase adequate hardware and software to
interface with and use GIS technology. Train personnel in
the proper use of this equipment so that by June 2015 the
first phase of the restructuring will be completed.
Goal 2: Increase communication with the public and industry so
that information can be accessed and shared through multiple
avenues. Complete the basic transformation by June 2015 but
continually upgrade and refine as needed.
 Objective 1 – Branch out to other social media platforms
that may be more easily used and accepted by a changing
population. Launch the first use of a different
communication method by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Further develop our newly improved website
to offer different types of information and links to valuable
sources so that the public and all stakeholders can routinely
be assured that the information they require can be
accessed through our site without the need to call in.
Information regarding consumer protections and Weights
and Measures issues are scheduled to be some of the first
to be posted by June 2015.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Renew our commitment to the agricultural community
as well as all of the residences of Tulare County regarding the
safe use of pesticides at home and on the farm making tangible
advancement in the methods we employ to make contact with
those that we protect.
 Objective 1 – Use a well-planned strategy that utilizes the
Department of Pesticide Regulation (DPR) resources that
include personnel, trainings, and written materials. Request
one on one ride-a-long training by DPR so that each
inspector gets the benefit of personalized training by the end
of the fiscal year. Then, use this training to complete more
than 265 inspections in an effort to educate operators and
applicators on the safe use of pesticides by June 2015
 Objective 2 – Increase the number of individual contacts
made by at least 5% so that farmworkers and the general
public are increasingly aware of how to safely be around and
use pesticides. This will be accomplished by increasing
outreach using the improved website and Facebook
activities by June 2015.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Value all taxable property in Tulare County in order to
accurately publish the Secured and Unsecured Assessment Roll
and deliver it to the County Auditor by June 2015.
 Objective 1 – Value an estimated 156,900 real property
accounts. There are approximately 71,000 single-family
residences and condominiums still under Proposition 8
(decline in value) review, which is due to the still recovering
housing market; value an estimated 31,500 business and
personal property accounts by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Deliver an accurate and complete assessment
to the County Auditor by June 2015.
Goal 2: Replace end of life mainframe Property Information
Management System (PIMS) in Assessor’s office.
 Objective 1 – Take proposal to Board regarding
replacement system before November 2014.
 Objective 2 – Implement PIMS new base year configuration
by March 2015.
 Objective 3 – Implement Phase I of base conversion by
June 2015.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Implement paperless workpapers for audits and other
attest engagements utilizing PropSystems software.
 Objective 1 – Modify the audit and other attest working
paper manuals to incorporate the paperless environment.
 Objective 2 – Provide training on the new procedures to all
auditors to help facilitate the paperless environment by
December 2014.
 Objective 3 – Have the new procedures completely
implemented and begin using by January 2015.
Goal 2: Purchase and Implement “Ballot on Demand” for the
Registrar of Voters Division.
 Objective 1 – Purchase ballot on demand printer by
September 2014.
 Objective 2 - Have the new process completed and working
for the November 2014 General Election.
Goal 3: Enhance cash management by helping Special Districts
and departments receive credit faster for their deposits.
 Objective 1 – Promote direct deposits for outlying special
districts and departments in FY 2014/15.
 Objective 2 – Test a “smart safe” product which allows for
direct deposit to our bank from the Tax Collector’s office by
December 2014.

Goal 1: Streamline cash handling and increase sales by
implementing a debit/credit card system at the Surplus Store.
 Objective 1 – Work with TCiCT and complete installation of
software into computers/register by October 2014.
 Objective 2 – Train staff to use new computer/register
system by September 2014.
 Objective 3 – Increase sales due to the availability of
debit/credit machine by 5%.
Goal 2: Complete the AFIN procurement software upgrade and
complete training of County staff of the new functions of the
software.
 Objective 1 – Work with TCiCT to complete AFIN
Procurement software upgrades by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Train County staff on how to use new
Procurement software to maintain and track more accurate
records of items purchased countywide by June 2015.
Goal 3: Update Purchasing Policy and Procedure Manual.
 Objective 1 – Update the Policy and Procedure Manual that
will meet current standards and bring policies and
procedures up-to-date by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Train departments on any new changes
regarding the Policy and Procedure Manual by June 2015.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Ensure a safe water supply.
 Objective 1 – Participate in 12 monthly County Groundwater
management planning meetings. Provide science based
data for County decision makers and the general public as
information becomes available in FY 2014/15.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Enhance competitive, sustainable food systems.
 Objective 1 – Update production manuals for alfalfa and
blackeye beans and make them available on the web by
June 2015. These publications will have the basic
information and latest research on recommended practices
for successful growing of these crops.
 Objective 2 – A research trial will continue to measure the
water requirements of citrus trees. The results of this study
will provide research based water requirements for efficient
irrigation scheduling and water conservation practices. The
results are to be compiled by June 2015.
 Objective 3 – Reduce impact of invasive weeds. Weed
management research will be conducted on cropping and
non-crop systems. The results are to be presented at
producers and industry meetings by March 2015.
 Objective 4 – Developing research trials aimed at mitigating
the effects of heat stress in dairy herds. Study of why some
animals are not as stressed during the hot summer months.
The results are to be compiled and analyzed by December
2014 and presented by June 2015.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Enhance the health of Californians.
 Objective 1 – Conduct nutrition and family consumer
science research and implement programs that address
childhood obesity and the human nutritional status, with the
goal to reach 5,000 families from EFNEP and FSNEP
programs and to expand the SNEP to reach over 5,000
youth by June 2015.
Goal 2: Advance youth leadership and science literacy in
natural resources, agriculture, and nutrition.
 Objective 1 – Advisor to implement new “Step-It-Up-2-
Thrive” curriculum to local 4-H Club programs by June 2015.
Goal 3: Promote water conservation and drought strategies for
urban landscapes.
 Objective 1 – Expand outreach with new educational
opportunities to learn more about Gardening “Central Valley
Style” by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Establish new partnerships with local
agencies, organizations and clubs by June 2015.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Improve legal framework for effective civil code
enforcement.
 Objective 1 – Continue to work with departments to identify
those chapters of Tulare County Ordinance Code pertaining
to the County’s civil code enforcement authority that need to
be updated and improved by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Continue to work with departments to update
at least one chapter of the Tulare County Ordinance to
update the County’s civil code enforcement authority by
June 2015.
 Objective 3 – Update and complete one chapter in a Code
Enforcement Manual by June 2015.
Economic Well Being
Goal 1: Continue to improve County effectiveness in
contracting for goods and services.
 Objective 1 – Provide or update three online training
modules on contracts and contract administration using the
County Counsel web page by June 2015.
Goal 2: Create a Tax, Assessment, Fee and Financing
Reference Guide for internal use to advise departments and
develop trainings on each topic.
 Objective 1 – Draft a chapter for the Tax, Assessment, Fee
and Financing Reference Guide, setting out fee adoption
procedures and describing the basis for, and limits, on
County fees by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Develop an on-line training for departments
on setting County fees by April 2015.
 Objective 3 – Prepare a first draft of a Chapter on Taxes
and a Chapter on Assessments for the Tax, Assessment,
Fee and Financing Reference Guide for internal use to
advise departments by June 2015.
 Objective 4 – Develop an on-line training for new Deputy
County Counsels on Taxes, Assessments and Fees by June
2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Create a practice guide for internal use to advise those
departments conducing informal administrative hearings on
matters appealable to the BOS under Tulare County Ordinance
Code Section 165.
 Objective 1 – Prepare a proposed ordinance to
substantively update section 165 (pertaining to appeals to
the Board) of the Tulare County ordinance by March 2015.
 Objective 2 – Create a practice guide for internal use to
advise hearing officers in the administrative hearings held
under Chapter 23 of Part I of the Tulare County Ordinance
Code pertaining to Administrative Fines by June 2015.
 Objective 3 – Create a practice guide for internal use to
advise department advocates in administrative hearings held
under Chapter 23 of Part I of the Tulare County Ordinance
Code pertaining to Administrative Fines by July 2015.
Goal 2: Create trainings and tools for departments to assist
them in handling routine legal matters on their own, and to also
recognize when they need to refer a legal issue to County
Counsel.
 Objective 1 – Develop an on-line training for departments
on how to respond to routine public record requests on their
own, using our guidelines, protocols, boilerplates, samples,
and checklists by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Identify one new, routine legal subject area
that clients could be trained to handle on their own, develop
training and boilerplates, develop training materials and
checklists, and provide relevant training by June 2015.
 Objective 3 – Implement one or more, regular blogs on new
legal topics that could potentially impact or be useful to our
clients by June 2015.
 Objective 4 – Create a new legal resource for the County
Counsel website and notify clients by June 2015.
Goal 3: Implement the succession management plan for the
County Counsel’s Office that will assist in the preservation of
institutional knowledge and in the maintenance of a highly
skilled, motivated and professional County legal team.
 Objective 1 – Update and enhance the Office’s case
management system to increase its ease of use by January
2015 and implement an internal training program to more
fully utilize the case management system by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Develop projects, training modules and
mentoring programs designed to preserve and pass long the
heritage of legal experience, institutional knowledge and skill
sets to the newer attorneys and legal staff by June 2015.
 Objective 3 – Create a Tulare County specific legal
resource by retrieving and preserving the past decades of
County Counsel legal advice to our clients through
converting older, hard copy opinions and other office created
legal resources into digital formats by June 2015.
 Objective 4 – Revitalize Law Clerk internship program in
partnership with San Joaquin Law School.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Develop and implement Impact Fee Program.
 Objective 1 – Revise the inventory of buildings associated
with impact fees by December 2014.
 Objective 2 – Conduct and complete outreach to Cities by
February 2015.
 Objective 3 – Submit agenda item for approval of Impact
Fees to Board of Supervisors by June 2015.
Goal 2: Initiate the process to update the County’s Five Year
Strategic Plan.
 Objective 1 – Gather County and community input through
stakeholder meetings and surveys by March 2015.
 Objective 2 – Complete draft update of the County’s Five
Year Strategic Plan by May 2015.
 Objective 3 – Submit update to Board of Supervisors by
June 2015.
Goal 3: Automate the Fair Political Practices Commission Form
700 - Statement of Economic Interests filings for County
departments, Boards, Commissions and Committees, and
Special Districts through the eDisclosure solution. The
eDisclosure solution provides a streamlined, simplified method
for filers to complete their forms online, as well as for Filing
Officials to assist in managing filings and Biennial Reviews.
 Objective 1 - Purchase and installation of the eDisclosure
software in test environment, configuration, and user
training.
 Objective 2 - Go live with the eDisclosure software by April
2015.
Goal 4: Migrate from the Questys Enterprise/LegiStream v9
system to the Questys ECMx/LSx v11 system that supports the
Board of Supervisors meeting agenda creation and publication.
 Objective 1 – Work with Questys and IT staff to rebuild the
Agenda Template for Questys ECMx/LSx v11.
 Objective 2 – Installation and configuration of the Questys
ECMx/LSx v11.
 Objective 3 – Receive training from our IT staff on how to
use the new system for creating our agenda.
 Objective 4 – Go live using the Questys ECMx/LSx v11.
Goal 5: Implement the Granicus Board & Commissions system
to streamline the management of government body
appointments, vacancies, and applications.
 Objective 1 – Purchase and installation of the Board &
Commissions software.
 Objective 2 – Receive training on how to input all current
appointments and data details.
 Objective 3 – Design application templates.
 Objective 4 – Go live using the software for tracking all
future appointments, vacancies, and monitoring term ending
dates.
Goal 6: Ensure departments have suitable office space by
developing a long-term plan for the County's space needs.
 Objective 1 – Conduct a County space needs work session
with departments and the Board of Supervisors by October
2014.
 Objective 2 – Determine the future use plan for the two
Office of Education-occupied buildings by November 2014.
 Objective 3 – Identify any necessary property acquisition or
development options by January 2015.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Restore various park locations to pre-drought
conditions.
 Objective 1 – During the drought of 2014, the Parks system
reduced watering to 50%. For FY 2014/15, precipitation is
expected to return to normal levels. During the summer
irrigation, systems will be fine-tuned by October 2014, and
turf will be restored by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – During the drought of 2014, the Parks system
suffered some loss of trees. Replacement trees will be
planted by February 2015.
Goal 2: Install a new cashiering system that will work for Park
Reservations to improve cash management and customer
services.
 Objective 1 – Meet with Treasurer’s Office to create a team
for implementation of iNovah cashiering software by
February 2014.
 Objective 2 – Install iNovah Cashiering Software at the
Administration Office and test by April 2014.
 Objective 3 – Train staff on input requirements for the new
system by June 2015.
Goal 3: Work with TCiCT to complete the development of an
independent Property Management Database to streamline
several of the County’s leasing and management functions.
 Objective 1 – Complete the cooperative effort with TCiCT to
establish the property database and make it available to the
County Administrative and Board offices by February 2015.
Goal 4: Identify and purchase a site in Porterville for use by
HHSA as a Wellness and Recovery Center by January 2015.
 Objective 1 – Obtain Board approval of a Notice of Intent to
Purchase by November 2014.
 Objective 2 – Obtain Board approval of a Property Purchase
Contract by January 2014.
 Objective 3 – Close escrow on property by April 2015.
Goal 5: Do necessary ground work needed to develop and
open Italian exhibition as part of the History of Farm Labor and
Agriculture’s rotating cultural display.
 Objective 1 – Establish a committee of community residents
and local leaders to represent the Italian community by
August 2014.
 Objective 2 – Meet with committee to gather artifacts from
local community to create a display, and identify community
members to be involved in the opening event by September
2014.
 Objective 3 – Install the new exhibit and host an opening
reception for Italian exhibit by end of October 2014.
Goal 6: Utilize new copier count automation software to gather
data to improve customer service and reduce billing errors.
 Objective 1 – Provide additional customer service to each
department by automatically gathering copy counts.
 Objective 2 – Reduce monthly workforce labor by
automatically collecting recurrent counts instead of emailing
and/or calling each department.
 Objective 3 – Reduce billing errors with accurate reading of
monthly copy count.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Prepare to replace older Voice over Internet Protocol
(VoIP) and network equipment
 Objective 1 – Identify older equipment due to be replaced.
 Objective 2 – Prepare documentation for equipment lease
in FY 2015/16.

Establish a Public Information Officer position by assigning a full-time employee to handle relations with the
media and the public at-large.
Goal 2: Integrate electronic discovery process with local law
enforcement agencies to allow uploading of digital evidence
directly into DAMION.
Goal 3: Conduct bi-monthly trainings on current topics which
will benefit law-enforcement partners as a whole.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: To increase the safety and security of the senior
population, HHSA’s Aging Services Division will address
barriers to service access.
 Objective 1 – Assess the training needs of In-Home
Supportive Services (IHSS) providers in order to improve the
care and safety of clients. A training plan will be developed
by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Offer assistance with enrollment in the
AlertTC Program to 25% of the Multipurpose Senior Services
Program population by June 2015.
Goal 2: To increase the safety and security of all County
residents, HHSA’s Office of Emergency Services will revise and
test critical emergency plans and adopt the recently approved
position-specific training program for Emergency Operations
Center personnel.
 Objective 1 – Revise and adopt Part 3 (Procedures) of the
Tulare County/Operational Area Emergency Operations Plan
by March 2015.
 Objective 2 – Conduct an operations-based exercise,
involving partner agencies and local jurisdictions, to test the
Tulare Operational Area Mass Evacuation and Mass Care &
Shelter Plans by June 2015.
 Objective 3 – Provide position-specific training to key
Operational Area Emergency Operations Center staff
members by June 2015.
Goal 3: To minimize harmful environmental conditions for
Tulare County residents, HHSA will develop an ongoing
outreach and education program that provides Environmental
Health training to business owners and community
organizations.
 Objective 1 – Conduct ten outreach trainings with various
industry groups that are regulated by the Environmental
Health Division, by June 2015.
Goal 4: To increase the ability of Tulare County’s healthcare
system to prepare, respond, and recover from incidents that
have public health and medical impacts, HHSA’s Public Health
Emergency Preparedness Program (PHEP) will work with
healthcare organizations to achieve healthcare system
preparedness.
 Objective 1 – Hold six meetings annually with the PHEP
Advisory Committee and an additional six subcommittee
meetings with community partners to review, revise, and
integrate emergency plans. Two emergency plans will be
reviewed each year.
 Objective 2 – Conduct a mock exercise by November 2014,
to evaluate the ability to respond to an emerging infectious

disease outbreak in the County. A corrective action plan will
be developed by January 2015.
 Objective 3 – By December 2014, revise local PHEP
planning to align with the California Department of Public
Health’s Emergency Operations Manual as well as existing
local partner policies.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: To enhance the health and economic well-being of
children and families, HHSA will expand healthcare outreach
and enrollment efforts to Tulare County residents who do not
currently have healthcare coverage.
 Objective 1 – Coordinate with community organizations and
partners to complete five information sessions throughout
Tulare County, to educate and increase awareness of
available healthcare coverage options, by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Enroll an additional 5,000 low-income, Medi-
Cal–eligible individuals by June 2015.
Goal 2: To enhance the well-being of children in the foster care
system, HHSA will continue to seek placement of foster youth in
the least restrictive, most family-like setting. Relative homes and
quality foster homes are two of the least restrictive options.
 Objective 1 – Increase the percentage of Tulare County
children placed with relatives and County-licensed foster
homes to 54% of children in out-of-home care by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Reduce the percentage of Tulare County
children placed in a higher level of care, including group
homes and foster family agencies, to 31% of children by
June 2015.
Goal 3: To improve the quality of care for Tulare County
consumers and increase their ability to access mental health
electronic health records (EHR), HHSA will implement new
myHealthPointe software that will enable consumers to access
information from the Netsmart AVATAR EHR system and
communicate with clinical staff electronically.
 Objective 1 – Identify the elements to be included in the
Netsmart myHealthPointe software by January 2015.
 Objective 2 – Train consumer and County staff on using the
myHealthPointe software by June 2015.
Goal 4: To protect the health of Tulare County residents from
communicable diseases, HHSA will increase the number of
partnerships for immunization, increase the number of morbidity
reports submitted, and implement a quality improvement plan.
 Objective 1 – By June 2015, the Immunization Program will
increase the number of partnerships with school districts,
other agencies/departments, and other community sites by
10%, from 30 to 33.
 Objective 2 – By June 2015, increase the number of
community healthcare providers that submit confidential
morbidity reports via the California Reportable Disease
Information Exchange (CalREDIE) system by five facilities,
from four to nine.
 Objective 3 – By June 2015, the Public Health Branch will
collaborate with Fresno State Central Valley Health Policy
Institute to implement Performance Management Quality
Improvement (PMQI) in two of the Public Health units.
Goal 5: Address the prevalence of Tulare County residents who
are obese or overweight (and therefore at risk for chronic
diseases) by increasing interest in healthy foods and physical
activity, providing health- and nutrition-related educational
opportunities, and establishing linkages to Tulare County
community networks.
 Objective 1 – HHSA’s WIC program will host at least ten in-
service or training sessions for HHSA staff and local public
health partners on health-related topics such as
breastfeeding and nutrition, to build capacity for educating
residents on chronic disease prevention through health
eating and physical activity, by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Improve linkages and create networks for
pregnant and parenting teens and their children by providing
one-on-one education to 100 participants in the California
Personal Responsibility Education Program (CA PREP) by
June 2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: HHSA will improve outreach, engagement, and peerdelivered
services for Tulare County individuals who receive
outpatient specialty mental health services by redesigning the
mental health outpatient services model and piloting it at the
Visalia Adult Integrated Clinic (VAIC).
 Objective 1 – By July 2014, finalize adoption of the Mental
Health Redesign Manual, an implementation guide
developed by mental health managers, staff, and peers over
the past fiscal year.
 Objective 2 – By July 2014, adopt the newly created
Redesign Evaluation Plan to track outcome data and
indicators that measure performance and efficiency.
 Objective 3 – By July 2014, commence full implementation
of the redesigned outpatient pilot program.
 Objective 4 – Conduct preliminary analysis of program
results by June 2015.
Goal 2: HHSA will develop and implement sustainable practices
that increase knowledge of cultural and linguistic competency,
skills, and service delivery.
 Objective 1 – Provide cultural competency training to all
Agency employees via the Diversity Works Manager’s
Toolkit, Diversity Blog, and HHSA.net internal employee
communications, through June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Partner with Agency branches to create an
annual training event for all Agency staff with a cultural
competency component and client service delivery theme by
June 2015.
 Objective 3 – Develop a system to increase public
awareness of HHSA’s cultural and linguistic competency
initiative, in collaboration with the Community Outreach
Team and Agency branches, by June 2015.
Goal 3: The County Health Care Centers will work toward
implementation of the Patient-Centered Medical Home (PCMH)
model that integrates a patient’s physical and mental health
care needs, including prevention and wellness, acute care, and
chronic care.
 Objective 1 – Expand the integration of Mental Health
Services at County Health Care Centers by piloting a
program between the County Health Care Center, HHSA’s
Mental Health Branch, and Anthem Blue Cross. These
partners will work together to implement a screening process
to improve the detection, diagnosis, and treatment of
persons experiencing depression. The program will screen
at least 1,200 clinic patients by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Provide prevention and wellness education to
patients in a one-on-one or group setting to address such
topics as diabetes management, sexually transmitted
disease (STD) education, dental care/cavity prevention,
healthy pregnancy, and HIV education. These will be offered
in both English and Spanish. The clinics will provide at least
20 group classes and 250 one-on-one counseling sessions
by June 2015.

Goal 4: To improve the efficiency of laboratory services to the
residents and medical providers of Tulare County, the Public
Health Lab will expand the implementation of LEAN (a process
for maximizing operations with minimum resources) and
utilization of the upgraded Laboratory Information Management
System (LIMS).
 Objective 1 – The Public Health Lab will become certified
with at least one LEAN leader through a qualified third-party
certification service provider by December 2014.
 Objective 2 – By December 2014, the Public Health Lab will
reduce the amount of paper requisitions required for orders
by at least 80%, from 5,500 to less than 1,000 annually.
 Objective 3 – By June 2015, the Public Health Lab will
reduce the number of paper results by 50%, from 5,500 to
2,750.
 Objective 4 – By December 2014, the Public Health Lab will
increase the number of locations ordering electronically from
two to six.
 Objective 5 – By December 2014, the Public Health Lab will
have an electronic interface in place to submit confidential
lab reports via the California Reportable Disease Information
Exchange (CalREDIE). The lab will also establish an
electronic interface to submit confidential lab results directly
to the Centers for Disease Control.

Goal 1: Launch an education and training program for
employees regarding Workplace Violence (WPV) prevention
and policy.
 Objective 1 – Work with Risk Management and the WPV
Committee to identify training needs and resources
available to the workforce.
 Objective 2 – Schedule and hold ongoing training sessions
and provide resources to departments throughout the fiscal
year on WPV Prevention.
Goal 2: Implementation of the second year of the Employee
Wellness Program.
 Objective 1 – Measure and evaluate the results of the first
12 month period.
 Objective 2 – Plan and implement monthly activities for
employees and health plan users.
 Objective 3 – Formulate and present recommendations for
a long-term Wellness Program to the Board of Supervisors,
County Administrative Officer, and policy makers, based on
the two-year pilot program period.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Upgrade audio and video recording systems, inclusive
of the consoles, at both the Juvenile Detention Facility and the
Youth Facility.
 Objective 1 – Meet with representatives from the Capital
Projects/Facilities and TCiCT to evaluate existing
proposals for audio and video equipment by July 2014.
 Objective 2 – Secure funding for console replacements
and/or offset costs of the audio and video recording
systems through an anticipated October 2014 grant
application with the BSCC.

 Objective 3 – Complete both system upgrades by June
2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Increase the collection of Victim Restitution on adult
cases by 5%, from $579,573 to $608,552.
Goal 2: Increase credit card payments of fines, fees, and
Victim Restitution by 10%, from $119,005 to $130,906.
Goal 3: Work in concert with the CCP to ensure a prison
realignment process that is in compliance with the law and
addresses public safety.
 Objective 1 – Hold quarterly meetings of the CCP to
provide statistical information, evaluate needs/trends, and
identify issues as they arise.
 Objective 2 – Participate in the Jail Programming
subcommittee and work with the Sheriff’s Office to mitigate
potential jail overcrowding issues.
 Objective 3 – Meet supervision ratios of 1:20, 1:30, and
1:40 based on assessed risk to the community of both
PRCS and 1170(h) offenders.
 Objective 4 – Ensure completion of the Recidivism Project
and have the project available for evaluation by the CCP
by December 2014.
Goal 4: Develop a pilot project at the Porterville Superior
Court for the electronic filing of Adult Court Reports.
 Objective 1 – Coordinate a meeting between TCiCT and
Superior Court officials to determine printer needs by July
2014.
 Objective 2 – Establish protocols for electronic filing by
July 2014.
 Objective 3 – Install printer/s in the Porterville Superior
Court by August 2014.
 Objective 4 – Initiate electronic filing in September 2014.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Work closely with the Board of Supervisors on Step-
Up events, as well as the Summer Night Lights program, on a
countywide basis.
 Objective 1 – Participate in a minimum of six Step-Up
events.
 Objective 2 – Participate in a minimum of 15 Summer
Night Lights events.
Goal 2: Develop in concert with the Tulare County Board of
Supervisors, the Tulare County Office of Education and the
Tulare County Juvenile Court, a vocational education program
for minors committed to the Juvenile Detention Facility and the
Youth Facility for long-term programming.
 Objective 1 – Determine location for the placement of a
vocational education building by July 2014.
 Objective 2 – Determine curriculum//training needs based
on CareerScope of minors currently committed to longterm
programming by July 2014.
 Objective 3 – Purchase needed equipment and materials
by May 2015.
 Objective 4 – Have building in place by May 2015.
 Objective 5 – Hire a Vocational Education Instructor by
October 2014 (Department of Education).
 Objective 6 – Establish a baseline for ongoing program
evaluation.
Goal 3: In collaboration with the Workforce Investment Board
(WIB) of Tulare County, provide job readiness training and
aptitude-specific employment opportunities for adult
probationers.
 Objective 1 – Assign one Probation Officer responsibility
for job readiness, job placement and job-site monitoring by
July 2014.
 Objective 2 – Implement Readiness for Employment
through Sustainable Education and Training (RESET), an
evidence-based, five week job preparation program, by
August 2014.
 Objective 3 – Enter into a contractual agreement with
Geographic Solutions, currently utilized by the WIB, to
develop a portal that will allow employers willing to hire
probationers a separate job posting site by August 2014.
Make program available to juvenile offenders as well.
 Objective 4 – Provide RESET curriculum to 140 adult
offenders during the period of August 2014 through June
2015.
 Objective 5 – Secure job placement for 112 adult
offenders by June 2015.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Maximize Parole Revocation Revenues.
 Objective 1 – Implement attorney time keeping system for
Parole Revocation cases.
 Objective 2 – Receive funds that have been earmarked by
legislation for the representation of clients in parole
revocation matters.
Goal 2: Improvements to the file management system
application for iPads to make access to the client files and note
and time entries more efficient. The changes will allow
attorneys to view their calendars on one screen, reducing the
number of steps necessary for needed entries, and adding
capabilities such as uploading images directly from the camera
roll or camera function.
 Objective 1 – Coordinate with TCiCT and Canyon Solutions,
Inc. to develop improvements for the iPad application to
assist attorneys with courtroom representation of clients.
Goal 3: Explore the possibility of partnering with the University
of San Francisco Law School for post-bar law clerks.
 Objective 1 – Contact the University of San Francisco Law
School to request referrals of students interested in
practicing criminal law for post-bar clerkships.

Quality of Life
Goal 1 – Implement Tulare County’s General Plan 2030 Update
by focusing on major environmental, planning and development
activities within the Planning Branch.
 Objective 1 – Initiate the Community Plan updating process
for the communities of Cutler-Orosi, Lindsay-Strathmore,
and Terra Bella-Ducor by December 2014.
 Objective 2 – Prepare the next Housing Element update by
December 2015.
 Objective 3 - Complete the Animal Confinement Facilities
Plan (ACFP) Environmental Impact Report by the Spring of
2015.
 Objective 4 – Complete the Yokohl Ranch Environmental
Impact Report by the Spring of 2015.
 Objective 5 – Apply for ten grants for economic
development and infrastructure projects.
 Objective 6 - Complete SB 244 (Disadvantaged Community
Plan) by December 2015.
 Objective 7 – Complete the 275 general code enforcement
cases, a 10% increase over prior year’s objective.
 Objective 8 – Complete 300 medical marijuana code
enforcement cases.
 Objective 9 – Complete 275 planning and development
projects a 10% increase over the prior year’s objective.
 Objective 10 – Issue 2,500 building permits or 25% increase
over the prior year’s objective.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1 – Reorganize the Public Works Branch to implement the
Strategic Management System with an emphasis on the
interdisciplinary project management approach.
 Objective 1 – Merge various divisions within the Public
Works Branch by April 2015.
 Objective 2 – Integrate the Public Works Branch with the
Planning and Administration Branches through increased
use of project management teams, namely, at least 15
project teams to be formed by May 2015.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Purchase and deploy a body scanner to reduce
contraband items, such as narcotics, cell phones, weapons, and
other items in the County Jail System.
 Objective 1 – Order a body scanner capable of detecting
contraband items missed by initial search or metal detection
of inmates by September 2014.
 Objective 2 – Train staff in the operation of body scanner
equipment by February 2015.
 Objective 3 – Deploy body scanner by March 2015 at the
Tulare County Pre-Trial Detention Facility for booking new
inmates and existing inmates as needed.
Goal 2: Purchase and deploy more mobile camera systems at
potential crime locations.
 Objective 1 – Purchase cameras and video recording
equipment to monitor potential crime locations, such as
remote agricultural equipment sites by September 2014.
 Objective 2 – Begin deployment of surveillance equipment
by November 2014.
Goal 3: Enhance evidence collection through in-car video
system.
 Objective 1 – Purchase 30 ICOP video systems by
September 2014.
 Objective 2 – Complete installation of ICOP video system in
entire Sheriff’s patrol fleet by June 2015.
Goal 3: Increase citizen participation in public safety.
 Objective 1 – Work with residents to establish six
Neighborhood Watch programs in rural Tulare County
communities which do not have these effective anti-crime
programs. The new Neighborhood Watch programs are
projected to be in place by June 2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Purchase and deploy a laser 3-D scanner to
photograph and more efficiently construct 3-D evidence maps of
crime scenes.
 Objective 1 – Order a laser 3-D scanner by September
2014.
 Objective 2 – Train Crime Lab staff in operation of
equipment by February 2015.
 Objective 3 – Deploy scanner at crime scenes by March
2015.
Goal 2: Purchase and deploy a second patrol aircraft to provide
surveillance of simultaneous investigations; and provide
continuous coverage while the Department’s other plane is
grounded for maintenance. The new aircraft features a fuelinjected
engine that is more fuel efficient and requires less
maintenance than the Department’s existing plane.
 Objective 1 – Order a light sport aircraft by September
2014.
Goal 3: Convert thousands of paper records to electronic
format.
 Objective 1 – Digitize thousands of older paper documents
stored by the Department’s records staff by June 2015. The
process will reduce operations costs by significantly reducing
storage space for records, while allowing faster access to
documents by records staff via computer.
Goal 4: Offer video visitation between inmates and their
families, lawyers, and other parties to provide more frequent
visits with families; lessen travel expenses for people visiting
inmates; and reduce County visitation costs (such as providing
security for face-to-face visits). Face-to-face visitation will
continue on a limited basis (clergy visits, court-ordered custody
visits with children, and other specialized reasons.)
 Objective 1 – Finalize contract with equipment and
installation vendor by September 2014.
 Objective 2 – Install and test video visitation kiosks at Bob
Wiley Correctional Facility and Main Jail by December 2014.
 Objective 3 – Test internet access to video visitation system
by December 2014. This alternative will save travel time and
expense by family members, friends, lawyers, and others
desiring to visit with inmates.
 Objective 4 – Provide video visitation system via jail kiosks
or internet seven days a week between 8 a.m. and 10 p.m.
by January 2015.
Goal 5: Complete upgrade of Department’s computer
workstations to Windows 7 operating system.
 Objective 1 – Complete conversion of 110 older computer
workstations in the Department from Windows XP to
Windows 7 by August 2014.
Goal 6: Expand Sheriff’s Explorer program for youth.
 Objective 1 – Increase membership by 20 percent of
Sheriff’s Explorer program by June 2015. The career
oriented program teaches law enforcement skills and
develops discipline in youth ages 14 to 21.
Goal 1: Successfully prosecute agricultural crime cases.
Goal 2: Conduct six community outreach meetings informing
the agricultural community about the work of the Rural Crime
Prevention Task Force.
Goal 3: Attend the quarterly CVRCTF meetings and the
monthly Tulare County Farm Bureau meetings to continue
disseminating details of the Task Force’s work to the agricultural
community.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Interrupt the cycle of delinquent behavior among youth
through balanced and restorative justice services; reduce youth
contact with the formal juvenile justice system through the
provision of evidence-based services; and reduce the rate of
recidivism among youth.
 Objective 1 – Increase the Aftercare and Re-entry
graduation rate to 45% by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Maintain the current staffing level of the
GREAT program with six Probation Officer II positions and
expand the program with the addition of three school sites
which will allow for the GREAT curriculum to be delivered to
a minimum of 4,260 children in 4th through 7th grades
throughout the county by June 2015.
 Objective 3 - Continue to provide GREAT Summer Camp to
100 children by June 2015.
Goal 2: Strengthen and unify the families of juveniles who have
had contact with the Juvenile Justice System to develop
problem solving skills, coping skills, and self-efficacy.
 Objective 1 - Terminate the Neighborhood Accountability
Board (NAB) Program and implement the Family
Preservation Program effective July 2014.
 Objective 2 – Provide Family Preservation Services to 20
youth beginning July 2014.
 Objective 3 - Achieve a 25% graduation rate by June 2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Implement treatment, educational, and vocational
programming at the Juvenile Detention Facility and the Youth
Facility based on validated assessment tools.
 Objective 1 – Develop a vocational education program by
September 2014.
 Objective 2 – Partner with YMCA to send at risk youth to
camp to enrich their lives and encourage healthy living and
social responsibility by September 2014.
 Objective 3 - Continue to provide the New Freedom
curriculum to committed minors, encouraging permanent
behavioral change.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Increase the efficiency of process and procedures by
streamlining access to Maddy program resources for providers.
 Objective 1 – Evaluate the Maddy program process and
procedures and implement program changes to improve
efficiency by June 2015.
Objective 2 – Implement a training session to educate
providers on the availability of Maddy funds and streamlining
the claiming process by June 2015.
 Objective 3 – Complete a comprehensive analysis on the
feasibility of changing the schedule from annual to quarterly
disbursement of funds to providers by June 2015.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Enhance library engagement with Children and Teens
through library programming.
 Objective 1 - Provide at least one program a month
targeting tweens (ages 10-12) starting by September 2014.
 Objective 2 - Start a Forever YA Book Club targeting late
teens (ages 18-19) by September 2014
 Objective 3 - Investigate and develop a Winter Reading
Program for children (ages 0-5), tweens, and teens.
 Objective 4 - Provide Family Movie Night and Afterschool
Wii gaming program at the Three Rivers Branch Library by
October 2014.
Goal 2: Increase access by County residents to a variety of
library materials.
 Objective 1 - Add a new moving collection of juvenile
graphic novels to the Branch System by September 2014.
 Objective 2 - Add needed CD/AV display units to Orosi,
Woodlake, Springville, Earlimart, Alpaugh, and Tipton by
December 2014.
 Objective 3 - Add an adult beginning reader collection of
fiction and non-fiction books in the Visalia Branch by
September 2014.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Increase County residents’ awareness of the library’s
electronic online resources.
 Objective 1 - Redesign Online Resources web page to
make it more user-friendly by December 2014.
 Objective 2 - Organize staff training cohorts by supervisorial
district. Hold two on-site staff training sessions (vendor or
staff led) in each district: one by December 2014 and the
second by June 2015
 Objective 3 - Present at least 4 outreach sessions (outside
the library) to raise awareness of the library’s electronic
resources and to teach information and/or digital literacy by
June 2015.
 Objective 4 - Make up-to-date promotional and instructional
materials available on the system drive by September 2014.
Develop a system for requests and distribution of
promotional and instructional materials to the branches by
March 2015
 Objective 5 - Create handouts and pathfinders that promote
the library’s resources for children to be distributed at the
Children’s Desk by December 2014.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Increase County residents’ awareness of the Library’s
history collection to encourage a greater appreciation of Tulare
County heritage.
 Objective 1 - Prepare a traveling exhibit of local World War I
and II photos for War Comes Home grant by September
2014.
 Objective 2 - Exhibit a selection of Linnell Camp photos in
the library by August 2014.
 Objective 3 - Digitize Tule River Heritage Project oral
history interviews (audio and transcripts) and make them
available on the library website by December 2014.
 Objective 4 - Investigate a plan to promote local authors to
publish local history using the Tulare County Library’s
History Room Collection by January 2015.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Prepare and implement an Airport Facilities
Maintenance Plan by September 2014.
 Objective 1 – Minimize or eliminate deficiencies as part of
the annual inspection of the runway and taxiway facilities.
Goal 2: Ensure compliance with FAA regulations and track
future improvements to the Airport by preparing the ALP.
Objective 1 – Prepare ALP by February 2015.
Goal 3: Ensure the maximum entitlement of $150,000 per year
and eligibility for grants by submitting to FAA for approval the
five-year Airport Capital Improvement Plan (ACIP) to.
 Objective 1 – Prepare and submit the ACIP to FAA by
October 2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Provide for the future needs and capacities of the
Airport by exploring future improvements to the Airport.
 Objective 1 – Utilize consultant to identify future
improvements to the Airport. Identified improvements shall
be reflected in an updated ACIP by June 2015.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Improve economic stability by increasing tenant
occupancy at the airport
 Objective 1 – Attract tenants and businesses through an
aggressive construction schedule to make aeronautical
improvements in accordance with ACIP by June 2015.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Work with the TCiCT Fire Dispatch Technology Team in
updating the Fire Communications Center to maintain industry
accepted practices.
 Objective 1 – Upgrade the 9-1-1 system technology and
equipment by March 2015.
 Objective 2 – Increase the number of dispatch workstation
pods from three to four by March 2015.
 Objective 3 – Upgrade the 9-1-1 workstation pods
ergonomically to better meet the daily needs of dispatchers.
Goal 2: Continue developing and implementing the Vehicle
Replacement Program.
 Objective 1 – Develop vehicle purchase schedule based on
the available funding.
 Objective 2 – Work with other agencies to facilitate the
acquisition process by September 2014.
 Objective 3 – Work with selected vendor on specification
and delivery by June 2015.
Goal 3: Increase training delivery capabilities.
 Objective 1 – Complete a training assessment by October
2014.
Objective 2 – Develop internal audio visual training program
by January 2015.
 Objective 3 – Expand applicability of on-line trainings
through Target Solutions to all areas of the Department by
February 2015.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Increase staff awareness of new and updated road
maintenance methods and procedures.
 Objective 1 – In collaboration with Human Resources &
Development provide training courses to staff through
appropriate workshops, videos, and other resources.
Goal 2: Improve and maintain adequate Transportation
Infrastructure
 Objective 1 - Secure funding for the design and construction
for the widening of the Avenue 280 corridor from State Route
99 to the City of Exeter.
 Objective 2 – Complete the right-of-way and engineering for
the widening of a three mile segment of Avenue 416 from
two lanes to four lanes by June 2015, so that construction
can proceed in the summer of 2015.
 Objective 3 – Complete the design, acquisition of temporary
construction easements, and acquire regulatory agency
permits for the construction of the Road 224 Deer Creek
Bridge project by December of 2014 so that construction can
proceed in the spring of 2015.
 Objective 4 – Complete the construction of five community
projects in various unincorporated communities, typically
consisting of curb, gutter and sidewalk improvements.
Additionally, complete the design of an additional five
community projects so that construction can proceed when
funding is identified for those projects.
 Objective 5 – Continue development of the bridge program,
which will include; 1) completion of Phase One of the Bridge
Preventive Maintenance Program, which includes an
assessment of the County’s bridge inventory and
prioritization of bridge projects; 2) begin construction on
three bridge projects (including Road 224 Deer Creek
Bridge); 3) continue the engineering and environmental
document phase on seven bridge projects and; 4) initiate the
engineering and environmental document phase on three
new bridge projects.
 Objective 6 – Complete the engineering and environmental
document phase for two roadway safety improvement
projects totaling $1.5 million in construction costs.
 Objective 7 – Perform roadway rehabilitation by placing
asphalt concrete overlays on approximately 20 miles of
roadway throughout the County, placing chip seals on
approximately 115 miles of roadway and perform shoulder
maintenance on approximately 400 miles of roadway.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve staff’s understanding of the mechanics of soils
material testing as it pertains to compaction testing and soil
identification.
 Objective 1 – Continue to provide a basic course in the
Introduction of Soils Material Testing for new Engineers and
Engineering Technicians (Inspectors) by June 2015.
Goal 2: Increase capacity of the Public Works branch to deliver
construction projects.
Objective 1 – Develop an “on-call” list of professional
engineering and environmental consultants, through a
competitive, qualification based selection process, meeting
Federal and State requirements, so that projects can be
outsourced on a timelier basis resulting in an increased
capacity for project delivery.
 Objective 2 – Develop a standard bid document template for
construction projects, to be reviewed and approved by
County Counsel, so that bid document approval can be
streamlined and projects can get into construction sooner by
June 2015.
 Objective 3 – Develop and maintain comprehensive public
works projects priority list and schedule.
 Objective 4 – Oversee five community projects, two signal
installation projects, three road overlays, and four bridge
construction projects during FY 2014/15.
Goal 3: Purchase and retire equipment as necessary to comply
with the PM10 Air Board rules.
 Objective 1 – Purchase seven diesel engine retrofits by
June 2015 and replace two wheel tractors and two forklifts to
comply with PM10 Air Board rules.
Goal 4: Provide project management oversight to improve
effectiveness of construction projects.
 Objective 1 – Collaborate with fiscal staff to improve
construction information necessary for reimbursement
requests to be submitted within 60 days.
Goal 5: Improve traffic related database system.
 Objective 1 – Create a streetlight inventory database by
converting existing data to be input into a Geographic
Information System (GIS) by June 2015.
WIA performance measures record not only if an individual
became employed after being served by the WIB, but also if that
individual remained employed for six months and the earnings
of the individual over that time period. Because of the long time
horizon of the performance measures, WIB outcomes for each
program year are not available until approximately six months
after the year has ended. Therefore, the following goals and
objectives are for program year 2013/14.
Goal 1: Achieve at least 90% all WIA Adult and Dislocated
Worker participant performance goals set by the California
Employment Development Department Workforce Services
Division (EDD WSD) by June 2014. Individuals must meet WIA
low income criteria to be eligible for the Adult Program.
Individuals must meet dislocated worker criteria such as being
laid off due to a company closure or substantial lay off, or
receiving unemployment insurance and unlikely to return to their
previous industry or occupation.
 Objective 1 – 50.8% of all Adult Program participants will
find employment within 90 days after program completion,
57.6% of all Dislocated Worker Program participants will
find employment within 90 days after program completion.
 Objective 2 – 77.4% of all Adult Program participants who
find employment after program completion will remain
employed for six months. 78% of all Dislocated Worker
Program participants who find employment after program
completion will remain employed for six months.
 Objective 3 – The average earnings of all Adult Program
participants employed six months after program completion
will be $9,950. The average earnings for all Dislocated
Worker Program participants six months after program
completion will be $11,900.
Goal 2: Achieve at least 90% of all WIA In-School and Out-of-
School Youth Program performance goals set by the EDD WSD
by June 2014. Youth must be between the ages of 16 to 21, be
low income, and have a barrier to finding employment or
completing school to be eligible for the WIA Youth Program.
 Objective 1 – 67.5% of youth participants will find a job or
enroll in school within three months of program completion.
 Objective 2 – 46.1% of Youth Program participants will
receive a GED, High School Diploma, or Vocational School
Certificate within three months of program completion.
 Objective 3 – 48.4% of Out-of-School youth will increase at
least one educational functioning level within three months of
program completion.

Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Ensure that children in cases involving Title IV-D of
the Federal Social Security Act have support from parents as
ordered by increasing the amount of child support collections
and distributions by September 2014 as set by the State.
 Objective 1 – Collect and distribute $39,771,743 in child
support.
 Objective 2 – Collect and distribute 71.6% of the amount
of current child support due.
 Objective 3 – Collect on 65.4% of cases with arrears
owing.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Increase the percentage of children with a legal
relationship with their parents by September 2014 as set by
the State.
 Objective 1 – Maintain or increase Statewide Paternity
Establishment Percentage to 100% or above.
Goal 2: Increase the percentage of child support cases with
support orders by September 2014 as set by the State.
 Objective 1 – Establish support orders in 93.2% of cases
needing a support order.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Operate a cost effective program by September 2014
as set by the State.
 Objective 1 – Achieve a Cost Effectiveness ratio of at
least $2.25.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Provide project management for the design of the
South County Detention Facility, a 500-bed jail facility to be
constructed in Porterville in FY 2015/16, to provide the building
resources necessary for the County’s future law enforcement
needs.

 Objective 1 – Complete the required Design Development
phase of the project, and submit it to the State Public Works
Board by March 2015.
 Objective 2 – Begin the Bid & Award phase of the project
by June 2015.
Goal 2: In addition to the new South County Detention Facility,
Capital Projects will provide project management for the
construction of the Sequoia Field Program Facility.
 Objective 1 – Establish the project scope and budget with
the State Public Works Board by January 2015.
 Objective 2 – Execute consultant contracts and begin
designing the facility with County stakeholders by March
2015.
Goal 3: Ensure Fire Department has a long-term and
sustainable headquarters near Visalia, by designing Fire
Station No. 1 for construction.
 Objective 1 – Complete the biddable plans and
specifications in conjunction with the Transportation
Operations and Maintenance Facility and Compressed
Natural Gas Fueling Station by June 2015.
Goal 4: Ensure that critical building resources have sufficient
back-up systems in place by installing an emergency generator
at the Civic Center to provide improved service delivery and
protect assets during power outages.
 Objective 1 – Complete the bid process for the installation
of the generator and associated equipment by the end of
October 2014.
 Objective 2 – Complete the installation of the generator and
associated equipment by January 2015.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Complete the Harmon Field Low Temperature Thermal
Desorption Project.
 Objective 1 – Complete the remediation of Harmon Field by
November 2014.
 Objective 2 – Start preparing the Final Report and
Operations and Maintenance Agreement for submittal to the
Department of Toxic Substances Control for approval by
June 2015.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: To enhance the recreation experience of visitors,
renovate the bathrooms at Balch Park.
 Objective 1 – Design and bid the project by March 2015.
 Objective 2 – Initiate the bathroom renovations by April
2015.
Goal 2: Provide additional job training skills for youth, by
completing the Juvenile Vocational Education Center design
and construction.
 Objective 1 – Complete the biddable plans and
specifications for advertisement by the end of October 2014.
 Objective 2 – Complete the construction of the project by
June 2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Merge the Department with the divisions of the General
Services Department to create one unified organization. The
purpose of this merger is to reduce costs through economies of
scale, and to allow for similar functions to be grouped together.
 Objective 1 – Complete the required organizational
changes for the merger by January 2015.
 Objective 2 – Identify new office space for the merged staff
by March 2015.

Quality of Life
Goal 1: Develop viable communities by providing decent
housing and a suitable living environment.
 Objective 1 – Collaborate with County staff to identify
project needs and develop project descriptions for future
funding opportunities.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Improve economic growth and community stability by
providing businesses with access to funding opportunities.
Objective 1 – Collaborate with Economic Development staff to
identify viable businesses and connect those businesses with
business expansion or retention funding opportunities.
Goal 1: Continue efforts to provide safe and sanitary housing
for the low and very low income residents of unincorporated
Tulare County through its housing rehabilitation program, multifamily
housing construction project, and first-time homebuyer
mortgage assistance programs.
 Objective 1 – Research opportunities for multi-family
housing projects.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Develop viable communities by providing decent
housing and a suitable living environment.
 Objective 1 – Manage existing housing loan portfolio for
maximum revenue generation for future housing
opportunities.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Improve the water and wastewater facilities in Lemon
Cove to assure residents of a continued supply of safe water.
 Objective 1 – Work with the Lemon Cove Sanitary District to
assess alternative plans to locate a source of drinkable water
for the community by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Secure funding to implement storm runoff
project by June 2015.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Provide safe and cost effective water and sewer
services within County Service Areas No. 1 and 2.
 Objective 1 – Safely operate and maintain the County sewer
and water system.
 Objective 2 – Improve and maintain the sewer plants
appearance to improve safety and discourage vandalism
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Continue to ensure adequate funding for operation and
maintenance of the water and sewer systems.
 Objective 1 – Place delinquent accounts on the County
Assessors’ Tax Roll by August 2015.
 Objective 2 – Increase user fees to offset expenses.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Decrease risk to the environment and human health.
 Objective 1 – Replace/upgrade malfunctioning equipment
and perform necessary repairs by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Complete a feasibility study to improve the
water quality in Yettem.

Goal 1: Study and recommend modification to the TCaT “Fixed
Route” fare structure.
 Objective 1 – Complete study by November 2014 to make
recommendation to the Board of Supervisors on Fixed Route
fare adjustments.
Goal 2: Present to the Board of Supervisors a Transit
Development Plan for TCaT.
 Objective 1 – By April 2015 present to the Board of
Supervisors a recommended Transit Development Plan to
guide the Transit Division for the next five years.
Goal 3: Design plans for the Transit Operations and
Maintenance Facility (TOMF).
 Objective 1 – Complete about 80 percent design plans for
the TOMF by June, 2015. Complete plans for the
construction of compressed natural gas (CNG) fueling facility
and begin the first phase of construction of the TOMF by
constructing the CNG fueling facility.
Goal 4: Convert TCAT fleet from diesel to Compressed Natural
Gas (CNG) to improve air quality.
 Objective 1 – Replace all diesel powered buses with new
CNG buses by June 2015.
Goal 5: Increase safety and security on buses
 Objective 1 – By June 2015, purchase Software for bus
tracking in the form of Automatic Vehicle Locator and Global
Positioning System AVL/GPS. The current system does not
provide real-time tracking.
Goal 6: Increase ridership and improve overall rider experience.
 Objective 1 – By January 2015 staff will install a Google
Transit Trip Planner to assist riders to plan a trip from one
location to another.
 Objective 2 – Install two bus shelters with benches at the
TCAT designated bus stop at the new Tulare COS Campus.
 Objective 3 – By September, 2014 staff will comply with Title
VI process in the manner of posting notices to transit stations
and the County webpage.
 Objective 4 – Upgrade the TCAT Webpage that is user
friendly and easy to locate.
 Objective 5 – By March 2015 staff will purchase and install
eight shelters and benches at existing bus stops.
 Objective 6 – Search for grants and others sources of
income to fund the cost of installing electronic fare boxes in
all transit buses by June 2015.
Goal 7: Continue to provide uninterrupted contracted transit
services to the public.
 Objective 1 – By January 2015 extend the contract option
with MV Transportation or present an RFP for a new vendor
to the Board.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Initiate construction of the Visalia Landfill Unit 1
closure.
 Objective 1 – Complete design of landfill gas collection
system for closure plan by November 2014.
 Objective 2 – Secure the advance release of closure funds
from CalReycle to fund construction by March 2015.
 Objective 3 – Bid out the project for construction of closure
by January 2015.
Goal 2: Initiate partial closure activities at the Woodville
Landfill.
 Objective 1 – Complete preliminary grading for partial
closure by October 2014.
 Objective 2 – Complete design by December 2014.
 Objective 3 – Bid out the project for construction of closure
by March 2015.
Goal 3: Implement a franchise system for refuse collection.
 Objective 1 – Finalize a franchise agreement by December
2014.

Goal 4: Improve recycling opportunities for County residents.
 Objective 1 – Implement program based recycling goals for
franchised haulers by December 2014.
Goal 5: Reduce air emissions.
 Objective 1 – Internalize volume leaving the County by
licensed haulers and transfer stations into County landfills by
December 2014.
Goal 6: Improve groundwater mitigation system at the Visalia
Landfill.
 Objective 1 – Complete system evaluation and submit
report to Regional Water Quality Control Board by July 2014.
 Objective 2 –Upgrade groundwater mitigation system by
November 2014.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Increase disposal volumes at Tulare County Landfills.
 Objective 1 – Obtain approvals to accept sludge at the
Visalia Landfill by August 2014 and obtain sludge disposal
agreements by September 2014.
 Objective 2 – Complete municipal waste disposal
agreements with the City of Tulare by August 2014.
 Objective 3 – Obtain waste disposal agreements with public
and private entities by December 2014, totaling an increased
volume of approximately 40,000 tons per year.
Goal 2: Improve transfer station fiscal performance.
 Objective 1 – Complete financial evaluation of the existing
transfer station system by July 2014.
 Objective 2 – Evaluate reopening the Earlimart Transfer
Station to increase volume and revenue from sources
outside of Tulare County.
Goal 3: Evaluate sustainable energy opportunities.
 Objective 1 – Investigate landfill gas contracts and potential
for increased performance with gas to energy by December
2014.
 Objective 2 – Evaluate solar power system options by
October 2014.
 Objective 3 – Research anaerobic digestion operations and
potential impacts to the County landfills by November 2014.
Goal 4: Increase landfill density.
 Objective 1 – Continue to track and reduce onsite soil
usage for daily and intermediate cover implement
immediately.
 Objective 2 – Increase usage of revenue generating daily
and intermediate cover soil such as dried sludge and offsite
excavation soil by October 1, 2014.
 Objective 3 – Increase overall landfill density by 20 percent
therefore reducing the airspace consumed and extending the
life of the landfill by June 30, 2015
Goal 5: Improve customer service.
 Objective 1 – Track and reduce commercial customer cycle
times on site by December 2014.
Goal 6: Improve management skills.
 Objective 1 – Facilitate two members of the Solid Waste
Department’s management team to attend Leadership
Academy by March 2015.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Provide a safe and efficient sewer system to residents.
 Objective 1 – Provide ongoing maintenance to the collection
system and treatment plant to preclude a sewage spill.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Decrease the risk to human health and the environment
through prevention of sewer spills.
 Objective 1 – Replace/repair malfunctioning equipment and
perform necessary repairs by June 2015.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Provide cost effective operations and maintenance for
the storm drainage systems, roadways and landscape areas
within the assessment districts.
 Objective 1 – Inspect the drainage systems are in working
order for proper operation and provide maintenance when
required.
 Objective 2 – Provide basin weed abatement and fence
repair by June 2015.
 Objective 3 – Repair sprinklers and electrical in the
landscape districts by June 2015.
 Objective 4 – Inspect and repair any road damage within
the assessment districts, as needed.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Ensure adequate funding for the management and
maintenance of the assessment districts storm drainage
systems, roadways and landscape districts.
 Objective 1 – Evaluate each assessment district for an
assessment fee adjustment based on the Consumer Price
Index (CPI).
 Objective 2 – Ensure annual assessment district fees are
provided to the Assessor’s Office for placement on the tax
roll.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Develop and implement the Emergency Response
Action Plan for all County employee-occupied buildings. The
plan will provide protection to employees and the public in
County buildings in eminent safety threat situations.
 Objective 1 - Assist the Safety Representatives of each
agency to complete a threat assessment for each building
within their respective agencies by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Implement the security plan which includes
providing training, drills, role playing and refresher exercises
to County employees by June 2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Further improve the efficiency of risk finance
administrative functions and insurance administration services
to county agencies.
 Objective 1 - Complete the review of all Boards and
Commissions to determine insurance needs and identify
liability exposures by June 2015.
Goal 2: Continually evaluate the effectiveness of Workers’
Compensation claim administration service delivery to County
employees.
 Objective 1 - Conduct semi-annual nurse case management
reviews with the claim administrator by December 2014 and
June 2015.
 Objective 2 - Conduct semi-annual training for front-line
medical providers by December 2014 and June 2015.
 Objective 3 - Conduct Workers’ Compensation Procedures
training for County Human Resource personnel by June
2015.
Goal 3: Improve the efficiency of claim administration functions
to county agencies.
 Objective 1 – Convert claim administration software from
iVOS to Systema by June 2015.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: To maintain dental insurance rates without major
increases in premiums.
 Objective 1 – To encourage prudent use of dental services
to maximize the dental health of current subscribers and
minimize future dental claims.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Ensure that County assets are well maintained and
functional.
 Objective 1 – The Grounds staff will work to transition areas
that have cool season turf to warm season turf that will result
in a 40 % reduction in water. This will provide better water
conservation at County facilities by December 2014.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Replace aging, out of compliance boiler at Bob Wiley
Detention Facility.
 Objective 1 – Develop a scope of work and bid the project
by December 2014.
 Objective 2 – Award and manage the project to completion
by March 2015.
Goal 2: Replace aging, out of compliance backup generator at
Bob Wiley Detention Facility.
 Objective 1 – Develop a scope of work and bid the project
by November 2014.
 Objective 2 – Award and manage the project to completion
by March 2015.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Identify internal KPI’s.
 Objective 1 – Continue to evaluate collected data against
industry standards in the private sector by June 2015.
 Objective 2 – Analyze FY 2013/14 benchmarks and
compare them to the FY 2014/15 by June 2015.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Increase storage capabilities to provide better inventory
for customers.
 Objective 1 – Provide more storage room for supplies, keep
accurate inventory on supplies, to be more accommodating
to employees and have an accessible central location for
deliveries from outside venders by June 2015.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Purchase Data Pass Hardware and Software for County
vehicles and fueling sites.
 Objective 1 – Phase I: Purchase Data Pass hardware and
software for County vehicles and fuel pumps September
2014.
 Objective 2 – Phase II: Install hardware and software in the
County owned bulk fueling sites October 2014.
 Objective 3 – Install Data Pass hardware and software onto
County owned vehicles June 2015
Goal 2: Provide a drainage project for the Fleet Services
Facility.
 Objective 1 – Phase I: In conjunction with Capital Projects,
design a drainage plan that could fit into the site’s master
plan by September 2014.
 Objective 2 – Phase ll: Install drains, and asphalt for the
south and west side of the Fleet Services Shop by January
2015.
 Objective 3 – Phase III: Pour concrete on the east side of
the Fleet Services Shop by February 2015.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Provide new alternate power source for the Mooney
Grove Business Continuity site. Current generator cannot
ensure that critical services for the County network and
applications can be maintained in the event of power outage.
 Objective 1 – In conjunction with Capital Projects, by
March 2015 develop specifications and purchase new
generator
 Objective 2 – By June 2015, install and test new generator.
Goal 2: Provide a secondary circuit connection at critical
County locations to ensure business continuity in the event of
local disaster.
 Objective 1 – Review and engineer secondary circuit
solutions for County sites by October 2014.
 Objective 2 – Based upon TCiCT criteria, install secondary
circuits by June 2015.
Goal 3: Improve physical network security at the wiring closet
level to ensure only necessary employees have access to
critical data systems.
 Objective 1 – Review and engineer physical network
security at the wiring closets to meet TCiCT standards by
November 2014.
 Objective 2 – Begin implementation at priority sites by
December 2014.
Goal 4: In the event of an emergency, the communications
trailer will provide temporary connections to the Internet for
remote locations. This trailer can also be used to support
temporary offices and Government meetings away from current
County network access.
 Objective 1 – By October 2014, review and engineer
configurations for the various scenarios that may require
remote connectivity.
 Objective 2 – By December 2014, develop and implement
policies and procedures for trailer deployment and
utilization.
 Objective 3 – By December 2014, procure the new trailer
and by April 2015, test connectivity to the Internet with a
variety of data types (ie: voice, multimedia, data) from a
remote location.
 Objective 4 – By May 2015 conduct two location tests of
various data types to validate plan and procedures.

 Objective 1 – By January 2015, review and engineer
secondary internet access solution.
 Objective 2 – By May 2015, complete implementation.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Develop and implement an enterprise level GIS
strategy to meet the needs of County business processes,
applications, and constituents.
 Objective 1 – By December 2014 research best practices
and establish hardware, software, and data architecture
recommendations
 Objective 2 – By January 2015, develop prioritized plans for
technology improvements.
 Objective 3 – By June 2015 complete initial infrastructure
enhancements.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve Server systems.
 Objective 1 – Migrate XEN servers off older hardware to
meet current standards by March 2015.
 Objective 2 – Decommission legacy fiber channel switches
by March 2015.
 Objective 3 – Upgrade our Server VMware operating
system to a newer version by June 2015.
Goal 2: Improve resiliency and management of data storage
network.
 Objective 1 – Research and engineer enhanced data
system management solutions by December 2014.
 Objective 2 – Implement initial solution by June 2015.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Continue to improve Tulare County voice and data
radio systems.
 Objective 1 – Design replacement of Blue Ridge Radio site
to replace existing wooden tower with metal tower by
December 2014.
 Objective 2 – Work to make industry standard electrical
grounding improvements at Simulcast sites that need it by
June 2015.
 Objective 3 – Engineer and implement improvements to
Public Safety communications using Simulcast technology
by June 2015.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Develop training program for new mail services of the
mail sorter equipment.
 Objective 1 – Fully train staff on the application details for
greater utilization, cost savings and discounts offered by the
USPS by September 2014.
 Objective 2 – Train mail staff on the addressing machine for
all mail preparations and new USPS requirements by
September 2014.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Promote user group meetings.
 Objective 1 – Encourage users groups to attend monthly
meetings where new items available are discussed by
September 2014.
 Objective 2 – Provide an opportunity for users to express
copier program concerns and needs by September 2014.
Goal 2: Implement software to gather and store copier counts
from every copier used by the County.
 Objective 1 – Meet with TCiCT and coordinate
implementation of software for networked copiers by January
2015.
 Objective 2 – Coordinate with TCiCT to phase in all nonnetworked
copiers into a network for complete utilization of
software by March 2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Enhance customer service by increasing the Print
Services webpage accessibility.
 Objective 1 – Partner with Tulare County Information and
Communications Technology (TCiCT) to establish a Print
Shop link on the County intranet.
Goal 2: Improve quality of production through equipment
replacement.
 Objective 1 – Replace the 10 year old large format printer
by procuring a new high quality format color printer by June
2015.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Provide County with energy usage and cost information
across portfolio of County-owned facilities.
 Objective 1 – Coordinate with SJVCEO and input County
owned facility information into EPA Energy Star Portfolio
Manager by April 2015. There is no cost for using Portfolio
Manager.
 Objective 2 – Coordinate with SJVCEO and utility providers
to utilize Portfolio Manager’s ABS that allows for monthly
energy usage data to automatically populate in the system
by May 2015.
Goal 2: Coordinate implementation of Southern California
Edison Direct Install program in approximately twenty-seven
county-owned facilities for installation of energy-efficient lighting
product at no cost to the County.
 Objective 1 – Meet with contractor to develop schedule for
installation of qualified energy-efficient lighting product at
qualified county facilities by August 2014.
 Objective 2 – Coordinate with departments, County
personnel and contractor to set up dates and times for
installation of product at each site by September 2014.
 Objective 3 – Oversee installation of product for the
program to be completed by October 2014.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Continue to advance the design and construction of the
flood control projects approved by the BOS in December 2012.
 Objective 1- Contract for the engineering and construction
of the Juvenile Detention Facility-Cottonwood Creek flood
control project that will provide for flood control, groundwater
recharge, enhance riparian and wetland habitat mitigation by
June 2015.
 Objective 2 - Complete design of the Seville-Sontag Ditch
project by June 2015.
Goal 2: Continue the development of the flood control facilities
management plan.
 Objective 1 – Maintain the comprehensive inventory of
flood control facilities consisting of ponding basins, channels,
levees, flood control pumps, and other flood control facilities;
assess each facility and determine costs for operation and
maintenance; review capital improvements plan and financial
model for funding necessary improvements.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1 - Prepare the annual update to SWMP and implement
the plan. Prepare annual summaries of first years’ major
activities required of the NPDES small MS4 general permit and
upload to SMARTS in June 2014.
 Objective 1 – Contract with a recognized expert consultant
in water quality to prepare the annual SWMP and implement
the plan based upon the availability of resources. Complete
summary and upload to the Water Board’s SMARTS
website.