Safety and Security
Goal 1: Work with State and Federal government officials to
maintain local land use authority concerning marijuana grow
sites.
Objective 1 – Continue to monitor and provide feedback,
as needed, on all State and Federal legislative proposals.

Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Continue to promote Tulare County business growth
and development.
Objective 1 – Work with the Resource Management
Agency to continue to provide superior expedited
services to County residents and look for additional
methods to improve County services by June 2016.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Implement the goals as outlined in the adopted
Strategic Plan for the Step Up Program.
Objective 1 – Seek a data and research consultant to
assist in the implementation of goals 1-4 of the Strategic
Plan by December 2015.
Objective 2 – Work with consultant to gather data and
identify the next targeted area for the appropriate
program efforts by June 2016.
Goal 2: Direct the Tulare County Park Advisory Committee
to review and evaluate the physical conditions of all the
County Parks.
Objective 1 – Recommend and prioritize repairs and
improvements along with costs analysis of future projects
by December 2015.
Objective 2 – Assist the County in identifying community
partners to help fund future park projects by June 2016.
Goal 3: Continue to seek State and Federal funding to assist
communities and farms to secure a sustainable and
affordable water supply.
Objective 1 – Work with the Stakeholder Oversight
Advisory Committee to identify and prioritize needs of
various communities by June 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Review all County real property holdings and
evaluate the future needs of County departments.
Objective 1 – Evaluate County real property holdings to
determine the need for retention or sale by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Evaluate the need for additional structures
and time frame for acquiring such structures by June
2016.
Economic Well Being
Goal 1: Strengthen the relationship between the various
industries in Tulare County and the Agricultural
Commissioner’s Department in an effort to help them thrive
in a continuously changing environment with ever changing
rules and regulations.
Objective 1 – Meet with industry groups and members of
foreign delegations to collaborate on inspection protocols
throughout the season.
Goal 2: Promote the exportation of agricultural products.
Objective 1 – Provide valuable pest and pesticide data
to policy makers in an effort to ensure that agricultural
products are certified to ship to virtually any country in
the world as markets expand, allowing growers to reap
increased benefits from their efforts by June 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Continue the multi-year restructuring of the Pest
Detection Program in order to ensure that trapping
information is gathered, utilized, and disseminated in the
most expedient manner possible.
Objective 1 – Build upon Asian Citrus Psyllid electronic
data collection capabilities by incorporating additional
pest tracking programs, such as the European Grape
Vine Moth, by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Restructure elements of our Glassywinged
Sharpshooter (GWSS) Program to eliminate
antiquated spreadsheets and develop new systems that
track specific information utilized in the management of
the Pest Detection Program by June 2016.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Value all taxable property in Tulare County in order
to accurately publish the Secured and Unsecured
Assessment Roll and deliver it to the County Auditor by June
2016.
Objective 1 – Value an estimated 157,900 real property
accounts. There are approximately 25,064 single-family
residences and condominiums still under automatic
Proposition 8 (decline in value) review, which is due to
the still recovering housing market; value an estimated
31,000 business and personal property accounts by June
2016.
Objective 2 – Deliver an accurate and complete
assessment to the County Auditor by June 2016.
Goal 2: Implementation of new property tax system –
Aumentum by Thomson Reuters.
Objective 1 – Complete additional data set conversion
by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Input 75% of Proposition 13 base year and
base year values from paper records into a database for
future migration into Aumentum by June 2016.
Objective 3 – Implement IPAD mobility tools for
appraisal staff by June 2016.
Goal 3: Convert 1960-1987 grantor/grantee indices from
microfiche to digital format.
Objective 1 – Have conversion of 1960-1987
grantor/grantee indices completed by December 2015.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Streamline the State Controller Report preparation
process by utilizing the existing ProSystem software to aid in
the combining of like revenue and expenditure sources.
Objective 1 – Work with the Financial Reporting and
Audits staff to develop an output file from the ProSystem
software which is catered to the reporting requirements of
the State Controller Report by August 2015.
Objective 2 – Incorporate all agency funds in the General
Fund into the report, allowing the report to correspond
directly to the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report
(CAFR) by September 2015.
Objective 3 – Prepare and file the State Controller Report
using the newly developed reports by October 2015.
Goal 2: Replace end of life mainframe Property Information
Management System (PIMS) in Property Tax and Tax
Collector Divisions.
Objective 1 – Implement phase one of base conversion
for the Property Tax Division by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Implement phase one of base conversion
for the Tax Collector Division by June 2016.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve cost savings for departments and the County
by implementing a procurement software upgrade.
Objective 1 – Work with TCiCT to complete AFIN
Procurement software upgrades by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Train County staff on how to use new
Procurement software to maintain and track more
accurate records of items purchased countywide by June
2016.
Goal 2: Improve execution of processes and procedures to
serve departments more effectively and efficiently.
Objective 1 – Update the Policy and Procedure Manual
that will meet current standards and bring policies and
procedures up-to-date by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Train departments on any new changes
regarding the Policy and Procedure Manual by June 2016.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Enhance competitive, sustainable food systems.
Objective 1 – Reduce impact of invasive weeds. Weed
management research will be conducted on cropping and
non-crop systems. The results are to be presented at
producers and industry meetings by March 2016.
Objective 2 – Develop deficit irrigation and canopy
management strategies for table grapes. The result of
this study will provide better information to producers on
best management and effective irrigation practices. The
results are to be presented to producers at industry
meetings by March 2016.
Objective 3 – Complete research trial to measure the
water requirements of citrus trees by December 2016.
Compile results to provide research based water
requirements for efficient irrigation scheduling and water
conservation practices by January 2017.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Enhance the health of Californians.
Objective 1 – Conduct nutrition and family consumer
science research, and implement programs that address
childhood obesity and the human nutritional status.
Provide outreach to 5,000 families from EFNEP and
FSNEP programs, and expand the SNEP to reach over
5,000 youth by June 2016.
Goal 2: Advance youth leadership and science literacy in
natural resources, agricultural, and nutrition.
Objective 1 – Implement new “Step-It-Up-2-Thrive”
curriculum to local 4-H Club programs by June 2016.
Goal 3: Promote water conservation and drought strategies
for urban landscapes.
Objective 1 – Expand outreach with new educational
opportunities to promote gardening “Central Valley Style”
by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Establish new partnerships with local
agencies and organizations by June 2016.
Goal 4: Staff development to capture efficiencies,
effectiveness, and savings.
Objective 1 – The Master Gardener Program will
conduct a series of educational classes to develop
approximately 20 candidates to qualify as new Master
Gardeners by June 2016. Provide continuing education
to the existing Master Gardeners though classroom
instruction, field trips, and hands-on workshops.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Further improve client service by developing and
providing relevant training.
Objective 1 – Work collaboratively with Health & Human
Services Agency-Mental Health to develop a presentation
outlining mental health services in Tulare County by March
2016.
Objective 2 – Conduct one training on new cases and
legislation for Child Welfare Services staff by February
2016.
Objective 3 – Conduct one training on search and seizure
for Child Welfare Services staff by February 2016.
Objective 4 – Continue to provide training in the areas of
the Public Records Act, unemployment insurance appeals,
and AB 1825. Begin providing specialized training in the
area of employment investigations, protected leaves of
absences, the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act 1996 (HIPAA), Peace Officers’ Bill of
Rights, and Fire Fighters’ Bill of Rights by June 2016.
Goal 2: Improve legal framework for effective civil code
enforcement.
Objective 1 – Prepare a proposed ordinance to
substantively update section 165 (pertaining to appeals to
the Board) of the Tulare County ordinance by March 2016.
Objective 2 – Partner with the Resource Management
Agency to revise the Public Nuisance and Administrative
Fines chapters in the Tulare County Ordinance Code to
streamline the code enforcement process by April 2016.
Objective 3 – Partner with the Health and Human
Services Agency to implement a comprehensive reform of
the animal control regulations in the Tulare County
Ordinance Code by April 2016.
Objective 4 – Create a practice guide for internal use to
advise hearing officers in the administrative hearings held
under Chapter 23 of Part 1 of the Tulare County Ordinance
Code pertaining to administrative fines by June 2016.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Continue to improve County effectiveness in
contracting for goods and services.
Objective 1 – Revise County contract boilerplate
language to address contracting with different business
entities by December 2015.
Objective 2 – Provide contracts training for departments
by January 2016.
Goal 2: Improve County fee setting process.
Objective 1 – Conduct training for departments by March
2016.
Objective 2 – Partner with requesting departments to
review and assist in bringing before the Board new fee
structures by June 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve public meetings conducted by County
committees and commissions.
Objective 1 – Update Brown Act manual with recent case
law developments by April 2016.
Objective 2 – Provide Brown Act Training by May 2016.
Goal 2: Define the County’s obligations to locate and
preserve records, electronic data, and other evidence, and
create training regarding those obligations and the
development and implementation of appropriate litigation hold
processes.
Objective 1 – Develop litigation hold training materials by
June 2016.
Goal 3: Further improve effectiveness of employees and
work teams in the delivery of legal and risk management
services to departments.
Objective 1 – Monitor implementation of improvements
and provide quarterly updates to departments beginning
September 2015.
Objective 2 – Complete assessments of team functions
and preliminary implementation of recommended
improvements in three of the eight work teams by
December 2015.
Objective 3 – Develop internal practice guides regarding
County personnel matters and employee due process,
advocacy in administrative hearings, handling HIPAA
breaches, and protected leaves of absences by June
2016.
Goal 4: Increase efficiency in filing and managing legal
documents.
Objective 1 – Work with Tulare County Superior Court to
establish and implement electronic filing of legal
documents by December 2015.
Objective 2 – File all appeals and writs electronically by
August 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Develop and implement Impact Fee Program.
Objective 1 – Revise the inventory of buildings
associated with impact fees by December 2015.
Objective 2 – Conduct and complete outreach to Cities
by February 2016.
Objective 3 – Submit agenda item for approval of Impact
Fees to Board of Supervisors by June 2016.
Goal 2: Automate the Fair Political Practices Commission
Form 700 – Statement of Economic Interests filings for
County departments, Boards, Commissions and
Committees, and Special Districts through the eDisclosure
solution. The eDisclosure solutions provides a streamlined,
simplified method for filers to complete their forms online, as
well as for Filing Officials to assist in managing filings and
Biennial Reviews.
Objective 1 – Purchase and installation of the
eDisclosure software by September 2015.
Objective 2 – Electronic Form 700 user training using
eDisclosure software by December 2015.
Objective 3 – Go live with the eDisclosure software by
January 2016.
Goal 3: Work closely with Capital Project’s staff to insure the
jail projects and department moves are done timely and
efficiently.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Facilitate quarterly meetings of the Parks Advisory
Committee and develop, through a subcommittee, an
Implementation Strategy for the approved Mooney Grove 20
Year Conceptual Master Plan to provide for enhanced park
services.
Objective 1 – Complete the establishment of the Parks
Advisory Committee and conduct the first Committee
meeting by August 2015.
Objective 2 – Establish a subcommittee to develop an
Implementation Strategy for the Mooney Grove 20 Year
Conceptual Master Plan by October 2015.
Objective 3 – Complete the initial draft of the
Implementation Strategy by February 2016.
Objective 4 – Present the Implementation Strategy to the
Board of Supervisors for approval by May 2016.
Goal 2: Improve equipment installed at County Parks to
maintain County assets and enhance recreational
opportunities.
Objective 1 – Purchase and receive tables, benches,
and barbecues to replace deteriorated facilities at
Mooney Grove Park by July 2015.
Objective 2 – Install and replace the deteriorated
facilities at Mooney Grove Park by September 2015.
Objective 3 – Purchase and receive replacement items
for additional County parks by June 2016.
Goal 3: Design and open a Dutch exhibition as part of the
History of Farm Labor and Agriculture’s rotating cultural
display.
Objective 1 – Establish a committee of community
residents and local leaders to represent the Dutch
community by July 2015.
Objective 2 – Meet with committee to gather artifacts
from the local community to create a display, and identify
community members to be involved in the opening event
by September 2015.
Objective 3 – Install the new exhibit and host an opening
reception for Dutch exhibit by end of October 2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Identify all of the modules of the Parks Reservation
System to be created by TCiCT to increase organizational
efficiencies and reduce staff costs.
Objective 1 – Meet with TCiCT programmer to review
Park Reservation System by December 2015.
Objective 2 – Review all internal controls and give
recommendations to TCiCT to update by March 2016.
Objective 3 – Work with TCiCT to create fiscal reports
for balancing Wincams System in order to reduce staff
time dedicated to manual reporting by June 2016.
Goal 2: Develop policies and procedures for critical tasks in
the divisions of General Services to enhance organizational
performance. Initial phase of critical areas to be reviewed
will be fiscal controls, personnel procedures, and analyst
functions.
Objective 1 – Complete the initial phase of policies and
procedures preparation by June 2016. This will be a
multi-year effort, continuing into FY 2016/17.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Upgrade VolP and network equipment.
Objective 1 – Receive, inventory, and release the new
equipment for installation by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Receive, inventory, and surplus the old
equipment as it is replaced by July 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Seek funding for the Tulare County Anti-Human
Trafficking Task Force.
Objective 1 – Apply for funding opportunities as they arise
to strengthen the task force’s mission.
Goal 2: Continue to provide training to law enforcement
partners and other agencies.
Objective 1 – Offer trainings, conferences, and
symposiums that will provide valuable information to law
enforcement, other County agencies, and the general
public. Two symposiums will be conducted in Visalia for
Tulare County and the surrounding counties. In addition,
the Department intends to schedule one additional training
at a yet to be determined location. The two scheduled
trainings are an Environmental Crimes Symposium
planned for October 2015, and a one-day “Health Care
404” seminar for investigators and prosecutors to focus on
fraud in the health-care industry, scheduled for November
2015.
Goal 3: The Department’s Media Specialist will continue to
disseminate relevant information to the public through social
media and other methods.
Objective 1 – Establish a process to measure Media
Specialist impact by June 2016.
Goal 4: Restructure the Bureau of Investigations personnel to
bring more resources to investigating rural crimes.
Objective 1 – Establish a Crimes Against Property Unit,
comprised of two teams, an Economic Crimes Team, and
a Specialized Investigations Team focused on particular
crime-types.
Objective 2 – Assign Consumer Fraud, Auto Insurance
Fraud, Tulare Regional Auto-Theft Task Force (TRATT),
and General Property Crimes to the Specialized
Investigations Team. These resources, combined with the
Economic Crimes Team will be utilized to flood resources
to specific rural crime problems at a moment’s notice.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Develop, expand, or improve services that ensure a
safe and thriving community.
Objective 1 – By June 2016 the Agency will expand
client and family advocacy services through strategic
communication strategies to educate service recipients,
family members, stakeholders, and the public about the
array of services provided, the rights of individuals and
family members involved, and opportunities for
engagement and partnership.
Objective 2 – By June 2016 Animal Services will provide
a community centered spay, neuter, and vaccine
program, with the goal of bringing low cost spay/neuter
and vaccination services to the rural communities in the
County.
Objective 3 – By June 2016 Environmental Health will
provide education and outreach to the community to
improve food safety practices and reduce the incidence
of foodborne illnesses.
Objective 4 – By June 2016 the Human Services Branch
will expand program opportunities for at-risk youth,
helping to provide pathways to financial stability and wellbeing
as they transition to adulthood.
Objective 5 – By June 2016 the Mental Health Branch
will open the Porterville Wellness and Recovery Center,
providing a community-based service for individuals living
with mental illness to have a place to go to connect with
peers, engage in vocational and recreational supports,
and sustain wellness.
Objective 6 – By June 2016 the Public Health Branch
will increase the number of clients registered with the
Patient Portal, allowing them to more effectively monitor
their health information, access patient-specific
resources, and securely correspond with health care
providers.
Objective 7 – By June 2016 the Public Health Branch
will upgrade the Patient Portal with new features to
provide additional services and promote an excellent
model of care.
Objective 8 – By December 2015 revise local PHEP
planning to align with the California Department of Public
Health’s Emergency Operations Manual, as well as
existing local partner policies.
Objective 9 – Expand the integration of Mental Health
Services at County Health Care Centers by piloting a
program between the County Health Care Center,
HHSA’s Mental Health Branch, and Anthem Blue Cross.
These partners will work together to implement a
screening process to improve the detection, diagnosis,
and treatment of persons experiencing depression. The
program will screen at least 1,200 clinic patients by June
2016.
Goal 2: Evaluate and improve services to ensure they are
provided in a collaborative and community-driven manner.
Objective 1 – By June 2016 Animal Services will
establish a Tulare County Animal Services Advisory
Committee comprised of members from veterinarian,
rescue, breeder, and city groups, as well as general
County residents. The group will provide
recommendations to staff on shelter operations, as well
as help direct outreach curriculum.
Objective 2 – By June 2016 the Mental Health Branch
will gain public input through a community planning
process to determine service needs, gaps, and priorities.
Objective 3 – By June 2016 the Public Health Branch
will begin obtaining public input through a countywide
assessment of service needs, resources, and priorities.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Increase the value of our services by enhancing
quality and strengthening our ability to deliver cost effective
programs consistent with the Agency’s vision, mission, and
values.
Objective 1 – By June 2016 the Fiscal Operations
Branch will design or re-design two business processes
to enhance either the quality or cost effectiveness of its
services, with a focus on transparency and customer
service.
Objective 2 – By June 2016 the Fiscal Operations
Branch will provide a series of trainings to promote
collaboration at all levels of the organization. The overall
aim is to help develop a culture focused on teamwork,
mutual respect, and customer service.
Objective 3 – By June 2016 the Human Services Branch
will strengthen service integration through collaboration,
coordination, and co-location of Agency staff; enhancing
the customer experience while also strengthening
Agency partnerships and broadening the knowledge
base of resources and services available to assist staff in
handling a multitude of customer needs.
Objective 4 – By June 2016 the Human Services
Branch, in collaboration with the Child Protection
Planning Council will strengthen the well-being of
children and families by thoroughly examining current
policies, services, and practices as part of the California
Child and Family Services Review; a comprehensive
process that will help identify areas of strength and areas
that need improvement.
Objective 5 – By June 2016 the Mental Health Branch
will have trained its providers on the quality assurance
supports and measures to better engage all staff in the
process of system efficiency and program effectiveness.
Objective 6 – By June 2016 the Mental Health Branch
will implement a PHR component to its existing EHR to
improve the quality of care for mental health consumers
by making information more readily available and easily
accessible, and providing another outlet by which
consumers can communicate and coordinate with their
providers.
Objective 7 – By June 2016 the Mental Health Branch
will undergo a fidelity review and adopt necessary
recommendations for the existing Supported Employment
Program to improve and enhance their abilities to provide
quality and successful supported employment services to
individuals living with mental illness.
Goal 2: Strengthen partnerships with community providers
to maximize effectiveness, funding sustainability and
capacity building.
Objective 1 – By June 2016 Animal Services will partner
with rescue organizations and other community groups to
decrease the shelter’s euthanization rate by increasing
the placement of animals with rescues, foster families, or
through adoptions.
Objective 2 – By June 2016 Children’s Medical Services
will improve its collaboration and networking by
establishing consistent communication and quarterly
meetings with partners, such as Tulare County Office of
Education Bright Start, Central Valley Regional Center,
and hospital liaisons to improve coordinated care
services.
Objective 3 – By June 2016 the Mental Health Branch
will have trained its providers to use the fiscal monitoring
tool which allows both the Agency and provider a more
complete understanding of the consumer costs.
Goal 1: Improve departmental hiring by implementing
changes to recruitment and selection certification process.
Objective 1 – Complete meet and confer on proposed
new policies by July 2015.
Objective 2 – Launch new selection certification process
in August 2015.
Objective 3 – Review new recruitment and selection
certification process by December 2015, survey
department users on new processes, and make
recommendations to modify practices in 3rd quarter of FY
2015/16.
Objective 4 – Conduct and evaluate hiring metrics in the
4th quarter of FY 2015/16.
Goal 2: In collaboration with Health and Human Services
Agency, champion countywide competency-based training
and professional certification in human resources for
departmental human resources staff.
Objective 1 – Provide employees with workshops and
study guides in July 2015 in advance of training.
Objective 2 – Schedule on-site training for August 2015.
Objective 3 – Support continuing education for recertification
of human resources staff through the 4th
quarter of FY 2015/16.
Goal 3: Review and update testing criteria and examinations
used for hiring based on current industry standards for job
classes.
Objective 1 – Identify departments’ needs to test for
knowledge, skills, and abilities in 1st quarter FY 2015-16.
Objective 2 – Research, review, and demonstrate test
products and new resources or testing methods in 2nd
quarter FY 2015/16.
Objective 3 – Formalize recommendations and purchase
and/or develop new testing tools in 2nd and 3rd quarters FY
2015/16.
Goal 4: Develop and implement a holistic approach to
address complaints, correct employee behavior, and resolve
disputes of discrimination/harassment, bullying, hostile work
environment and management versus performance issues.
Objective 1 – Review current complaints and processes
in 1st quarter FY 2015/16.
Objective 2 – Identify gaps in services to departments in
1st and 2nd quarters FY 2015/16.
Objective 3 – Develop procedures and educate
departments on early identification of issues during 3rd
quarter FY 2015/16.
Objective 4 – Implement, with the collaboration of key
departments, a complaint resolution process in 3rd and 4th
quarters FY 2015/16.
Objective 5 – Track and monitor results, evaluate, and
make changes to improve the process. Continuous
evaluation 4th quarter FY 2015/16.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Develop a Pre-Trial Release Supervision program
for adult offenders grant Own Recognizance (OR) releases
or offenders who have posted bail but are subject to
additional orders of the Court based on the severity of the
offense.
Objective 1 – Develop protocols for program referral and
participation by September 2015.
Objective 2 – Add two FTE Deputy Probation Officer
positions, with AB 109 funding, by October 2015.
Goal 2: Develop a cost-effective, interim solution to record
and store audio and video at both the Juvenile Detention
Facility and the Youth Facility.
Objective 1 – Continue monthly meetings with a new
Project Team, established in May 2015, consisting of
representatives from the Sheriff’s Department, TCiCT,
General Services, Facilities, and the Probation
Department.
Objective 2 – Establish a working committee within the
Probation Department to assist the Project Team in
developing an interim solution by July 2015.
Objective 3 – Complete the interim solution, inclusive of
additional cameras and storage, by September 2015.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Expand the RESET program for service delivery in
South County.
Objective 1 – Add one FTE Deputy Probation Officer l/ll
position, with AB 109 funding, by September 2015.
Objective 2 – Begin RESET classes in Porterville on or
before September 2015.
Objective 3 – Provide RESET curriculum to 75 adult
offenders residing in South County during the period of
September 2015 through June 2016.
Objective 4 – Secure job placement for 50 adult
offenders residing in South County during the period of
September 2015 through June 2016.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Work in concert with the Sheriff’s Office to identify
programming and treatment needs of offenders and combine
resources to allow for a continuum of service delivery from
custody programs through probation supervision.
Objective 1 – Develop a Treatment Team subcommittee
of the CCP to meet monthly effective July 2015.
Objective 2 – Identify programming and treatment needs
of the offender populations by October 2015.
Objective 3 – Develop a Strategic Plan for
implementation by December 2015.
Goal 2: Enhance vocational education programming to
commitment youth at the Juvenile Detention Facility and the
Youth Facility.
Objective 1 – Identify and develop a multi-agency
Project Team for construction by July 2015 and
commence bi-monthly meetings beginning in August
2015.
Objective 2 – Identify and develop a multi-agency
Project Team for curriculum development by July 2015
and commence bi-monthly meetings and commence bimonthly
meetings effective July 2015.
Objective 3 – Purchase and implement a vocational
education curriculum by January 2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Enhance the Pre-Trial Assessment program to
ensure that all qualifying adult defendants unable to post bail
receive a Common Performance Assessment System
(COMPAS) assessment prior to the Preliminary Hearing to
determine eligibility for Pre-Trial release.
Objective 1 – Add one FTE Deputy Probation Officer by
October 1, 2015.
Objective 2 – Increase the number of COMPAS
assessments and associated Honor Release Reports by
33%, from 377 to 602 during FY 2015/16.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Start a Clean Slate Program.
Objective 1 – Public Defender Supervising Attorneys to
formalize the process utilized by the Department in
obtaining post-conviction relief for Tulare County citizens
and former clients by January 2016.
Objective 2 – Outreach to citizens and former clients
informing them of post-conviction relief available to them
pursuant to Proposition 47 and other laws. The time that
Proposition 47 relief is available is limited. Outreach will be
conducted over a two year period through November
2017.
Goal 2: Add Attorney position for new Driving Under the
Influence and Domestic Violence Courts.
Objective 1 – Finalize agreement with Probation
Department and Tulare County Superior Court to fund the
position by August 2015.
Objective 2 – Recruit, hire, and train attorney to represent
individuals in these new collaborative courts by October
2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Continue with additions, improvements, and updates
to the Department’s website.
Objective 1 – Establish a website review team to add and
maintain content by September 2015.
Objective 2 – Provide online answers to many general,
frequent legal questions (“Frequently Asked Questions”)
on the Public Defender website by June 2016.
Objective 3 – Provide links to other justice partner’s web
sites for other useful information and data by June 2016.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Promote the economic well-being of the residents and
businesses within the unincorporated area of Tulare County.
Objective 1 – Apply for ten grants for economic
development and infrastructure projects by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Launch a Business Expansion and
Retention (BEAR) Program by June 2016.
Objective 3 – Attract businesses to Tulare County by
directly marketing to a minimum of ten targeted companies
by June 2016.
Objective 4 – Work with companies on business
development that results in the creation of 50 new jobs by
June 2016.
Objective 5 – Promote tourism by marketing a minimum
of three trade shows by June 2016.
Objective 6 – Market visitor opportunities within Tulare
County by producing regional tourism guides and other
related marketing materials by June 2016.
Objective 7 – The Tulare County Film Commission will
seek to process at least ten commercial film permits to
encourage local spending and public value by June 2016.
Objective 8 – Market Tulare County locations to
Hollywood filmmakers by attending at least three industry
trade events by June 2016.
Objective 9 – Promote filming opportunities within Tulare
County by participating in industry trade association
activities by June 2016.
Objective 10 – Promote educational and vocational
opportunities for local youth seeking careers in film and
news media professions by June 2016.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Promote the public health, safety and general welfare
of the residents of Tulare County by implementing the
County’s General Plan 2030 Update through completion of
major environmental, planning, development, and building
initiatives.
Objective 1 – Implement the General Plan Update
litigation settlement by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Complete the Community Plan updating
process for the unincorporated communities of Pixley,
Tipton, Strathmore, Terra Bella, Ducor, Earlimart, and
Goshen by June 2016.
Objective 3 – Prepare updated community plans and
environmental documents for the communities of Three
Rivers, Cutler and Orosi by June 2016.
Objective 4 – Complete the Housing Element Update by
June 2016.
Objective 5 – Complete the Animal Confinement Facilities
Plan (ACFP) (Dairy Plan) and the related Program
Environmental Impact Report by June 2016.
Objective 6 – Complete the Yokohl Ranch Program
Environmental Impact Report by June 2016.
Objective 7 – Complete the SB 244 Disadvantaged
Community Plan by June 2016.
Objective 8 – Complete the Countywide Onsite
Wastewater Management Plan by June 2016.
Objective 9 – Launch by “going live” the Planning and
Land Use Management System (PALMS) by June 2016.
Objective 10 – Complete 330 general code enforcement
cases, a 10% increase over prior year’s objective by June
2016.
Objective 11 – Complete 460 medical marijuana code
enforcement cases, a 10% increase over prior year’s
objective by June 2016.
Objective 12 – Complete 350 planning and development
projects, a 10% increase over prior year’s objective by
June 2016.
Objective 13 – Issue 3,140 building permits, a 10%
increase over prior year’s objective by June 2016.
Objective 14 – Complete processing amendment to Code
Enforcement Ordinance by June 2016.
Objective 15 – Prepare and present reports to the Board
of Supervisors addressing the General Plan Update,
Housing Element Update, Surface Mining and
Reclamation Act Program, Employee Housing Act
Program, and Airport Land Use Plan by June 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve the organizational performance of RMA’s
Economic Development and Planning, Public Works, and
Administration Branches by implementing RMA’s Strategic
Management System.
Objective 1 – Decentralize the Administration Branch’s
Clerical Division by directly embedding clerical staff within
the divisions of the Economic Development and Planning
Branch, including the Permit Center Division, Project
Processing Division, and Building and Housing Division by
June 2016.
Objective 2 – Continue to reduce RMA’s overhead
expenses by, among other things, applying to Caltrans for
approval of an Indirect Cost Rate Plan (ICRP) by June
2016.
Objective 3 – Explore how to transfer some of the
functions of RMA’s Human Resources Division to the
Human Resources and Development Department by June
2016.
Objective 4 – Reorganize the Surface Mining and
Reclamation Act Program by June 2016.
Objective 5 – Implement RMA’s Strategic Management
System by beginning the study of “Best Management
Practices” for RMA as an Agency and for each Branch by
June 2016.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Reduce local gang activity.
Objective 1 – Conduct 250 probation and parole
compliance checks by June 2016 to disrupt local gang
culture and activity.
Objective 2 – Increase gang awareness sessions to
community residents, and to business and civic groups, to
strengthen anti-gang partnerships. The objective is to
have four sessions every three months during the FY
2015/16, for a total of 16 by June 2016.
Goal 2: Increase citizen participation in public safety.
Objective 1 – Work with residents to establish six
Neighborhood Watch programs in rural Tulare County
communities which do not have these effective anti-crime
programs. The new Neighborhood Watch programs are
projected to be in place by June 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Re-establish the Sheriff Department’s “cold case” unit
Objective 1 – Hire two experienced homicide detectives
with major case investigation experience by September
2015 to re-start the Department “cold case” unit. Cold
cases are homicides and other major cases that
investigators were unable to solve when they occurred,
typically years ago. Cold case units re-examine evidence
and apply new investigative techniques to solve these
crimes.
Objective 2 – Examine number of cases reviewed and
leads generated by June 2016 to evaluate effectiveness of
new unit.
Goal 2: Purchase and implement a body-worn camera (BWC)
program.
Objective 1 – Purchase body-worn cameras for
Department field personnel by November 2015.
Objective 2 – Finalize BWC policy for proper use of bodyworn
cameras by November 2015.
Objective 3 – Establish BWC training for field personnel
and implement usage of the cameras by June 2016.
Goal 3: Start egg production operation on Sheriff’s Farm to
reduce food costs in jail kitchen by a projected $98,000
annually versus purchasing eggs from outside vendors.
Objective 1 – Build, stock, and place in operation the first
of four mobile chicken coops at Sheriff’s Farm by July 1,
2015. Each coop will house approximately 500 chickens
capable of laying approximately 2,000 eggs per day.
Objective 2 – Build, stock, and place into operation three
additional chicken coops by January 2016.
Goal 4: Expand Sheriff’s Explorer program for youth.
Objective 1 – Increase membership of the Sheriff’s
Explorer program by 20 percent by June 2016.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Successfully investigate and prosecute agricultural
crimes.
Goal 2: Offer services through the Owner Applied Number
system and stamp equipment to deter theft.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Continue our involvement in the CRCPTF Rural
Crime School.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Strengthen and unify the families of juveniles who
have had contact with the juvenile justice system to develop
problem solving skills, coping skills, and self-efficacy.
Objective 1 – Provide Family Preservation Services to 90
youth beginning July 2015.
Objective 2 – Achieve 45% graduation rate by June 2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Increase collaboration with community members in
an effort to decrease tobacco use in Tulare County.
Objective 1 – Implement two trainings for existing and
new Tulare County Tobacco Coalition members to
increase their skills for providing tobacco-related
education in the community by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Partner and coordinate with three multiunit
housing complexes managers to adopt smoke free
policies by June 2016.
Objective 3 – Conduct three educational presentations
on the impact of tobacco, and on activities and
opportunities that bring “Healthy Stores for a Healthy
Community” awareness to community groups by June
2016.
Goal 2: Increase the efficiency of process and procedures
by streamlining access to Maddy Program resources for
providers.
Objective 1 – Implement a training session to educate
providers on the availability of Maddy funds and
streamlining the claims process by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Complete a comprehensive analysis on
the feasibility of changing the schedule from annual to
quarterly disbursement of funds to providers by June
2016.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Provide a safe and secure environment for staff and
the public at all Library locations.
Objective 1 – Work with Risk Management to develop
Emergency Action Plan for all branches by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Participate in all training offered on safety
and security. Conduct in-house staff training and review,
including drills at all locations by June 2016.
Objective 3 – Review the Library’s safety and security
practices and update necessary documents by May
2016.
Objective 4 – Review layout of libraries to ensure
accessibility and safety, starting with Visalia by
November 2015.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Increase County residents’ awareness of the
Library’s electronic online resources.
Objective 1 – Develop and implement an ongoing
training plan for staff to better assist customers with
public computers, online resources, and digital literacy by
May 2016.
Objective 2 – Implement WiFi technology in six branch
locations with funding provided by a Library Service and
Technology Pitch an Idea Grant in Exeter, Ivanhoe,
Lindsay, Strathmore, Tipton, and Woodlake branches by
March 2016.
Objective 3 – Provide customer training on Library
electronic resources, including homework help, job
training and testing, and downloadable resources by April
2016.
Goal 2: Increase access to literacy services, resources, and
programs for adults.
Objective 1 – Increase relevant curriculum and materials
to expand the effectiveness of each tutor and learner pair
by March 2016.
Objective 2 – Add at least one additional ESL
conversation circle by March 2016.
Objective 3 – Assess and improve tutor recruitment and
learner referrals by working with the local community,
media, schools, and other resources to increase tutor
and learners by 10%.
Objective 4 – Continue as an active partner in the
SAEC. This group of education organizations, including
local school districts and colleges, is working to gather
adult learning resources.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Improve County residents’ well-being and quality of
life through partnerships and programs.
Objective 1 – Continue to support and host the Summer
Lunch Program for children and teens working with local
nonprofit food agencies, and investigate expansion to
other locations by May 2016.
Objective 2 – Participate in at least five annual
community programs that promote literacy and learning,
including the Tulare County Office of Education’s Spring
Program by May 2016.
Objective 3 – Work with local cultural groups to develop
at least two new adult programs by June 2016.
Objective 4 – Expand successful programs, including
Lego Club and Candyland, to at least three more
branches by April 2016.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Ensure compliance with FAA regulations.
Objective 1 – Subject to FAA grant award, prepare the
ALP by June 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve Airport facilities for optimized use.
Objective 1 – Subject to FAA grant award, prepare the
design of navigation aids by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Subject to FAA grant award, construct
navigation aids by June 2016.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Increase tenant occupancy of the hangar buildings.
Objective 1 – Research and identify potential aircraft
related business enterprises that would be interested in
leasing space and would provide the highest possible rent
market opportunities that are related to airport use by
December 2015.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Work with Tulare County Information and
Communications Fire Dispatch Technology Team in
updating the Fire Communications Center to maintain
industry accepted practices.
Objective 1 – Increase the number of dispatch
workstation pods from three to four by June 2016.
Goal 2: Improve the operational service delivery model.
Objective 1 – Determine the fire station that will benefit
the most by the addition of the Fire Apparatus Engineer
by September 2015.
Objective 2 – Create new classification and add three
Fire Apparatus Engineer position allocations by October
2015.
Objective 3 – Collaborate with Human Resources &
Development in the recruitment process by November
2015.
Goal 3: Increase emergency medical service capabilities.
Objective 1 – Adopt California Health & Safety Code
regulation amendments relative to emergency medical
services and basic life support techniques such as CPR
and first aid by September 2015.
Objective 2 – Require all entry level fire apparatus
engineers and lieutenants to have Emergency Medical
Technician certification by September 2015.
Objective 3 – Provide cost effective trainings that include
a recertification of required emergency medical response
certifications by February 2016.
Goal 4: Increase cost recovery capabilities.
Objective 1 – Research County ordinances and
methodologies related to cost recovery by September
2015.
Objective 2 – Implement an Administrative Citation
Process to provide a streamlined process for illegal burns
and other fire related infractions no later than December
2015.
Objective 3 – Collaborate with County Counsel on cost
recovery through the judicial process for those individuals
or agencies who have an outstanding citation or other
outstanding payable no later than June 2016.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Improve roadway safety for the public and County
personnel.
Objective 1 – Develop a Countywide Safe Routes to
School Plan by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Implement Workzone Safety training
seminars for all Roads staff working in traffic areas by
June 2016.
Objective 3 – Continue progress with the Highway
Safety Improvement Program. This includes:
implementing two Stop Controlled Intersection
Improvement Projects by June 2016, designing the
Avenue 152 Safety Improvement Project by June 2016,
and submitting grant applications for Cycle 8 of the
Highway Safety Improvement Program by June 2016.
Goal 2: Improve and maintain adequate transportation
infrastructure.
Objective 1 – Complete the design and obtain the rightof-
way for the widening of Avenue 280 – Segment 1
(State Route 99 to the west limits of the City of Visalia)
from two lanes to four lanes by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Proceed with construction of the Avenue
416 road widening project from the Fresno/Tulare County
line to Road 56.
Objective 3 – Complete the construction of the Road 224
Deer Creek Bridge by June 2016.
Objective 4 – Complete the construction of five
community projects in various unincorporated
communities, typically consisting of pavement
rehabilitation, curb, gutter, and sidewalk improvements.
Additionally, complete the conceptual design of an
additional five community projects so that construction
can proceed when funding is identified for those projects
by June 2016.
Objective 5 – Continue development of the bridge
program, which will include; 1) obtain authorization to
proceed with the engineering and environmental
document phase of the Bridge Preventive Maintenance
Program; 2) complete construction on three bridge
projects (including Road 224 Deer Creek Bridge); 3)
continue the engineering and environmental document
phase on seven bridge projects and; 4) initiate the
engineering and environmental document phase on three
new bridge projects by June 2016.
Objective 6 – Complete the design engineering and the
environmental documents for two roadway safety
improvement projects, totaling $2.5 million in construction
costs by June 2016.
Objective 7 – Perform roadway rehabilitation by
contracting out approximately $4 million in asphalt
concrete overlay projects throughout the County; $2
million dedicated to rural roads; and $2 million for
unincorporated communities.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve project delivery through utilization of
strategic project management methods.
Objective 1 – Improve project management
effectiveness through additional training of key
personnel.
Objective 2 – Improve operational effectiveness within
the reorganized structure of Public Works for
Management Groups 1, 2, and 3.
Objective 3 – Improve collaborative effectiveness within
the new RMA structure for the Administrative Branch and
the Economic Development and Planning Branch.
Goal 2: Improve efficiencies through the use of new
technology and software.
Objective 1 – Obtain and utilize new survey tools to
allow for one-man survey crews by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Acquire additional GIS software licenses
and develop staff expertise to address unique
applications of GIS technologies for public works and
land surveying by June 2016.
Objective 3 – Acquire iPad devices for appropriate staff
and management to allow for off-site communication and
interaction by June 2016.
Due to previously outlined WIOA effective dates and data
collection timelines, FY 2015/16 performance measures are
measured against WIA goals.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Achieve at least 90% all WIA Adult and Dislocated
Worker participant performance goals set by the California
Employment Development Department Workforce Services
Division (EDD WSD) by June 2015. Individuals must meet
WIA low income criteria to be eligible for the Adult Program.
Individuals must meet dislocated worker criteria such as
being laid off due to a company closure or substantial lay off,
or receiving unemployment insurance and unlikely to return
to their previous industry or occupation.
Objective 1 – 51.5% of all Adult Program participants will
find employment within 90 days after program
completion. 57.5% of all Dislocated Worker Program
participants will find employment within 90 days after
program completion.
Objective 2 – 77.5% of all Adult Program participants
who find employment after program completion will
remain employed for six months. 77.5% of all Dislocated
Worker Program participants who find employment after
program completion will remain employed for six months.
Objective 3 - The average earnings of all Adult Program
participants employed six months after program
completion will be $10,100. The average earnings for all
Dislocated Worker Program participants six months after
program completion will be $11,900.
Goal 2: Achieve at least 90% of all WIA In-School and Outof-
School Youth Program performance goals set by the EDD
WSD by June 2015. Youth must be between the ages of 16
to 21, be low income, and have a barrier to finding
employment or completing school to be eligible for the WIA
Youth Program.
Objective 1 – 68% of youth participants will find a job or
enroll in school within three months of program
completion.
Objective 2 – 53% of Youth Program participants will
receive a GED, High School Diploma, or Vocational
School Certificate within three months of program
completion.
Objective 3 – 53.5% of Out-of-School youth will increase
at least one educational functioning level within three
months of program completion.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Ensure that children in cases involving Title IV-D of
the Federal Social Security Act have support from parents as
ordered by increasing the amount of child support collections
and distributions by September 2015 as set by the State.
Objective 1 – Collect and distribute $38,255,585 in child
support.
Objective 2 – Collect and distribute 74.3% of the amount
of current child support due.
Objective 3 – Collect on 64.5% of cases with arrears
owing.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Increase the percentage of children with a legal
relationship with their parents by September 2015 as set by
the State.
Objective 1 – Maintain or increase Statewide Paternity
Establishment Percentage to 100% or above.
Goal 2: Increase the percentage of child support cases with
support orders by September 2015 as set by the State.
Objective 1 – Establish support orders in 95.8% of cases
needing a support order.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Operate a cost effective program by September
2015 as set by the State.
Objective 1 – Achieve a Cost Effectiveness ratio of at
least $2.25.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Provide project management for the design of the
South County Detention Facility, a 500-bed jail facility to be
constructed in Porterville in FY 2015/16, to provide the
building resources necessary for the County’s future law
enforcement needs.
Objective 1 – Complete the required construction
document phase of the project, and submit it to the BSCC
for approval by September 2015.
Objective 2 – Begin the bid and award phase of the
project by November 2015 and award a construction
contract by January 2016.
Objective 3 – Begin construction of the project by
February 2016.
Goal 2: Provide project management for the construction of
the Sequoia Field Program Facility to provide for the County’s
future law enforcement needs.
Objective 1 – Establish the project scope and budget with
the State Public Works Board by October 2015.
Objective 2 – Execute consultant contracts for
architecture and construction management services, and
initiate facility design with County stakeholders by
December 2015.
Goal 3: Ensure that Tulare County Fire Department has a
long-term and sustainable station near Visalia, by designing
Fire Station No. 1 for construction.
Objective 1 – Complete the biddable plans and
specifications in conjunction with the Transportation
Operations and Maintenance Facility and Compressed
Natural Gas Fueling Station by December 2015.
Goal 4: Ensure that critical building resources have sufficient
back-up systems in place by installing an emergency
generator at Government Plaza to provide improved service
delivery and protect assets during power outages.

Objective 1 – Complete the bid process for the installation
of the generator and associated equipment by the end of
July 2015.
Objective 2 – Complete the installation of the generator
and associated equipment by December 2015.
Goal 5: Provide improved property protection and law
enforcement efforts through the design of a new Property and
Evidence facility for use by the Sheriff’s Department.
Objective 1 – Complete the biddable plans and
specifications by March 2016.
Objective 2 – Complete the bid process for the
construction of the project and award a construction
contract by June 2016.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Complete the Harmon Field Low Temperature
Thermal Desorption Project.
Objective 1 – Complete the additional remediation of
Harmon Field by October 2015.
Objective 2 – Prepare the Final Report and Operations
and Maintenance Agreement for submittal to the DTSC for
approval by December 2015.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Enhance the recreation experience of visitors by
constructing new bathroom facilities at Balch Park.
Objective 1 – Complete the bathroom construction by
October 2015.
Goal 2: Provide additional job training skills for youth by
designing and constructing the Juvenile Vocational Education
Center.
Objective 1 – Establish the project scope and budget with
the State Public Works Board by September 2015.
Objective 2 – Execute a consultant contract for
architecture services and begin designing, with County
stakeholders, the facility by December 2015.
Goal 3: Provide additional services to clients of the Health and
Human Services Agency by renovating the new mental health
building located in Porterville.
Objective 1 – Complete the biddable plans and
specifications by August 2015.
Objective 2 – Complete the bid process for the
construction of the project and award a construction
contract by November 2015.
Objective 3 – Start construction of the project by January
2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve the quality of working conditions for County
employees and enhance services to the public by relocating
employees and renovating portions of the following Countyowned
buildings: Government Plaza, County Counsel/Human
Resources, Visalia courthouse basement floor, and two
buildings currently occupied by the Tulare County Office of
Education.
Objective 1 – Complete space programming and
construction documents by January 2016.
Objective 2 – Complete building renovations and
employee relocation by June 2016.

Goal 2: Provide for the County’s long-term office space needs
through the acquisition of a new office building in Visalia.
Objective 1 – Identify new office space within Visalia to
meet the County’s needs by July 2015.
Objective 2 – Present request to purchase new office
space to Board of Supervisors by October 2015.
Objective 3 – Obtain possession and occupy new office
space by January 2015.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Enhance the performance of the Justice Partner
Data Sharing system. Planned future improvements to
sharing of data between County Justice Departments require
a more powerful infrastructure.
Objective 1 – Purchase new processor license for
Fiorino software by December 2015.
Objective 2 – Install, test, and bring into production the
new processor license by June 2016.
Goal 2: Upgrade the County’s Property Management
Information Management System with the Aumentum
Project.
Objective 1 – Conduct Project kick-off meeting with
executive stakeholders by April 2016.
Objective 2 – Complete all first quarter assigned Project
tasks by June 2016.
Goal 3: Enhance County communications by upgrading the
Blue Ridge communications tower.
Objective 1 – Install new tower at Blue Ridge site by
April 2016.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Improve economic growth and community stability
by providing businesses with access to funding
opportunities.

Objective 1 – Collaborate with Economic Development
staff to identify viable businesses and connect those
businesses with business expansion or retention funding
opportunities.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Develop viable communities by encouraging new
housing and a suitable living environment.
Objective 1 – Collaborate with County staff to identify
project needs and develop project descriptions for future
funding opportunities.
Goal 2: Improve infrastructure within the community of
Traver.
Objective 1 – Finalize plans and specs for the Traver
Waste Water System Improvement Project by March
2016.
Objective 2 – Bid out the Traver Waste Water System
Improvement Project by May 2016.
Objective 3 – Begin construction on the Traver Waste
Water System Improvement Project by June 2016.

Quality of Life
Goal 1: Continue efforts to provide safe and sanitary
housing for the low and very low income residents of
unincorporated Tulare County through its housing
rehabilitation program, multi-family housing construction
project, and first-time homebuyer mortgage assistance
programs.
Objective 1 – Research opportunities for multi-family
housing projects.

Quality of Life
Goal 1: Develop viable communities by encouraging new
housing and suitable living environments.
Objective 1 – Collaborate with public agencies and
stakeholders to identify project needs and develop
project descriptions for future funding opportunities.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Improve the water and wastewater facilities in
Lemon Cove to assure residents of a continued supply of
safe water.
Objective 1 – Work with the Lemon Cove Sanitary
District to assess alternative plans to locate a source of
drinkable water for the community by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Secure funding to implement storm runoff
project by June 2016.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Provide safe and cost effective water and sewer
services within County Service Areas Numbers 1 and 2.
Objective 1 – Safely operate and maintain County sewer
and water systems.
Objective 2 – Replace/upgrade malfunctioning
equipment by June 2016.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Continue to ensure adequate funding for operation
and maintenance of the water and sewer systems.
Objective 1 – Place delinquent accounts on the County
Assessors’ Tax Roll by August 2016.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Decrease risk to the environment and human health.
Objective 1 – Complete a feasibility study by December
2015 to improve the water quality in Yettem.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Increase rider safety and comfort
Objective 1 – By June 2016, staff will purchase and install
at least 12 transit shelters and benches to improve
customer service and safety while waiting for the buses.

Goal 2: Increase transit system safety and security.
Objective 1 – By February 2016, purchase and install
software for bus tracking in the form of AVL/GPS, which
will provide real-time tracking of buses and allow for better
monitoring and more reliable alerts of unsafe activities.
Objective 2 – By June 2016, purchase and install a digital
video recording system to capture what is happening in
and around fixed route buses with a built-in inertia sensor
ideal for recording unsafe driving practices.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Increase ridership and provide additional rider
amenities.
Objective 1 – By June 2016, provide passengers with
real-time bus arrival information via mobile applications,
the TCaT webpage, and text messaging to alert customers
of delays.
Objective 2 – By June 2016, provide Wi-Fi on buses to
improve entertainment options for riders and promote
ridership among the non-transit dependent demographics.
Objective 3 – By June 2016, develop and Improve TCaT
website.
Objective 4 – By June 2016, identify events and
opportunities to expand outreach.
Objective 5 – Study and identify support for rebranding of
TCaT system.
Goal 2: Develop Fleet Upgrade Policy.
Objective 1 – By November 2015, research and develop
a policy regarding classification of future bus purchases.
Objective 2 – Select and install electronic card reader
units in existing fleets.
Objective 3 – Select and purchase fully functional fare
boxes or electronic card readers as applicable in all future
bus purchases.
Goal 3: Improve route planning and increase route
awareness.
Objective 1 – By June 2016, produce a GIS generated
map that shows the locations of all TCaT bus stops and
amenities for use in community planning and to improve
synergy with other transportation options in the County,
including bicycle and pedestrian options and other transit
systems.
Objective 2 – By November 2015, participate in the
Google Transit Partner Program to make stop information
available via Google Maps to assist riders in planning trips
and connecting with other transit agencies.
Goal 4: Improve cost recovery for TCaT fixed routes.
Objective 1 – Study potential fare increases in conjunction
with the TDP by September 2015 to make
recommendation to the Board.
Goal 5: Develop strategic long term plan for TCaT.
Objective 1 – By September 2015, present to the Board a
recommended TDP to guide the Transit Division for the
next five years.
Goal 6: Improve transit operations and maintenance.
Objective 1 – By June 2016, complete design plans for
the TOMF.

Objective 2 – By June 2016, complete plans for the
construction of CNG fueling facility.
Goal 7: Improve air quality and decrease emissions by
reducing diesel fleet.
Objective 1 – By June 2016, purchase two new CNG
buses to replace the remaining diesel busses within the
LOOP fleet.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Develop long term resource and facility plans.
Objective 1 – Initiate contact with the cities that have
expressed interest in long term resource and facility
planning by March 2016.
Goal 2: Complete construction activities at the Visalia
Landfill Unit 1 closure.
Objective 1 – Bid out the project for construction by
September 2015.
Objective 2 – Begin construction of the project by
November 2015.
Goal 3: Improve recycling opportunities for County
residents.
Objective 1 – Refine the AB 341 program for Mandatory
Commercial Recycling by October 1, 2015.
Objective 2 – Implement the first phase of AB 1826,
Mandatory Commercial Organics Recycling, by April
2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve customer service.
Objective 1 – Reduce commercial customer cycle times
by 10% by December 2015.
Goal 2: Increase disposal volumes at County Landfills.
Objective 1 – Obtain sludge volume at the Visalia
Landfill by September 2015.
Objective 2 – Complete the Waste Disposal Agreement
with Mid Valley Disposal by September 2015.
Goal 3: Improve transfer station fiscal performance.
Objective 1 – Complete financial evaluation of the
existing transfer station system by December 2015.
Objective 2 – Finish evaluation of reopening the
Earlimart Transfer Station to increase service in the
unincorporated south County by December 2015.
Goal 4: Evaluate sustainable energy opportunities.
Objective 1 – Investigate landfill gas conversion to
compressed natural gas for usage in County, other
municipalities, or commercial vehicles.
Objective 2 – Analyze solar power system options for
the Visalia Landfill by October 2015.
Objective 3 – Research anaerobic digestion operations
and potential impacts to the County landfills by
November 2015.
Goal 5: Improve management skills.
Objective 1 – Facilitate two members of the Solid Waste
Department’s management team to attend Leadership
Academy by March 2016.
Objective 2 – Facilitate two members of the Solid Waste
Department’s landfill operations management team to
attend the Solid Waste Association of North America,
Manager of Landfill Operations, training program by June
2016.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Provide a safe and efficient sewer system to
residents.
Objective 1 – Provide ongoing maintenance to the
collection system and treatment plant to preclude a
sewage spill.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Decrease the risk to human health and the
environment through prevention of sewer spills.
Objective 1 – Replace/repair malfunctioning equipment
and perform necessary repairs by June 2016.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Provide cost effective operations and maintenance
for the storm drainage systems, roadways and landscape
belts within the assessment districts.
Objective 1 – Inspect and provide necessary repairs to
ensure the drainage basins are in proper working order.
Objective 2 – Provide weed abatement and necessary
fence repair.
Objective 3 – Inspect, repair, and/or replace any road
damage within the assessment districts, as needed.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Ensure adequate funding for the management and
maintenance of the assessment districts storm drainage
systems, roadways and landscape districts.
Objective 1 – Evaluate each assessment district for an
assessment fee adjustment based on the CPI.
Objective 2 – Ensure annual assessment district fees
are provided to the Assessor’s Office for placement on
the tax roll.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Develop and implement an Emergency Response
Action Plan for all County employee-occupied buildings. The
plan will provide protection to employees and the public in
County buildings in eminent safety threat situations.
Objective 1 – Assist the safety representatives of each
department in completing a threat assessment for each
building within their respective departments by March
2016.
Objective 2 – Implement the Security Plan which includes
providing training, drills, role playing and refresher
exercises to County employees by June 2016.
Objective 3 – Assist the safety representatives in
developing loss prevention plans specific to the activities
and hazards of each County department by June 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Further improve the efficiency of risk finance
administrative functions and insurance administration service
to departments.
Objective 1 – Provide training on the County’s insurance
requirements for contracts by November 2015.
Goal 2: Continually evaluate the effectiveness of Workers’
Compensation claim administration service delivery to County
employees.
Objective 1 – Provide Workers’ Compensation
Procedures training to human resource personnel by April
2016.
Objective 2 – Provide leave management training to
human resource personnel by April 2016.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: To maintain dental insurance rates without major
increases in premiums.
Objective 1 – To encourage prudent use of dental services
to maximize the dental health of current subscribers and
minimize future dental claims.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Ensure that County assets are well maintained and
functional.
Objective 1 – The Grounds staff will work to transition an
additional 30% of all cool season turf to warm season turf
which utilizes 40% less water. This will provide better
water conservation at County facilities by June 2016.
Goal 2: Ensure that County assets are well maintained and
functional by installing modernized equipment.
Objective 1 – Identify optimal placement for two remote,
automatic irrigation clocks by July 2015. The clocks will
include flow and soil moisture sensors which will regulate
and assist in identifying repairs.
Objective 2 – Install the irrigation clocks by December
2015.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Replace aging, out of compliance boiler at Bob Wiley
Detention Facility to ensure County maintains regulatory
compliance and to provide improved energy usage.
Objective 1 – Award the contract and complete the
equipment replacement by May 2016.
Goal 2: Replace aging, out of compliance backup generator
at Bob Wiley Detention Facility to ensure that critical County
business can continue during power outages.
Objective 1 – Award the contract and complete the project
by May 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Hire staff to manage the County’s system-wide
regulatory compliance efforts.
Objective 1 – Regulatory Compliance Specialist to
provide specialized training to staff to oversee regulatory
compliance within the Facilities Division by March 2016.
Objective 2 – Regulatory Compliance Specialist to
establish internal controls and procedures to meet
regulatory requirements by June 2016.
Goal 2: Identify internal KPI’s.
Objective 1 – Analyze FY 2013/14 benchmarks and
compare them to the FY 2014/15 data by June 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Provide expanded and improved services to
departments and continue to provide services to new
buildings and areas through the addition of new custodians.
Objective 1 – Provide services to new areas in Visalia to
meet County expansion needs by hiring one new
employee by February 2015.
Objective 2 – Reinstate window washing services by
hiring two employees by March 2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Purchase Data Pass Hardware and Software and
install the equipment in County vehicles and fueling sites to
provide for better tracking and billing of fuel services.
Objective 1 – Purchase Data Pass Hardware and
Software for County vehicles and fueling sites by January
2016.
Objective 2 – Install Data Pass Hardware and Software
in 50% of County vehicles and at all County fueling
facilities by June 2016.
Goal 2: Consolidate responsibility of ordering and billing for
bulk fuel at all County fueling sites, with the exception those
administered by the Fire Department, into the Fleet Services
Division to provide better fuel tracking and billing.
Objective 1 – Complete fuel services consolidation by
December 2015.
Goal 3: Provide a drainage project for the Fleet Services
Facility.
Objective 1 – Install drains and asphalt for the south,
east, and west side of the Fleet Services Shop by
October 2015.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Ensure that critical services for the County network
and applications can be maintained in the event of a power
outage at the Mooney Grove Business Continuity site.
Objective 1 – Install and test new generator by April
2016.
Objective 2 – Conduct failover test at Mooney Grove
Business Continuity site by June 2016.
Goal 2: Ensure business continuity in the event of primary
connection failure by providing a secondary circuit
connection at additional County locations.
Objective 1 – Conduct review and engineering for
second tier locations by October 2015.
Objective 2 – Based on TCiCT criteria, install additional
circuits to second tier locations by June 2016.
Goal 3: Improve physical network security at the wiring
closet level, to ensure only necessary employees have
access to critical data systems.
Objective 1 – Review and engineer physical network
security secondary sites to meet TCiCT standards by
November 2015.
Objective 2 – Begin implementation at secondary sites
by December 2015.
Goal 4: Complete implementation of communications
business trailer. This will include business continuity testing
to support internet connectivity to remote locations,
temporary offices, and meetings away from current County
network access.
Objective 1 – Engineer throughput for data, voice, and
multi-media needed to support temporary offices by
September 2015.
Objective 2 – Test throughput to support optimized office
configuration by September 2015.
Objective 3 – Conduct one remote test for internet
access, and one remote test for County office access
away from current County network access, by October
2015.
Goal 5: Increase Countywide security and protection.
Objective 1 – Evaluate malware protection by February
2016.
Objective 2 – Procure upgraded malware protection by
April 2016.
Objective 3 – Install upgraded malware protection by
May 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve network efficiency and reliability by
replacing identified Cisco network gear.
Objective 1 – Complete timeline, priorities, and resource
needs by July 2015.
Objective 2 – Identify a schedule of network outages and
customer impacts by August 2015.
Objective 3 – Install highest priority network gear by
February 2016.
Goal 2: Begin phase one of Enterprise Replacement Project
for the County’s payroll system.
Objective 1 – Contract with consultant to conduct a
study of payroll business processes across all
departments by August 2015.
Objective 2 – Develop project plan by April 2016.
Goal 3: Improve business intelligence reporting capabilities
for departments by enhancing current tools.
Objective 1 – Evaluate business intelligence tools for
management dashboards and develop recommendations
by January 2016.
Objective 2 – Evaluate and develop recommendations
for specified departments to implement management
dashboards by March 2016.
Objective 3 – Pilot departmental management
dashboard by June 2016.
Goal 4: Replace the current permitting system with PALMS
for the Resource Management Agency, the Fire Department,
and the Health and Human Services Agency’s
Environmental Health Department.
Objective 1 – Complete implementation by the end of
November 2015.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Continue to improve Tulare County voice and data
radio systems.
Objective 1 – Implement high priority improvements to
Public Safety communications using simulcast by June
2016.
Objective 2 – Complete planning for the Three Rivers
radio tower site by April 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Provide training to staff on changes to the electronic
files received from the State for daily mailings.
Objective 1 – Train staff on the State-implemented
changes to Health and Human Services Agency CalWIN
file formats, which are mailed to County clients daily, by
August 2015.
Goal 2: Replace outdated equipment to modernize and
improve postage application processes.
Objective 1 – Research and prepare a Request for
Proposal for the replacement of three postage application
machines by June 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Identify methods to obtain feedback on equipment
and services and to increase the use of copier functions.
Objective 1 – Conduct two educational equipment
demonstrations with equipment manufacturer
representatives by June 2016.
Objective 2 – Compose a newsletter that promotes and
informs department end users of the many tools available
on their copiers by June 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Enhance customer service by increasing the Print
Services webpage accessibility.
Objective 1 – Partner with TCiCT to develop a Print
Shop webpage designed to address information obtained
through the FY 2014/15 operations survey by June 2016.
Goal 2: Replace high volume copier equipment in order to
increase service delivery speed and quality, and to reduce
equipment downtime.
Objective 1 – Replace four black and white copiers by
January 2016.
Objective 2 – Add a new, high-quality digital color copier
to meet color copy requests by January 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Provide energy usage and cost information across
the portfolio of county-owned facilities and other County
utility accounts to determine future energy cost savings
possibilities.
Objective 1 – Continue to coordinate with the SJVCEO
to input county-owned facility information into EPA
Energy Star Portfolio Manager by May 2016.
Objective 2 – Coordinate with the SJVCEO to input
County pumps and streetlight utility accounts into EPA
Energy Star Portfolio Manager by May 2016.
Goal 2: To improve services to utility end users, increase the
efficiency of processing utility invoices.
Objective 1 – Coordinate with Health & Human Services
Agency (HHSA) to transfer payment of utility invoices
from HHSA to General Services by August 2015.
Objective 2 – Set up electronic receipt of HHSA SCE
invoices with Xebec Accounting by September 2015.
Goal 3: Provide energy efficiency education to County
residents through outreach programs focusing on
unincorporated areas of the County.
Objective 1 – Coordinate with the SJVCEO and VIEW
members to develop a schedule and strategy by
November 2015.
Objective 2 – Partner with VIEW members and the
SJVCEO in energy efficiency improvement outreach
efforts throughout the unincorporated areas of the County
by June 2016. Target communities are Allensworth,
Sultana, Woodville, Richgrove, Monson, and London.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Reduce or eliminate flood hazards in Tulare County.
Objective 1 – Seek funding to construct the three
projects approved by the BOS in December 2015 by
January 2016.
Goal 2: Continue development of the FCFMP.
Objective 1 – Prepare the annual update to the FCFMP
by September 2015.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Deliver flood control projects through a collaborative
working relationship with branches within the RMA including,
in particular, the environmental group within Planning and
the design group within Roads to prepare the EIR, process
for necessary permits, design of the flood control projects,
and construction management of the projects.
Objective 1 – Build a project team within RMA’s
branches; meet with stakeholders periodically to facilitate
awareness and knowledge of the projects.
Goal 2: Prepare the annual update to SWMP and implement
the plan.
Objective 1 – Contract with a recognized expert
consultant in water quality to prepare the annual SWMP
and implement the plan based upon the availability of
resources.
Goal 3: Implement the FCFMP, prepare an inventory of
needed storm drainage basin fence maintenance and repairs
on aging basins.
Objective 1 – Contract with a fence company for chain
link fencing repair and replacement.