
Continue to move away from paper inventory and processes by increasing the use of electronic workflows.


Oeview over 40,000 properties to identify needed changes to assessed value due to changing market conditions.



Complete scanning of restricted property files (excluding Williamson Act) and implementation of day forward paperless
procedures.


OContinue to reduce the mailings of Business Property Statements by an additional 25% to encourage e-filing.


Participate in ongoing studies for statewide assessment issues regarding cable/satellite television assessment and the
embedded software exclusion.


OReview 2000 claim forms annually to verify continued compliance with exemption law.


Significant court decisions and/or legislative changes to property tax law.
Increase in number of exemption claimants due to new construction.



Resolve all assessment appeal applications for changed assessment within the required two-year time period.
Appear at hearings before the Assessment Appeals Board to defend assessed values.
Work with the Clerk of the Board to improve case administration.


Taxpayer market perceptions will impact the number of appeals filed for residential properties.
Stagnant commercial market will impact the number of filings.
Revisions to appeal application forms will require modifications to tracking software.


Complete all roll changes in the assessment year they are discovered.


Maintain software to track and inventory transfer documents.
Recovery of residential real estate market will increase transfers and deed recordings.


OMaintain comprehensive maps to inventory taxable property in Ventura County.

F
Review the potential of GIS as a tool for parcel management.
Increase in new subdivisions due to recovery of the residential real estate market.


O
Provide real-time person-to-person assistance to taxpayer inquires.
Provide clerical assistance to the Assessor's Office.

FProvide office-wide implementation of Automated Call Distribution software to improve communications.


O
-Remain independent, objective and accountable to the public.
-Improve transparency to the public and County Agencies/Departments.
-Provide accurate and timely financial reports and maintain records that are useful to the public, County management, and
agencies/departments.
-Ensure accountability to the public through the performance of efficient and effective audits of County services.
-Hire, train, motivate and retain the highest quality work force.
-Safeguard County resources and assets.
-Increase operational efficiency through additional automation or processes.

F
-Continue with the upgrade to the Countywide financial system; targeted go-live July 1, 2015.
-Review, implement, and conform to GASB pronouncements to the extent applicable to the County of Ventura.
-Interpretation and implementation of the California Public Employees' Pension Reform Act (PEPRA).
-Continue to follow and meet requirements set forth in ABx1 26 and AB1484, ensuring timely dissolution of Redevelopment
Agencies (RDA).
-Continue to monitor the potential impacts of legislation introduced as part of the Governor's 2015-16 Budget which includes
a proposal for RDA dissolution simplification and transfers staffing responsibility of Oversight Boards to County auditors.


O
PROPERTY TAX SECTION
-Provide support to 11 Oversight Boards, the CEO, the State Controller, and the Department of Finance as part of the RDA
dissolution process.
-Automate the preparation of property tax CAFR schedules.
-Automate the preparation of biannual Redevelopment Property Tax Trust Fund distributions.
-Automate pass-through calculations for 36 Redevelopment Project areas.
-Automate RDA Assessment Roll Change True-up and Tax Rate Area audit adjustment calculations.
-Analyze options for the continued funding of the annual Teeter Buyout.
-Publish Redevelopment Property Tax Trust Fund distributions on the Auditor-Controller's webpage.
-Update and provide additional informative property tax information on the Auditor-Controller's webpage.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
-Work with each County Department and Special District to complete the Implementation of the County Financial
Management System Upgrade, including the upgraded VCFMS Data Warehouse.
-Work with the Health Care Agency to implement California Office of Statewide Health Planning & Development (OSHPD)
requirements for Info-ADVANTAGE 3.x reporting.
-Continue to support the existing version of VCFMS (VCFMS 2.2) using the internal management and operational tools that
have allowed our team to re-allocate staff to support the VCFMS Upgrade Project (VCFMS.3.10).
-Work with IT Services to develop a Historical VCFMS data warehouse universe to provide visibility of historical VCFMS 2.2
data after the implementation of the upgrade.
-Work with ACIS and IT Services to rollout the Virtual Server version of the VCFMS 2.2 warehouse to ensure long-term user
access to the historical data.
-Continue to provide support to the VCFMS Upgrade Project during the Conversion and Post Go-Live phases of the project.
-Create an automated weekly Chart of Account extract for placement on the Auditor-Controller's Office web page.
INFORMATIONS SYSTEMS
-Continue to publish on the Internet the property tax Tax Rate Book, AB8 TRA History Report, and the District Recap Report,
the County Adopted Budget Book, Budget Digest, Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, and audit reports.
-Continue with Disaster Recovery analysis, including the researching, planning and initiating phases (COOP).
-Provide technology guidance during the implementation of the new "Property Tax" system, which is used by the Auditor-
Controller's Office, Assessor's Office and the Treasurer-Tax Collector.
-Continue to provide technology guidance during the implementation of the Ventura County Financial Management System
(VCFMS) system and Performance Budgeting upgrades.
-Continue to provide user training for additional features of Microsoft Office 365 for a smooth transition.
-Update the Three-year Capital Projects Plan and the Information Technology Strategy for fiscal year 2015-16.
-With the implementation of VMware ESXi servers, continue to integrate the use of virtual technology to reduce the burden of
administration and infrastructure costs.


O
PAYROLL
-Continue to develop custom Time and Labor rules and Payroll calculations to conform to labor Memorandum of Agreement
contracts.
-Continue development, configuration, testing and implementation of Retirement VCERIS (PAS) project components.
-Redesign VCHRP Time and Labor component for cost accounting to conform to the new VCFMS 3.10.
-Design, develop, configure, test and implement chart of account and interface system modifications in support of the
VCFMS 3.10 and Performance Budgeting upgrades.
-Resume Countywide VCHRP Query training.
ACCOUNTS PAYABLE
-Continue to train department Accounts Payable staff in processing vendor transactions in the VCFMS 3.10 upgraded
system.
-Combine vendor 1099 data between the 2.2 and 3.10 versions of VCFMS and issue accurate 1099 forms to over 2,100
vendors.
-Implement EFT payments to vendors to reduce the volume of checks issued.
-Continue to verify new vendor names and Taxpayer Identification Numbers with IRS records to minimize the number of
vendor 1099 mismatches.


O
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT:
-Issue the County's CAFR for June 30, 2015, including the implementation of GASB Statement Nos. 68, 69, and 71.
-Analyze the following GASB Statements and evaluate for implementation of No.72, Fair Value Measurement and
Application.
-Contribute Chart of Accounts, General Ledger/Budget, Grant Accounting, and Fixed Assets subject matter expert for
VCFMS Upgrade Project.
-Update Caseware for the VCFMS 3.10 Chart of Accounts.
FINANCIAL PLANNING:
-Issue the Public Financing Authority Financial Statements for June 30, 2015 including the implementation of any applicable
GASB statements.
-Complete timely submission of the County's Adopted Budget for Fiscal Year 2015-16.
-Provide assistance to the County Executive Office for any new debt issuance.
-Contribute Cash Management, Accounts Receivable, Cost Accounting and Budget Formulation/Execution subject matter
experts for VCFMS and Performance Budgeting Upgrade Projects.
-Update the Interest Apportionment System for the enhanced Chart of Accounts of VCFMS 3.10.
-Continue to assist the County Executive Office in developing and implementing a new cash projection system.


O
-Develop an annual Internal Audit Plan that:
-Emphasizes audits that impact on cost savings and/or result in additional revenues.
-Focuses on performance audits to improve internal controls, promote operational economy and efficiency, and mitigate risk
to the County.
-Seeks to maximize use of the Internal Audit team's competencies.
-Meet audit mandates required of the Auditor-Controller.
-Maintain the integrity of the Employee Fraud Hotline.
-Monitor the submission of audits of Federal award sub recipients, special districts, and joint powers authorities.
-Re-launch the CSA Program for 2015.
-Facilitate auditors' compliance with continuing professional education requirements.
-Develop a training schedule to complement planned engagements, and auditors' strengths and areas in need of
improvement.
-Promote and encourage Internal Audit staff to actively seek professional certification.


O
1. Evaluate the market place for available Land Record Information Management systems.
2. Evaluate vendor solutions for a comprehensive disaster backup and recovery system.
3. Evaluate vendor and in-house solutions to expand the Recorder's Courtesy Notice Program to add a notification to
homeowners when any type of deed is recorded for their properties.
4. Complete the conversion of voter registration affidavits to microfilm, from 2014 to present.
5. Complete a remodel of the Clerk's office that includes an enlarged sound proof wedding room, a combination training and
conference room that maximizes efficient work areas.
6. Complete the conversion of confidential marriage records to electronic format.
7. Offer optional real-time viewing of civil marriage ceremonies from a remote location for our wedding customers and their
families and friends.
8. Complete the conversion of Coroner's Inquest files to microfilm from 1873 to 1965.


O
1. Evaluate new State-certified voting systems to replace the current voting system that was purchased in 2006.
2. Implement the new Secretary of State's Statewide voter registration database (VoteCal) in March 2016. VoteCal will
become the official voter registration system of record and will provide real-time Ventura County voter registration and realtime
voter registration between California counties.
3. Engage in enhanced multilingual voter registration outreach to identify target populations that may require voting assistant
in one of the four additional languages (Spanish, Tagalog, Chinese, and Hindi) in which Ventura County is required to
provide ballot materials.
4. Evaluate electronic poll books (e-poll books) with the goal of implementing network-based e-poll books once networkbased
poll books are certified by the Secretary of State.
5. Participate with the California Association of Clerks and Election Officials (CACEO) to evaluate future voting options.
6. Revise additional voting materials to use plain language to allow for easier understanding of voting materials.

F
1. AB 1436 was enacted in 2012 to establish Conditional Voter Registration (CVR), which will allow voters to register to vote
only in the Elections Division. CVR cannot be conducted at satellite offices or polling places. CVR will begin 14 days prior to
an election through Election Day and CVR voters may only cast a provisional ballot. The CVR provisional ballot may only be
counted if the CVR is deemed effective. This legislation is effective on January 1 (anticipated to be 2017) of the year
following the year in which the Secretary of State's Help America Vote Act (HAVA) compliant Statewide voter registration
database (VoteCal) is certified, which is anticipated to be June 2016. This new legislation is expected to increase election
costs (official ballots, staff labor and office space) due to the unforeseen number of voters registering to vote and receiving a
provisional ballot in the Elections Division.
2. Electronic voting equipment (purchased in 2006) will eventually need to be replaced with "next generation" voting
equipment when new voting equipment is available and certified by the Secretary of State.
3. The California Association of Clerks and Election Officials (CACEO) has established a legislative subcommittee to explore
the future of voting options in California in an effort to reduce costs and increase voter participation. The possibility of a
hybrid of Vote By Mail ballots and local Vote Centers (larger, regional polling places) instead of local polling places is being
explored, along with new voting system technology. Local Vote Centers are often set-up in several locations in each city and
serve between 10,000 and 30,000 voters.

Out Year 
1) Continue to produce a structurally balanced budget while sustaining core public services.
2) Maintain or increase the County's fiscal reserves.
3) Continue to maintain and, where possible, achieve additional reductions in County overhead and ISF costs.
4) Maintain the County's highest possible debt and treasury pool ratings from nationally designated rating agencies.
5) Continue our increased focus on economic development by identifying additional actions and initiatives that the County
can pursue in this critical area; and further incorporate economic development as a major component of the County's
Strategic Plan.
6) Continue to fulfill the County's Strategic Plan .
7) Continue to collaborate with our public safety elected officials and department heads, implement the County's long-term
Public Safety Realignment Plan and supporting programs to realize the Plan's goals.
8) Continue to further implement healthcare reform, both as a service provider and as an employer.
9) Continue to utilizing the county strategic plan to drive process improvement and promote county efficiencies and annual
cost savings.
10) Facilitate the transition of the Oversight Board functions for the County of Ventura to its successor entity.
11) Facilitate implementation of the relevant portions of the Ten-Year strategy to End Homelessness.
12) Continue to oversee construction, and ensure fiscal sustainability, of the County's Hospital Replacement Wing at Ventura
County Medical Center.
13) Continue to improve countywide automation and efficiencies by, collaborating with our Auditor Controller's Office on the
implementation of the Financial Management and Budget Preparation Systems; continuing work on the Property Tax System
Replacement Project; and further expanding the County's Website, Accela land management and Electronic Content
Management systems and programs, among others .
14) Continue to invest in our County workforce by establishing additional training programs for County leaders and staff,
including the development and implementation of the Strategic Leadership Academy; grow new mentoring and intern
programs, and further implementation of the County-wide e-Performance system.
15) Ensure that consistent customer satisfaction rating mechanisms are available to all recipients of County services and
begin collecting metrics from agencies and departments in this area.
16) Continue to improve county communication efforts by launching the Ventura County New channel (VCNC) to provide a
trusted source of County news for the public and the media.


O
1. Develop the 2016-17 Annual Action Plan.
2. Prepare the 2014-15 Consolidated Annual Performance Report.
3. Conduct compliance monitoring and program review system for all grants, including onsite monitoring of all open HOME
funded projects.
4. Facilitate implementation of the relevant portions of the Ten-Year Strategy to End Homelessness including reviewing
requests for general funds set aside for homeless facilities.
5. Continue to monitor adoption and implementation of HEARTH Act regulations and relationship to the unit's expanded
responsibilities for homeless programs.
6. Develop policies, procedures, and strategies to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the Ventura County Continuum
of Care in accessing funds from HUD and other public and private funding sources.
7. Senior staff to continue to serve as the Team A Liaison Officer on the Ventura County Emergency Operations Center
(EOC).
8. Continue to explore new grant opportunities and pursue as appropriate and as staff resources allow.
9. Continue providing staff support to the Ventura County Oversight Board for the County of Ventura, including administering
the former Redevelopment Agency's bond as the only remaining asset after dismantling the Ventura County Redevelopment
Agency.
10. Facilitate the transition of the Oversight Board functions for the County of Ventura to its successor entity.
11. Develop and present to the Board of Supervisors for adoption an Economic Vitality Plan for the County of Ventura,
committing to annual assessments and updates as necessary.

F
1. The assumption of responsibilities for administration of the Countywide Continuum of Care is impacting current staff and
the full significance has yet to be realized. Continued uncertainty in grant funding have a corresponding adverse impact on
funding for program administration while demands for reporting, monitoring, and public outreach are increasing. This fiscal
year we saw some organizations not apply for funds due to increasing stringent interpretation of regulatory reporting
requirements. With enhanced regional coordination with other organizations and community partners, strategies for improved
outcomes- including possible RFP's for HUD funds- may be explored. Financial and staff impacts will be monitored closely
and the Board will be apprised of conditions that cannot be absorbed within existing budgeted resources.
2. Increased demands on Community Development staff for new (i.e., Economic Development) and expanded
responsibilities (i.e., administering the County Homeless Coordinating Council) are placing additional stress on members of
the unit and it is becoming increasingly difficult to keep up with expectations. Given the political sensitivity and high priority of
these new initiatives, additional staff resources may be needed in the future.


1) Continue efforts to achieve and maintain fiscal stability.
2) Issue $150 million in Tax and Revenue Anticipation Notes through competitive bid process.
3) Continue to automate the Budget Development Manual process.
4) Coordinate capital projects and long term debt
5) Continue development and implementation of program-based budgeting.
6) Continue development of a county-wide strategic facilities master plan.
7) Continue implementation of the upgrade of the County's Budget System and identify opportunities for improvement
and enhancement.
8) Expand the implementation of a county-wide Performance Management program.
9) Continue evaluation of alternative energy opportunities for existing county infrastructure and new development.
10) Coordinate and plan the County's implementation of the public safety realignment as outlined in recently signed
legislation.
11) Assist in evaluating alternative incarceration programs in coordination with the Sheriff and Probation.
12) Develop and monitor increased Realignment programs.
13) Develop a replacement for our aging cash management and projection system.
14) Continue to work with the twelve successor agencies, of the former Redevelopment Agencies within Ventura County, in
order to wind down agency operations as outlined in ABx1
15) Continue providing oversight management of the Property Tax Assessment and Collection System (PTACS) as a CEO
representation to the project governance committee.
16) Continue to assist the Governor's RAC in developing a permanent allocation formula for realignment funds to counties.


O
COUNTY COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE:
1. Launch the Ventura County News Channel (VCNC) to provide a trusted source of County news for the public and the
media.
2. Research, write and produce informative videos for the online program "Featuring Ventura County" to be viewed on the
VCNC.
3.Write, coordinate and edit new and archival material for the VCNC.
4.Research, write, print and distribute the County of Ventura 2014-2015 Annual Report.
5.Ongoing: News releases, website, social media, presentations, etc.
6.Work with the Emergency Planning Council on public information matters.
GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS:
1. Develop State and Federal legislative Agendas and Platforms and pursue sound and effective local government through
the legislative process.
2. Pursue regional funding for the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County through Proposition 84 (water bond) passed by
California voters in 2006.
3. Pursue regional funding for the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County through the passage of Proposition 1 (water
bond) passed by California voters in 2014.
4. Manage the $17.5 million Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County Integrated Regional Water Management Round 1
Implementation Grant.
5. Manage the $18 million Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County Integrated Regional Water Management Round 2
Implementation Grant.
6. Manage the $8.4 million Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County Integrated Regional Water Management Drought
Implementation Grant.
7. Manage the Ventura County Regional Energy Alliance program.
8. Manage the Climate Protection Plan activities and responsibilities.
9.Manage the emPower comprehensive energy efficiency financing program in collaboration with Santa Barbara and San
Luis Obispo Counties.
SERVICE EXCELLENCE OFFICE:
1.Facilitate the update or creation of three Agency Executive Planning Sessions by June 30, 2016.
2. Work with agencies to support continued cost savings.
3. Designate and train County Managers as "Lean Management Practitioners" to embed Lean into operations.
4. Align budget performance measures with strategic plan measures.
5. Utilize the County strategic plan to drive process improvements.
6. Process improvement options will be considered for CIP projects where appropriate.
7. Develop an online system for reporting all improvements.


O
1) Continue to provide fiscal, administrative and information technology services to County Executive Office, Board of
Supervisors, Farm Advisor, Civil Service Commission and the Grand Jury.
2) Continue to assist with the development of department program budgets, cost recovery rate calculations and workflow
models.
3) Continue to collaborate with the CEO-Budget Division and Auditor-Controller's Office on the smooth transition of the
VCFMS Upgrade.
4) Review the County of Ventura Continuity of Operations system "COOP." Establish a road map for all agencies to ensure
all COOP content is up to date. Planning for continued agency COOP training.
5) Perform various CEO IT projects as prioritized and approved by management.


1. Adopt local rules for the Assessment Appeals Board.
2. Upgrade COB Portal/Public with improvements for Assessment Appeals. O
3. Initiate imaging project for Board of Supervisors records.


O
1. Develop/implement Strategic Leadership Academy.
2. Continue the Manager Nuts and Bolts Training Phase II.
3. Continue adding e-Performance to additional remaining Agencies and Departments.
4. Continue implementation of Customer Service Model needs assessment.
5. Continue to provide guidance and training to agency/department staff on HR/Payroll Programs including enhancements to
VCHRP.
6. Continue evaluation of County-wide training needs.
7. Continue to represent the County in various administrative forums, as necessary.
8. Continue to improve/maintain recruitment metrics turnaround times and decrease standard deviation.
9. Continue to update and delete unused classification specifications.
10. Continue development of training curriculum based on Department/Agency staffing development needs.
11. Continue with implementation and performance measurement of Nuts & Bolts for Managers training courses.
12. Support the implementation of a new Strategic Leadership series in alignment with the Strategic Plan.
13. Continue to provide, as needed, "Real Colors-Team Building" to offer more training opportunities to agencies.
14. Continue to work with Clerk of the Board to deliver and track AB1234 training.
15. Provide customized Customer Service training for IT Services to replace what has previously been contracted through an
outside vendor.
16. Support ITS with training for Office 365 implementation.
17. Support HR with training for ePerformance implementation.
18. Provide training opportunities for public employees in other jurisdictions.
19. Introduce Lynda.com as an on-line Training Tool.

F
1. Provide training opportunities for public employees in other jurisdictions which may result in some potential program cost
recovery.
2. Provide customized Customer Service training for IT Services, which will result in a cost savings to IT Services through
the elimination of an outside vendor contract.


1. Develop/implement strategies to streamline hiring processes.
2. Achieve adherence to the County goal of conducting 70% of recruitments within 35 days.
3. Implementation of follow-up interviews with hiring managers and new hire employees.
4. Develop a strategy to increase participation in exit interviews for Health Care Agency separations.
5. Collaborate with Health Care Agency managers to reduce late submissions of paperwork with monetary impacts.
6. Continue to provide guidance and training to agency/department staff on HR/Payroll Programs including enhancements to
VCHRP.
7. Investigate and resolve allegations of misconduct within 30 days of notification, unless extenuating circumstances
develop.
8. Continue to represent the County in various administrative forums, as necessary.
9. Continue to improve/maintain recruitment metrics turnaround times.
10. Continue to update classification specifications.
11. Provide training opportunities for staff.
12. Develop/implement an on-going training program on HR functions for HCA managers.

F
1. Provide training opportunities for employees.
2. Implementation of improved IT infrastructure to assist in generating increased work productivity.


1. Complete Supplemental Retirement Plan comprehensive actuarial valuation as of June 30, 2015.
2. Review options to lower employer costs.
3. Prepare plan information for FY 2014-15 CAFR.
4. Research possible plan design changes and distribution alternatives.
5. Research alternative solutions for plan beneficiary record keeping.
6. Calculate department allocation of the Elected Department Head Annual Required Contribution (ARC) for the budget
development manual.
7. Complete Minimum Required Distribution payments as required under federal regulations.
8. Conduct annual benefit mailing inclusive of application requests and pertinent plan information.
9. Conduct semiannual investment reviews in adherence to the Investment Policy Statement.
10. Monitor 415 limits for Elected Department Head benefit recipients to ensure limit is not exceeded.


O
1) Plan for and engage in collective bargaining over the terms of two major labor contracts due to expire in mid-2016.
2) Continue to improve working relationships with county line agencies/departments and the ten (10) labor organizations that
represent county employees through thirteen (13) labor contracts.
3) Proceed with the continual update of the Labor Relations' grievance and discipline tracking system and develop
performance indicators.
4) Hire a quality labor relations professional at the management analyst level.
5) Continue to secure appropriate and necessary professional certification of Labor Relations staff.


O
1. Hire staff support to assist in the development of Return-To-Work (RTW) program.
2. Develop the RTW Desk Reference Guidelines.
3. Collaborate with CEO Information Technology staff in developing the necessary software to be utilized by agencies/
departments for the purpose of LOA/ RTW/ transitional Duty.
4. Train and support managers and supervisors on regulatory standards.
5. Provide a mechanism to track all absences to provide a means to help produce a viable performance measure based on
actual data and the potential to reduce litigation in the Americans with Disability Act Amendments Act of 2008 (ADAAA)
regulation compliance.

1) Maintain relationship with Cal HFA's MCC program.
2) Continue administration of the Mobile Home Replacement program for CalHome.

Out Year 
O
1. Complete creation of a permanent Commission database by scanning all archived decisions and orders of the
Commission.
2. Continue study of the Personnel Rules and Regulations to identify segments that may be candidates for amendment in
order to clarify the rules governing all County employees.
3. Continue working on other measures to control both costs and time needed to afford all parties a full and fair hearing.


O1. Provide efficient and effective administration and attorney support services.

FCounty Counsel expects to maintain a balance between administration and productive hours.


O
1. Continue to adopt technology advances to improve efficiency and effectiveness.
2. Maintain high success rate in litigated cases.
3. Handle increasing appellate workload within current budgetary constraints.

FHSA funds the majority of the County Counsel's work in juvenile dependency through a cost shift.


O
1. Continue to develop expertise in water law issues, including Groundwater Sustainability Act.
2. Continue effective and efficient representation of County's interests in juvenile dependency and conservatorship matters.
3. Continue to provide legal guidance and analysis of potential impacts of implementing Laura's Law in Ventura County.
4. Provide support and guidance to Human Resources Division as it transitions from retirement of long-term director and
assistant director.
5. Continue to obtain favorable results in all litigation matters.

F
County Counsel advisory and litigation services depend on receipt of revenue for legal charges and general fund support. If
departments reduce their use of County Counsel as cost saving measures, County Counsel may have to shift its effort more
toward traditional tort cases, or seek additional general fund support.


O
1. Continue to refine and enhance the Treasurer-Tax Collector's on-line presence by utilizing social media and digital
marketing.
2. Continue to expand public relations through the presence at special community events and brand management.

The mandated requirements for both tax collections, treasury and investment are increasingly becoming complex in nature.
The Executive Management is actively engaged in and partnered with various state and national organizations to stay
abreast of any legislative changes and/or practices.


O
1. Continue to provide East County taxpayers a convenient location to make inquiries of tax payments during the security
December and April collection cycles.
2. Continue to proactively engage in business process improvements that result in increased efficiencies to meet the goals
and  of the Office.
3. Continue to explore the utilization of existing equipment and staff to accept and process payments for other County
Departments and Agencies.
4. Continue to actively participate in the monthly California Aumentum Software Consortium ("CSAC") to gauge the other
counties' implementation plan progress.
5. Actively modify and execute Phase II of the WebTax Application to improve the customer experience by keeping pace with
the public's expectations on technology use.


O
1. Continue to maintain the highest possible Standard and Poor's rating of AAAf/S-1 + for the County's Investment pool
2. Market the investment pool to local agencies to increase the size of the pool and reduce the basis points which will
leverage its operations for increased efficiency.
3. Expand the number of Agencies/Departments that participate in online payments through the County EPay system by
collaborating with ITSD and the Auditor-Controller and coordinating services with the County approved bank.
4. Continue to issue annual audited financial statements in accordance with GAAP.
5. Conduct an inaugural financial needs assessment review with all County agencies prior to development of the upcoming
County's banking RFP.


O
Continue to transition permittees to electronic pesticide use reporting.
Continued refinement of permitting in Cal Ag Permits Software.
Continue to complete the mapping of the crop layer.
Continue to provide in-house training and DPR sponsored training to current and new Inspectors.
Continue to provide assistance for newly hired inspectors in passing the two examinations that focus on Pesticide Use
Enforcement.
Create a specialist on staff for residue investigations.

F
We have a large number of hours spent responding to and investigating public complaints. In 2014 we had a total of 87
public complaints with a total of 165 hours spent handling these complaints. The PUE Program also has a large number of
hours dedicated in responding to various public information requests. In 2014 we had a total of 53 public information
requests with a total of 50 hours spent handling these requests. The increased workload from public complaints and public
information requests puts an additional strain on a relatively small department handling a very wide variety of time
consuming and sensitive tasks.
The Department of Pesticide Regulation (DPR) has scheduled to implement new regulations which will have a direct impact
on our inspector's workload. In July 2015, DPR plans to designate chlorpyrifos as a restricted material. This new regulation
will affect about 30 products used in agriculture. Chlorpyrifos is an organophosphate, the adopted new regulations are
geared to help safeguard the people and the environment. Also, these regulations will help to maintain more control of the
use of this product in the agricultural setting. It is estimated that after this regulatory change is implemented, our office will
have an additional 500 hours of evaluation time spent towards the mandated regulations put in place by DPR on the use of
chlorpyrifos.
DPR released in April 2015 the new recommended fumigation permit conditions for chloropicrin and chloropicrin in
combination with other products. The Agricultural Commissioner will adopt all the recommended conditions. All fumigations
will be reviewed for compliance with the new conditions before approval of the fumigation Notice of Intent. This requires
more time to be spent during the evaluation process by staff on fumigations especially fumigations with chloropicrin. As
methyl bromide is phased out for use in fumigations, chloropicrin is being used more and taking more time to evaluate with
stricter and more complex conditions in place. This is especially time consuming when dealing with fumigations near
schools. In 2014 we had a total of 327 field fumigations which had chloropicrin as one of the active ingredients. Additionally,
fumigations near schools require multiple days of planning to be carried out safely, pursuant to regulations and local permit
conditions.
Lastly, a large majority of our PUE inspectors are new to the department as well as to the position. This requires a
tremendous amount of time spent on inspector training. This takes a considerable amount of time which could otherwise be
spent on maintaining and improving PUE programs funded at the state level.


O T
o provide sufficient resources to accommodate an unusual intensive shipping period for a large Approved Treatment
protocol Program nursery.

F
As more Master Permit Program nurseries convert to the Approved Treatment Protocol Program, our funding may change.In
addition to the impacts from the ACP quarantine Ventura County compliance agreements issued in the PDCP may also be
affected by the quarantines for other exotic pests such as the Light Brown Apple Moth and the European Grapevine Moth.
The actual legislation allowing for the funding of PDCP changed in the beginning of 2011 to allow the Wine Grape Growers
to designate funding generated by them to any pest of wine grapes. Depending on how this industry decides to ditribute the
available funding. Ventura County's program could be affected.


O T
o increase Standardization inspections of premises, including fruit stands, packinghouses, commercial coolers, swap
meets, retail establishments and agricultural fields by 25% next fiscal year.

F
We do not expect significant reductions in funding from the industry funded and state funded programs within this Division. In
fact, with the increased workload from the new programs, we hope to increase our state funding in the next budget cycle.


O
We are increasing training and recruitment to mitigate the serious shortage of qualified inspectors certified as Federal
Cooperators.
The Agricultural Commissioner is working with various stakeholders to secure the best funding possible for programs that
protect the agricultural industry from the influx of exotic pests.

F
We continue to experience increases in workload due to increasingly stringent export requirements imposed by our trading
partners. Certification of exports are reimbursed through fees for inspection and certification; however, inspections of
incoming plant products designed to protect local agriculture and continue export viability through early detection and
eradication of exotic and harmful pests continues to receive little, to no reimbursement. Staff turnover rate continues to
present challenges to the program as training, licensing, and hands on experience take several years to bring new
inspectors up to journeymen level.


O
1. Conduct study of the current billing process and to identify measures to streamline through automation.
2. Conduct study of overtime use and identify improvements to assist with oversight and management.
3. Continue to work with County Human Resources Department to compete study of Agricultural Inspector and Supervising
Agricultural Inspector retention issues and develop measures to significantly slow the loss of staff.

F
Food and Agricultural Code Section 224.5 (g) regarding county reimbursement with unclaimed gas tax (UGT) requires
counties to:
"Maintain county general fund support for agricultural commissioner services at least equal to the average amount expended
for the five preceding fiscal years, unless the county is facing unusual economic hardship that precludes that support."
The UGT received by the county has averaged over $500,000.00 annually. For Fiscal Year 2013-2014 the county general
fund support fell below the average amount expended for the five preceding fiscal years, but the county was able to
demonstrate that unexpected revenues and less expenditures than projected resulted in a county support level of $564,846.
This is $596,388 below the five year average.
The County of Ventura along with Agricultural Commissioner's office will continue to communicate with the California
Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA) that County supports agricultural commissioner services and will continue its
general fund support. Fiscal year 13-14 reporting anomaly to CDFA will be explained in all future maintenance of effort
communications in order to continue to receive UGT funds.

Out Year 
O
UCCE Ventura County projects and programs focus on healthy food systems, healthy environments, and healthy
communities. Research in the areas of mitigating plant disease and combating pests and invasive species continues, with
renewed efforts focused and water supply, water quality and soil nutrition - key factors in organic and conventional farming.
Our education and outreach programs provide the latest research information to growers and the community. Our research
advisors conduct field days and workshops to disseminate information to growers. The Master Gardener program provides
valuable information for home and community gardeners promoting water-wise gardening, and promoting nutrition and local
gardening for families, while promoting healthier eating habits. Our 4-H Youth programs expose students to science,
engineering, and technology; agriculture and natural resources; animal science education; nutrition, and sustainability
concepts as well as develop leaders for tomorrow. Our outreach programs include:
1) Field Trips provide access to a working farm and allows children to observe food growing and connect with the land.
Engaging hands-on activities facilitate learning and supporting classroom instruction.
2) Classroom Outreach brings "the Farm" to youth that are not able to participate in field trips.
3) Student Farm provides first-hand experience for middle school youth to actually grow and manage a small plot of row
crops and learn about the business of farming.
4) Sustainable You! Camp provides youth a summer time activity to learn what it means to be sustainable concerning land,
water, food, air and energy and the importance of sustaining these for future generations.
Our goals of pursuing a healthy and sustainable community by keeping agriculture viable and environmentally sound,
protecting our natural resources, developing life skills in youth, maintaining healthy eating and lifestyles for families,
developing service-oriented community volunteers and exploring stewardship opportunities work toward making Ventura
County one of the most desirable places to work and live.
Future Impacts
F
UCCE research and community projects we do now are part of a continuing effort to ensure for the quality of life Ventura
county residents expect and enjoy. Our "county" department accounts for a very small percentage (~0.02%) of the general
fund budget, yet reaps continual and far-reaching benefits from this important collaborative effort, e.g., every $1 of county
investment returns over $5 in UC contributions (2014-15). In addition, UC will likely make a near $500,000 investment in
diagnostics and research equipment in the county in the next year. The Hansen Agricultural Research and Extension Center
will complete its strategic plan in the next few months, and with the sale of the THF endowment "Saticoy" the stage is set for
the University to capitalize on this opportunity to realize a vision to create a significant and meaningful UC structural
presence in Ventura County to serve the citizens of the county and of the State.
With the change in the funding model with the County of Ventura, we are hoping the County will to continue its long-standing
relationship with the University and continue to support our work. Hence, we are requesting the County to re-invest in our
extensive research and education programs via support for UC staff who lead our Master Gardener and Youth, Families, and
Communities (4-H) programs, and support our research and youth programs. It is also important to note that efforts are
underway to develop a county-wide California Naturalist program. We are also requesting continued support for our
operations (county facilities, fleet vehicles, etc.), which are an invaluable part of the services we provide to our citizens
(growers, farmers, backyard gardens, homeowners), county departments, organizations, and municipalities.


O
Continue to enhance the image of animal sheltering, decrease the amount of animals that enter the system, improve
community relationships by partnering with businesses and animal lovers of the community.

F
There are an estimated 210,000 dogs in the county and less than one third of them are currently licensed. Other than a
seasonal canvassing program using part-time help, current staffing levels limit proactive licensing efforts.


O
Continue to enhance the online licensing process, implement e-pay for field staff and license canvass team to increase ease
of payments accepted in the field, and increase license compliance. Create more outreach programs using social media to
encourage licenses by highlighting the benefits of licensing.

F
There are an estimated 210,000 dogs in the county and less than one third of them are currently licensed. Other than a
seasonal canvassing program using part-time help, current staffing levels limit proactive licensing efforts.


O
Create an adoption center, install sound barriers to reduce stress for dogs, rebuild the back of the Simi shelter to give the
dogs and potential adopters a place to meet, and implement community spay and neuter programs.

FThe renovation of the Camarillo and Simi shelters is crucial to the success of the Department to remain a no-kill facility.


O
Further utilize Chameleon software to enhance the level of efficiencies, implement an intern program to help students and
further assist the shelter in the care of animals, and partner with more local veterinarians to do outreach on the benefits of
sterilizing and vaccinating pets.

F
The renovation of the veterinarian office and surgical unit is crucial to the success of the Department performing spays and
neuters and remaining a no-kill facility.


O
Secure officers with protective vests, implement e-pay for field staff and license canvass team to increase ease of payments
accepted in the field and increase license compliance. Continue to work closely with Fish and Wildlife to develop new
protocols for wildlife handling.

FIf the cities reduce contracted service hours, then field officers will be eliminated.


O
Complete Year 5 of the FEMA-mandated 5-year Recertification of the CRS-Program for Unincorporated Ventura County.
Complete the remaining 10% of the multi-year CRS Re-Application process required by FEMA in order for the
Unincorporated Ventura County areas to remain in the CRS program for the next five year period (2015-2020), and submit
the CRS Re-Application package to FEMA within the required time frame.


O
Prepare and have adopted a new Water Pipeline Franchise Ordinance; processing the assignment of the former Vintage
Petroleum Oil Pipeline Franchises (1.10.108 and 1.10.111) to California Resources Corp and California Resources
Production, respectively; and review Oil Pipeline Franchise Ordinance for possible amendment addressing franchise fees for
private pipelines and liquidated damages for oil pipeline transfers completed without the prior approval of the Board of
Supervisors. Real Estate Services is currently including such liquidated damages provisions in all new Oil Pipeline franchise
resolutions.


O
1. Improve on turnaround time for checking maps and corner records.
2. Develop and implement Multi-Year plan for maintenance of vertical control network.
3. Revise the Guide for the Preparation of Maps.
4. Coordinate with Recorder's Office to facilitate transfer of fund for document recording.


O
1. Standardize the "Violation Letter" and "Compliance Agreement" for grading and floodplain violations.
2. Pursue "past due" or delinquent accounts on grading permits and floodplain development permits using the Small Claims
Court Collection Process. The County can sue and obtain a judgment not to exceed $5,000 for property owners who fail to
pay for plan check and inspection services rendered.
3. Prepare a checklist for information to be included in Geotechnical Reports that are prepared by private consultants for
private land development projects.
4. Continue to finalize the Grading Ordinance which will incorporate Hillside Erosion Control Ordinance into the Ventura
County Building Code. This is being done with stakeholder input and will need the Board of Supervisor's approval for the
final document.
5. Prepare a Native Plant Guide that can be used by property owners to establish slope planting and erosion control on
newly graded slopes.
6. Develop a digital plan check process which should result in faster turnaround review times with consultants.


O
1. Assist the Watershed Protection District in renewing the Community Rating Service application and pursue a Class rating
of 6 or better.
2. Examine consolidating the Floodplain development permit processing, plan check, and inspections into other permits to
save time and money for permit applicants.
3. Develop a digital plan check process which should result in faster turnaround review times with consultants.


O
1) State Mandated Solid Waste Diversion Compliance: Comply with all aspects of the California Integrated Waste
Management Act (AB 939) and AB 341 for all non-exempted unincorporated area businesses meeting or exceeding
minimum thresholds. 2) Contract Administration: Administer 19 newly developed residential and commercial solid waste
collection agreements for service within the UA, including enforcement of required collector reporting, payments & services.
3) Annual Fee & Rate Increases: Implement annual adjustments in solid waste-related rates & fees pursuant both to solid
waste hauler agreements as well as the Simi Valley Landfill & Recycling Center operating agreement; 4) Ordinance
Administration: Administer existing agreements for Simi Valley Landfill, Toland Landfill, & OVO Recycling Center. Condition
all building projects meeting thresholds of the County's C&D debris recycling Ordinance 4421 while maintaining enforcement
& oversight of all other solid waste ordinance code (i.e., Ord. 4445) within division purview. 5) Community Beautification: In
cooperation with Supervisors' offices, conduct 12 Community Beautification & clean-up Events (CBEs) among the County's
various supervisorial districts. 6) Pollution Prevention Center: Continue HHW collection operations in compliance with state
mandate; host 9 HHW collection events at PPC; 7) Electronic Waste Collection: Continue e-waste collection per state
mandate. 8) Regional Collaboration: Maintain cordial dialogue and mutually beneficial collaboration amongst all County
jurisdictions. 9) RMDZ Program Administration: Maintain administration of RMDZ program to provide long-term, low interest
loans to eligible Ventura County businesses; 10) Represent County on Solid Waste and Conversion Technology Committees
of CEAC (County Engineers Assoc. of CA).


FISCAL SERVICES:
- Implement new process that utilizes queries to assist with billing reconciliation, eliminate hard copy files, and expedite
customer refunds.
- Enhance credit card payment acceptance to include billing services.
PERSONNEL SERVICES:
- Review HR section roles, responsibilities, and workload within decentralized HR program.
- Ergonomic Evaluations - working on assuring an ergonomic evaluation is on file for each employee and kept current within
the last five years.
-Schedule and follow up on all mandatory training for staff to stay in compliance with county policy
-Schedule and follow up on Manager Nuts and Bolts Training required classes per County policy.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY/GRAPHICS/WEB/ GIS:
Complete upgrades and software enhancements for the following RMA business software packages:
- Land Use Management Software - Accela Automation, Accela Citizen Access, Accela GIS, Accela Mobile Office, as well as
Mobile applications Accela Inspector and Code Officer for mobile devices.
- Environmental Heath Business Software - EnvisionConnect, EnvisionConnect Remote, EnvisionConnect Online - Envision
upgrades will add mobility for the field personnel using the remote applications. The upgrade is also necessary to support the
states' requirements for electronic reporting to the California Environmental Reporting System (CERS).
- Operations/Planning Financial Software- MS Dynamics for tracking billable hours, financial metrics, and invoicing.
- RMA Website - Leverage the latest technologies to redesign the user interface to help make information easier to find with
the new and focused 'How to' selections that are specific to the individuals land use questions.
Implement Electronic Document Review/On-line (WEB) application submittal for plan check review.
- Electronic Document Review (EDR)/Electronic Plan Check - the ability to submit architectural, engineering and other plans
on line for electronic plan review and revisions. Creating a single point of entry for plan submittal for the County.
Upgrade RMA hardware and software technology infrastructure to ensure optimum system operations and service to our
Ocustomers.

F
This budget unit provides administrative and technical support services to the agency and its costs are largely funded by the
agency's user fees.


O
Continue monitoring of EIR accounts and timely closure as required by the contract and initiate administrative contract
amendments.

FThis program is cost-neutral as applicants pay for consultant costs.


- Use the Planning Division website and Accela Automation with Citizens Access as a means of communication between the
public, applicants and staff to further streamline the processing of all permit types.
- Further refine and improve Accela Automation records and reports that are utilized by the Permit Administration Staff.
- Focus attention on improving the processing of ministerial lot line adjustments, ministerial lot mergers, and legal lot
determinations.
- Update and refine the Planning Division existing website, handouts, and applications to improve the permit application
information provided to the public.
- Work with other sections to create new applications related to wireless communication facilities and oil and gas permitting.
- Add a Live Chat function to the Film Permit website that would allow production companies or interested parties to chat with
the Film Permit Coordinator. Note: This will be added when the Planning Division website is upgraded to a new platform in
2015.
- Provide training on the film permit process to the new ED-CVC Film Permit Liaison.
- Continue to review and update the Standard Conditions document that is used when preparing conditions of approval for
discretionary entitlements.
- Conduct training for Planning Division and other County agency staff on permit processing-related topics (e.g., CEQA,
select topics of the Ventura County Initial Study Assessment Guidelines).
- Monitor and, if found to be appropriate, revise permit processing procedures in accordance with new information published
by the California Coastal Commission and non-governmental organizations (e.g., The Nature Conservancy) regarding
coastal sea-level rise.
- Prepare standard Initial Study responses to address common environmental issues and standard policy narratives for use
in staff reports.
- Recruit two Senior Planners to assist with the processing of complex discretionary entitlement applications.
- Continue the efforts within the Planning Division to take immediate action to respond to public comments and survey
responses.
- Develop County-specific Reclamation Standards and a Vested Rights Determination process.
- Complete inspection and financial assurance process for each mining operation in the County.
- Create a stand-alone CUP application for mining and O&G projects.
- Review and implement improvements in the oil and gas permitting and condition compliance program.
- Coordinate with other County agencies and the State Division of Oil and Gas and Geothermal Resources (DOGGR) on the
inspection and monitoring of oil and gas facilities.
- Process the proposed CEMEX mining facility conditional use permit modification.
- Continue tracking of CEQA Mitigation measures to ensure long-term compliance.
- Perform regular reviews on sites with discretionary permits as staff time allows.

F
- Responding to changes in state law.
- Keeping pace with technological advancements in mapping and database management.
- Meeting Permit Streamlining Act deadlines.
- Keep up with programmatic and administrative needs.


O
- Complete the Board adoption process for the Saticoy Area Plan Update (Area Plan, Rezones, Old Town Saticoy
Development Code & Design Guidelines, Background Report and EIR) and complete all grant-related programs by October
31, 2015.
- Complete the Board adoption process, and initiate the CCC certification process, for the CIAP-funded Phase II LCP
amendments to the CAP and CZO.
- Complete the CIAP funded Coastal Biology Project and, pending additional grant funds, initiate related LCP amendments.
- Initiate the CIAP-funded update to the County's Landscape Guidelines, as required by State law.
- Complete NCZO amendment to allow the continued operation of an existing motocross racing facility in Piru.
- LCP Amendments: Initiate CZO version of the Wireless Communications Facilities (WCF) Ordinance and complete CZO
version of the notification area amendment.
- Complete the scoping, budgeting, and administrative planning process for the General Plan Update (GPU) and initiate the
GPU process.
- Continue the preparation of the Ventura County Subdivision Ordinance Amendments that the Board of Supervisors
authorized in the Fall of 2014.
- Continue to administer the federal CIAP grant for LCP Amendments, and close out the Sustainable Communities grant and
CIAP grant for Coastal Biology Monitor grant opportunities, and continue to pursue grant funding opportunities for pending
projects, including 2 authorized grant applications and special GPU topic areas authorized by the Board. Prepare RFP and
consultant contracts in support of grant-related programs.

F
- Responding to Board directives, changes in State law, and privately initiated applications in a timely manner with limited
staff resources or lack of resources in specific technical areas.
- Keeping pace with technological advancements in mapping, public outreach programs, and database management.
- There is ever greater competition for state and federal grants, and limited staff resources to prepare or administer grant
applications and programs.


O
- Continue to provide staff support and training to the Mobile Home Park Rent Review Board (RRB), assuring compliance
with Ordinance 4366.
- Review and update Cultural Heritage Board Resolution 2009-1.1 (Exemptions and Administrative Approvals) to include
criteria for the use of substitute materials when repairing, updating, or maintaining historic structures.
- Finalize a process to review demolition requests for properties/structures over 50 years old that are not designated Cultural
Heritage Sites.
- Continue to promote awareness and appreciation of historic resources and cultural heritage via the Ventura County Fair
and other community events.
- Identify, document, and preserve historic resources.

F
- Responding to changes in state law.
- Completion of grant-funded programs with limited staff resources.
- Continue to seek grant funding opportunities.


O
- Maintain next day processing of inspection requests of 99%.
- Improve our current inspector/supervisor follow up and ride-along program.
- Maintain Safety Assessment Program (SAP) certification and training for inspection staff.
- Continue training and updating inspection staff on changes to NPDES Surface Water Quality Requirements for construction
sites.
- Continue ongoing training on the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
- Continue training inspection staff on field enforcement of California Title 24 Building Standards.
- Continue training in our Injury and Illness Prevention Program.

F
- Preparing for changes in state building standards and regulations.
- Improving use of technological advancements in GIS, mapping and processing field inspection data.
- Staying abreast of CalEMA and Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) training requirements for damage
assessment.
- Tracking current drought conditions/regulatory responses and preparing for potential future impacts upon development in
the unincorporated area.


O
- Pursue and maintain "Less than 15 Days" average turnaround standard for first plan checks while continuing to strive for a
"Less than 10 Days" average turnaround time.
- Continue training in our Injury and Illness Prevention Program.
- Obtain Plan Checker Training and Certification for Accessibility Specialist (CASp).
- Obtain additional training and certification for plan check staff in floodplain management.
- Continue to train staff on the California Energy and Green Building Codes.

F
- Preparing for continuing changes in state building standards and regulations, particularly in Green Building, Water
Conservation, and Energy Efficiency.
- Staying abreast with CalEMA and FEMA training requirements for damage assessment.
- Tracking current drought conditions/regulatory responses and preparing for potential future impacts upon development in
the unincorporated area.


O
- Continue improving and updating our public information handouts.
- Continue document imaging of division files, including migration of document images to File Net for access through Accela
Automation.
- Maintain and improve our online Policy and Interpretation Manual.
- Maintain staff training on adopted codes, ordinances and appropriate State laws effecting building construction and
continue compliance with all State Laws.
- Continue training in our Injury and Illness Prevention Program.
- Continue to train staff on the California Energy and Green Building Codes.
- Continue public outreach and education on topics such as graywater and energy conservation.

F
- Preparing for continuing changes in state building standards and regulations, particularly in Green Building, Water
Conservation, and Energy efficiency.
- Staying abreast CalEMA and FEMA training requirements for damage assessment.
- With the significant increase in "No-Fee" Solar Photovoltaic Permits becoming a larger share of overall permit activity,
service levels for other permit types could begin to suffer.
- Tracking current drought conditions/regulatory responses and preparing for potential future impacts upon development in
the unincorporated area.


O
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
- Continue to train and assist customers with the implementation of CERS.
- Incorporate new inspection and data software into the CUPA program to facilitate CERS implementation, and continue the
transition toward a more "paperless" office.
MEDICAL WASTE AND BODY ART:
- Implement the new requirements of the MWMA into the existing Medical Waste program.
- Provide outreach to medical waste generators on the safe handling and disposal of medical waste.
- Collaborate with industry groups to provide outreach to Ventura County middle school, high school, and college students
related to the legal and safety requirements for body art.
VOLUNTARY CLEANUP PROGRAM:
- Continue to provide outreach to local businesses regarding the advantages of the program.
- Continue to support and cleanup oversight for owners of non-underground storage tank contaminated properties.

F
- State regulations became effective January 2013 that required the electronic submittal of data from facilities subject to
CUPA jurisdiction (CERS). The CUPA section is tasked with training and assisting facilities with this data transmittal, which
will continue to add costs to the CUPA program.
- Reductions in the amount of scholarship funding available to Environmental Health Division staff to attend the annual
CUPA conference and obtain required continuing education units will require adjustments to the Division's annual budget.


O
- Continue providing outreach promoting Environmental Health as a career to local high school and college students.
- Continue to work with other County Environmental Health divisions and food industry representatives in a statewide effort
to uniformly apply the California Retail Food Code.
- Continue outreach efforts to local retail food facility community to assist them in gaining compliance with State safe food
handling requirements.
- Continue mobile Food/TFF operator outreach and program streamlining.
- Continue program reviews to improve permit processes and reduce costs without compromising public health.
- Implement changes in the Backflow Device tester certification program to align with national testing standards.
- Implement training program for Backflow Device testers on using the new Cross-Connection portal system for test result
reporting.
- Update and improve the Community Services webpages to be more user-friendly.
- Develop training modules for food facility operators or the Certified Food Safety professionals at each facility to use to train
food handlers on safe food handling procedures.

F
We anticipate that legislation will be introduced to add Day Camps to the facilities regulated as Organized Camps. If Day
Camps are added to the definition of Organized Camps, approximately 130 facilities will be added to our current inspection
inventory and workload.


O
- Continue providing outreach promoting Environmental Health as a career to local high school and college students.
- Continue to work with other County Environmental Health divisions and food industry representatives in a statewide effort
to uniformly apply the California Retail Food Code.
- Continue outreach efforts to local retail food facility community to assist them in gaining compliance with State safe food
handling requirements.
- Continue mobile Food/TFF operator outreach and program streamlining.
- Continue program reviews to improve permit processes and reduce costs without compromising public health.
- Implement changes in the Backflow Device tester certification program to align with national testing standards.
- Implement training program for Backflow Device testers on using the new Cross-Connection portal system for test result
reporting.
- Update and improve the Community Services webpages to be more user-friendly.
- Develop training modules for food facility operators or the Certified Food Safety professionals at each facility to use to train
food handlers on safe food handling procedures.

F
We anticipate that legislation will be introduced to add Day Camps to the facilities regulated as Organized Camps. If Day
Camps are added to the definition of Organized Camps, approximately 130 facilities will be added to our current inspection
inventory and workload.


O
- Continue mosquito breeding source inspections and control activities.
- Continue responding to public complaints and service requests for mosquito control activities.
- Continue mosquito transmitted disease, plague and Lyme disease surveillance and public education efforts.

F
- State regulations require Vector Control Technicians to obtain Vector Certification Continuing Education Units to maintain
their certifications. This continues to add costs and increase staff time dedicated to training.
- Increase in purchases of mosquito control pesticides and compliance with State Water Resources Control Board
requirements pertaining to pesticide use may impact the amount of the per parcel benefit assessment necessary to support
ongoing mosquito control activities.


O
- Evaluate Liquid Waste Program standards and procedures, and complete alignment of these standards and procedures
with new statewide requirements.
- Continue permitting and enforcement activities pertaining to solid waste activities to insure protection of human health,
safety and the environment.
- Continue review of land use projects to insure conformance with applicable State and County requirements and evaluate
environmental impacts associated with these projects.
- Continue to pursue and secure State grant and other available funding for the Ocean Water Quality Monitoring Program
and conduct monitoring program consistent with available funding.
- Continue to evaluate State small water systems and individual/shared water supplies to insure conformance with State
primary drinking water standards.
- Continue data management through the use of Envision Connect and Accela to improve program efficiency and enhance
inter-program communication and data sharing.

F
- State regulations require that Registered Environmental Health Specialists obtain Continuing Education Contact Hours to
maintain their registration status. This adds costs and increased staff time dedicated to training.
- State funding and other potential revenue sources for the Ocean Water Quality Monitoring Program remain uncertain from
year to year.
- Implementation of new statewide Onsite Wastewater Treatment and disposal requirements may result in increased
program costs due to more in-depth application review and water quality monitoring/data management.
- The Environmental Health Division will continue to be engaged in the local response to Onsite Wastewater Treatment
System water quality concerns identified in a Total Maximum Daily Loads adopted by the Regional Water Quality Control
Board. This will continue to add costs associated with increased staff time dedicated to this effort.


O
- Work with Statewide Sealers organization (CACASA) to develop accurate benchmark data with respect to individual device
inspection times. This data will be an assessment tool for local programs and future legislative device fee increase
adjustments.
- We will be sending staff to the upcoming National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) HB 133 Class on
"Checking the Net Contents of Packages" in Los Angeles, CA. Staff will attend CA-DMS statewide trainings opportunities
focused on inspecting new and emerging technologies such as Electric Vehicle Charging Stations and Liquid Compressed
Gas dispensers.
- Submit a QC equipment grant proposal for CACASA Trust Fund reimbursement.
- Successfully recruit and hire two full time County Weights and Measures Inspectors to fill recent vacancies.

F
- Continue efforts to retain the County subvention contract from the State of California Division of Measurement Standards
(CA-DMS) for Petroleum inspections and for Weighmaster to enforce junk dealersand recyclers inspections.
- Continue specialized weights and measures equipment sharing agreements with neighboring county departments to avoid
or delay purchase of this expensive testing equipment. Two examples include our use of Los Angeles County's mobile
dynamometer for taxi testing and Santa Barbara County's high volume prover for aviation fuel meter testing.


O
- Continue our partnership with community organizations (Habitat for Humanity, Humane Society) and other county agencies
(Sheriff, Adult Protective Services, Animal Services) to improve housing stock and the livability of neighborhoods.
- Have all Code Compliance Officers receive California Association of Code Enforcement Officers (CACEO) Basic Academy
training or obtain basic certification.
- Continue sending staff for advanced certification, such as the week long training academy accredited by the CACEO.
- Continue to send staff to CACEO training seminars and conferences to add their skills.


O
Supportive services funded and provided under Title III B include: Information and Referral Services which link older persons
and their families to specific community services, in-home services such as personal care, homemaker and chore services,
adult day care, legal services to help identify legal problems and legal service needs of older persons, case management,
material aid, outreach, transportation to medical appointments, and transportation to the congregate meal site.
- The Older Americans Act mandates the operation of a long-term-care Ombudsman program, funded in part by Title III B. A
state-certified ombudsman is a trained individual who investigates and resolves complaints made by, or on behalf of, older
individuals who are residents of long-term-care facilities, nursing homes, and residential care homes. They do not represent
the facility. Complaints may relate to inadequate hygiene; physical abuse; personal items lost, stolen, or used by others;
understaffing of the facility; action, inaction, or decisions of long-term-care providers (or their representatives), public
agencies, or social service agencies that may adversely affect the health, safety, welfare, or rights of residents. Ombudsmen
are guaranteed access to facilities and must maintain strict rules of confidentiality for clients and complainants.
- The Senior Nutrition program (Title III C) provides both congregate and home delivered meals to seniors throughout
Ventura County. The purpose of the nutrition program is to: reduce hunger and food insecurity, promote socialization of older
individuals and promote the health and well-being of older individuals and delay adverse health conditions through access to
nutrition and other disease prevention and health promotion services. Meals and related nutrition services (nutrition
education and nutrition counseling) are provided to older individuals in a variety of settings including congregate facilities
such as senior centers; or by home-delivery to older individuals who are homebound due to illness, disability, or geographic
isolation. Services are targeted to those in greatest social and economic need with particular attention to low income
individuals, minority individuals, those in rural communities, those with limited English proficiency and those at risk of
institutional care. Nutrition Services Programs help older individuals to remain independent and in their communities.
- Title IIID provides funding for evidence based health, prevention, wellness and medication management programs aimed at
providing seniors with the tools to maintain their health, reduce their risk of developing chronic diseases, and manage their
health to live as independently as possible.
- Title IIIE provides funding for a range of support services which assist family and informal caregivers to care for their loved
ones at home for as long as possible. Families are the major provider of long-term care, but research has shown that caregiving
exacts a heavy emotional, physical and financial toll. Through contracts and direct service provision, the following
services may be provided: information to caregivers about available services, assistance to caregivers in gaining access to
the services, individual counseling, organization of support groups, and caregiver training, respite care, and supplemental
services.
- Title V Senior Employment Services is dedicated to providing job training and employment opportunities for qualifying
adults age 55 and over.
- Title VII provides funds to develop services and program to prevent elder abuse, neglect and exploitation.
- The Health Insurance Counseling Advocacy Program (HICAP) with substantial volunteer support, provides assistance to
help seniors choose the Medicare Plan to best suit their needs, and to assist them with other health insurance related issues.

F
Uncertain funding continues to threaten the safety net for Ventura County seniors and adults with disabilities. The aging
network does not have the necessary resources to serve its current clients let alone the growing number of aging Baby
Boomers. Adults with disabilities who are not eligible for services from other organizations have no safety net. Funding
reductions have been occurring in key program areas since FY 2008-09 when the State of California reduced funding for
Community Based Service Programs (CBSPs) by ten percent. In FY 2009-10 the State eliminated all general fund support
for CBSPs effective October 1, 2009.
The AAA is committed to providing service while living within our means. This agency is expecting a similar amount of
federal and state funding as last year. The net county cost will increase in FY2015-2016 mainly to fund the expanded
Homeshare program.
Although the AAA is able to leverage resources and partner with other agencies to provide services to seniors, the increased
cost of business and funding cuts of our partners will lead to decreased services. However, we will continue to seek
alternative sources of funds and utilize the funds we receive to meet the needs of the neediest of our seniors.


O
MSSP provides extensive assessment and care planning services, which lead to linkage to existing community services,
such as transportation, housing, meals, in-home care, adult day health care programs, therapeutic counseling, money
management, emergency response units, etc. Each client is treated on an individual basis to meet the many different needs
that client faces.

F
The state reduced the Multipurpose Senior Services Program (MSSP) funding by 10% in FY 2008-09; in both FY 2009-10
and FY 2010-11 the program operated on the same reduced amount of funds. In FY 2011-12, funding for the MSSP program
was further reduced by 11% to $685,600. This funding has not changed and will be the same for FY 2015-2016. Governor
Brown's office has proposed integrating MSSP as an optional benefit under the County Managed Health Plans (i.e. Gold
Coast Health Plan).


O
The Area Agency on Aging will identify and address the emerging and changing needs of the 60+ population as well as baby
boomers (born 1946-1964). The Area Agency on Aging will continue to identify and explore the needs of special populations
as well as the changing and emerging needs of seniors, and will develop and expand programs to help meet their needs.
The VCAAA will be a leader in pursuing best practices and achieving results that benefit taxpayers and the seniors and their
caregivers that we serve

F
The ability to secure funding from sources other than the California Department of Aging will be crucial to continue to
develop and provide innovative, cost effective direct services for seniors and their caregivers


O T
he County Executive Office will continue to provide oversight program management and administration. The administrative
efficiency and effectiveness will be reviewed and assessed to ensure effective program outcomes.

F
MSA payments have significantly reduced over the years. The MSA revenues were not designed in such a way as to
promote sustainable long-term services nor have the ability to expand services. Therefore, a multiple year plan will begin a
gradual funding reduction beginning in FY 2015-16 to align program expenditures with the actual MSA funding received.


O
Continue investigating deaths that occur for unknown causes or under suspicious circumstances professionally, effectively,
and efficiently with compassion. Continue to participate in multiagency working groups including the elder death review team,
child death review team, and mass disaster preparedness team. Maintain awareness for possible adoption of national
investigative standards, technological advancements, and judicial expectations. Train new investigators and continue to
standardize the departmental approach to death investigation. Training new investigators will ultimately decrease the
overtime accrual of the department but this training process is approximately one year depending upon the skill level and
experience of the new employee. Continue educational outreach to specific county agencies, various hospital administration
staff, and funeral home staff.


O
1. Provide oversight and administration of the countywide EMS System to ensure compliance with local and state
regulations. EMS functions include providing oversight of the ambulance contracts, personnel certifications, policy
development and disaster preparedness.
2. Continue to provide coordination and planning for the countywide STEMI, Stroke and Trauma Systems.
3. Implement system update for the ImageTrend pre-hospital documentation system.
4. Continue rollout of the revised VCEMS Quality Improvement program.
5. Continue to refine system specific core measures for monitoring and improvement of trauma care.
6. Continue to promote Sidewalk CPR programs to increase public awareness and participation with a goal of increasing
cardiac arrest survival rates.

F
EMS is funded through a combination of county allocation funds and revenue from various fees as well as court collected
assessments. No changes are currently anticipated, however, if our overall State and/or County funds are reduced
significantly, we would likely have to reduce staffing levels.


O
1. Coordinating healthcare preparedness activities to include conducting drills and exercises to assure effective disaster
response and mass surge capabilities.
2. Continue to develop and support Continuity of Operations planning with Health Care agency and associated partners to
ensure countywide integration of efforts.
3. Coordinated Medical and Health branch training and table top exercise to assist in local resource requesting process.
4. Continue to Support enhancements to disease surveillance and reporting programs in conjunction with Animal Health and
Environmental Health Departments.
5. Continue development of Epi-Center data surveillance project in incorporating meaningful use parameters with countywide
healthcare partners.
6. Maintain oversight and support for the Medical Reserve Corps.

F
Emergency Preparedness activities are funded through Federal grants. We currently anticipate level funding levels in
FY15-16. Focus will be to continue to maintain existing countywide emergency preparedness equipment and training levels.


O
1. Continue coordination of the EMS involvement in the Homeland Security grant program.
2. Procure and deploy a new triage system for countywide EMS responders.

F
Homeland Security programs are funded through Federal grants, however, due to significant cuts nationwide, we anticipate
there may be lower funding levels in FY15-16.


O
1. Provide quality case management and treatment services to persons living with HIV/AIDS
2. Provide linkage to care for all newly diagnosed clients
3. To identify and eliminate barriers to care to enable clients to re-engage care
4. Collaborate with community organizations and health care providers to enhanced HIV/AID treatment, case management
and prevention services.

F
HIV/AIDS programs are largely funded via Federal grants and we do not expect significant funding changes on these grants
in FY 15-16.


O
1. Release a new department strategic plan that will have input from all levels of VCPH staff and from community partners.
2. Identify additional funding sources to at minimum maintain current service levels.
3. Work with county departments and community partner organizations to implement the Health in All Polices framework as
adopted by the Board of Supervisors in January 2015 to have the health impacts be considered in policies across sectors.

F
We do not anticipate significant revenue changes from our FY 2015-16 Federal or State budgets, other than a small
reduction in our FFY 15-16 WIC budget. However, our overall FY budget for all of PH is expected to be very tight due to
increasing operational costs and flat or slightly reduced revenue levels from grants or contracts.


O
AFLP
1. Use Positive Youth Development (PYD) tools. Continue to meet successful outcomes for school attendance and
graduation, reduced repeat births, healthy birth weights, and healthy lifestyle choices for the client and their baby.
2. Work to improve linkages and strengthen networks to support our expectant and parenting teen population.
3. All case managers will continue to be trained to increase their awareness and ability to provide intensive comprehensive
case management to the clients we serve.
CHP
1. Working with 2-1-1 to build and establish Help Me Grow Ventura County as a comprehensive county resource of best
practices for standard developmental screening, referral and follow up to resources and interventions throughout Ventura
County.
2. Sustain developmental screening efforts and support RTT/QRIS (Quality Rating & Improvement System) preschool
screening efforts including new venues and methods to reach more children in group settings.
3. Seek additional funding opportunities for Childhood Injury Prevention efforts.
4. Seek additional funding opportunities for our health enrollment and utilization program to enhance the number of clients
who have coverage but also who can efficiently utilize preventative health services.
HEU
1. VCPH Bus of Tobacco Horrors will extend their reach by scheduling the bus at county-wide, community events that will
include residents of all ages including teens and adults.
2. The Tobacco Prop 99 staff will be conducting a second county-wide retail survey to identify where tobacco, alcohol and
unhealthy food is being sold.

F
AFLP
The AFLP program is funded by MCAH Federal Title V and the Federal AFLP PYD (Positive Youth Development) grants.
AFLP also matches local agency funding with the Federal Financial Participation Title XIX. The increased funding as a pilot
site for AFLP PYD ended after the FY13-14 which resulted in a reduction in revenue for the FY14-15. This was
accommodated with Cal-Learn staff accepting promotions with other departments and transferring personnel internally
between AFLP and Cal-Learn. No staff needed to be laid off and this limited the impact on clients and the number of clients
served.
AFLP agencies will continue to work on having State General Funds restored.There are no further fiscal impacts foreseen for
the FY15-16.
CHP
Children's Health Promotion & Health Coverage services are mostly funded by First 5 Ventura County. We will sustain the
same funding level with First 5 through FY 15-16 with some minor increases to support the RTT/QRIS preschool screening
efforts. We continue to explore more efficient and effective ways to provide all of our services.
1. First 5 funding will stay consistent through FY 15-16.
2.Childhood Injury Prevention in general does not have dedicated funding. Therefore, we are seeking grant opportunities,
such as through The Office of Traffic Safety, to continue our efforts.
3. We have been awarded the Covered California Outreach and Education grant that was extended through February 2015.
We are currently seeking additional funding through Cal Wellness to help support our efforts and staff after February.


O
1. Obtain MCAH/Cal Prep funding for next 3 years to implement an evidence-based teen pregnancy and STD prevention
curriculum in high-risk communities.
2. Strengthen MCAH and First 5 partnership through strategic planning for MCAH population in Ventura County
3. Increase home visitation and outreach to senior population in participation with the Fall Prevention Program.

F
1. Potential for future funding to launch Bright Beginnings at other hospitals in county.
2. Increased Targeted Case Management (TCM) revenue.
3. Increased services to senior population.
4. Potential for future funding through Cal Prep.


O
CD
1. The Communicable Disease Program will initiate case investigations for Title 17 reportable diseases, within 24 hours of
receipt, for those diseases specified as immediate reports 100% of the time.
2. The Communicable Disease Program will train three high-volume providers to submit their confidential morbidity reports
(CMRs) electronically through the provider portal.
3. The Communicable Disease Program will participate in five community events to provide education on the spread and
prevention of communicable diseases.
IZ
1. Provide outreach to health providers and community partners on standards concerning immunization practices,
education, and laws for increased immunization rates.
2. Continue the effort to maintain our 100% compliance on our annual assessment reviews.
3. Educate and maintain compliance with state regulations that all child-care centers, Preschool and K-12 must keep a blue
card with all required immunizations on file for every child enrolled.
4. Provide educational materials to local providers to promote vaccines and lower personal belief waivers.
5. Educate all birthing hospitals and laboratories in Ventura County on state law requirements on testing and reporting all
perinatal Hepatitis B positive cases to ensure 100% compliance.
CLINICS
1. Provide quality and easily accessible preventive health services to clients throughout Ventura County for all uninsured and
privately insured patients and connect to resources through the Affordable Care Act, in partnership with our Cover California
Program.
2. Prevent missed opportunities by educating and vaccinating each patient on every visit based on ACIP (CDC's
immunization recommendations).
3. Working collaboratively with clinic, fiscal, billing and EHR experts to improve revenue billing and collection.
4. Continue working to decrease TB cases within Ventura County and partnering with State of California TB Control Branch.
5. Staff will investigate through CMR's, EDN, lab reports and suspect reporting form of suspected TB cases to Ventura
County TB Clinic according to standards of practice endorsed by the California TB Control Branch and the Curry National TB
Center.
6. Educate community partners, schools, physicians and providers on the spread, prevention and treatment of Tuberculosis.

IZ
We continue to expand ways to increase our revenue by billing Medi-Cal and Medi-Care for flu clinics and collaborating with
community partners to offset staffing cost to continue providing services to the community.
CLINICS
PH Clinics are funded with County allocation funds, State and Local Grants, and with revenue generated from client fees. If
overall State and County funds are reduced significantly, we may have to reduce level and number of services provided to
clients. Financial reports are currently not available through the EHR to project cost vs revenue impact.
An emerging threat is medication resistant Tuberculosis. We have begun to see these cases in our County. The State
continues to provide funding for housing and related supports. The potential fiscal impact is that the State does not pay for
the medications for treatment. These medications can cost up to $3,000 per month per person. Treatment can take about
one year. The County has to cover all medication costs.


O
PH LAB
1. Work with the Cerner management group to correct the gap in the system's ability to properly place charges and submit
claims for reimbursement.
2. Continue our excellent record of quality control and quality assessment so that we maintain our accreditation with the
Centers for MediCare and MedicAid (CMS/CLIA), Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Program (ELAP) and the Public
Health Accreditation Board (PHAB).
VITAL RECORDS
1. Reorganize office structure and tasks to increase efficiency and allow for expansion of services.
2. Develop and ongoing collaboration with Self-Help Centers at Superior Court to allow better utilization of resources and
increased access and assistance for families.
3. Increase opportunities for staff development to enhance and expand skill sets.

F
1. PHL continues to provide support for Animal Control and the Communicable Disease Control programs free of charge and
for Environmental Health programs for a discounted price. When those programs increase services or respond to
emergencies, the increase in specimens and samples and reduction in pricing result in higher PHL costs.
2. VCMC administration makes decisions and implements policies related to laboratory testing, billing and reimbursement
without involving laboratory management. This reduces PHL capacity to effectively bill and receive reimbursement.


O
1.Maintain program participation at 97% of allocated caseload.
2.Maintain average wait time on WIC Call Center at 2 minutes.
3.Utilize "Raptor" data to maximize access to current participation trends for Ventura County WIC in order to assess
progress on a variety of program outcomes, assess efficient locations and delivery of WIC services and to communicate with
community partners.
4.Successful transition to co-location with Ambulatory Care clinic at Simi location.
5.Successful move to new suite at Ventura location.
6.Act as preceptor for 1-3 Dietetic Interns for a Community Nutrition rotation.
7.Establish new contract with California State WIC for next three year contract period; FFY15-18.

F
Continued decreases in WIC participation due to lower birth rates and less Medi-Cal eligible families contribute to challenges
facing the WIC Program to meeting participation goals in the coming fiscal year.


O
1.Maintain current roster of local specialty providers through increased collaboration with CHDP and Gold Coast Heath Care
Plan.
2.CCS MTP utilize transcription and report components of Cerner.
3.In collaboration with CHDP, unit 3143, establish a sustainable, family centered coalition with multiple county agencies to
improve coordination of the local system of healthcare for all children with special health care needs. Includes development
of consistent referral mechanism and screening tool.
4.MTP increases collaboration visits between public schools administrators, and other community partners.
5.Smooth transition to ICD 10 codes.

- Coordinating Affordable Care Act benefits for clients through sustained information and dissemination regarding Medi-Cal
aid codes.
- ICD-10 coding implementation


O
1. CHDP will implement a web-based data collection system allowing seamless electronic access and integration between
children's health programs (CHDP, CHDP Oral Health, Health Care Program for Children in Foster Care, and the Childhood
Lead Poisoning Prevention Program). This system will allow for a comprehensive method to retrieve and evaluate health
data from CHDP exams.
2. CHDP will continue to maintain a close working relationship with Gold Coast Health Plan in order to provide seamless,
and comprehensive health care for Medi-Cal children.
3. CHDP will continue to focus on educating providers, children and families and the community on prevention of diseases
such as dental disease, and overweight/obesity by providing oversight and training for providers on methods of engaging
their clients.
4. CHDP Foster Care (HCPCFC) will initiate a system to document and monitor the behavioral health needs of all children in
out-of-home placement and will facilitate access to available behavioral health services.
5. Establish a sustainable, family centered coalition with multiple county agencies to improve coordination of the local system
of healthcare for all children with special health care needs. Includes development of consistent referral mechanism and
screening tool.

- Cost to continue enhancement of electronic data collection from enrolled providers with the goal of eliminating
paper reporting from Providers.
- Affect of realignment


O
1.CLPPP will implement the new 4-Year State Contract for FY 2014-2018.
2.CLPPP will maintain and expand community outreach efforts to educate medical providers, and the community regarding
the prevention of lead exposure of young children by strengthening coordination of activities with Oral Health Education and
CHDP.


O
Administration
a.Manage operations within allotted resources.
b.Oversee development of secure Mental Health Rehabilitation Center (MHRC).
c.Develop and implement a department Communication Plan.

F
The FY 2015-16 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by the
Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.


O
Adult Services
a.Continue to improve Medi-Cal penetration rate.
b.Continue to work with board and care operators to improve the living environment, quality of care, and nutrition.
c.Expand evidence-based treatment groups throughout division.
d.Ensure that all eligible self-pay clients are enrolled in either Covered California or Medi-Cal.
e.Increase participation in the Older Adult Intensive Social Rehabilitation Program and socialization events.

F
The FY 2015-16 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by the
Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.


O
Youth and Family Services Program
a. Fully implement Katie A. screening and referral process, ensuring all youth entering foster care are assessed and
appropriately referred for mental health services. Increase access to services for this population by adding specialty supports
to the 0-5 population as well as the 18-21 year olds community (NMD). Continued expansion and implementation of programs
in collaboration with HSA to meet the State requirements of Katie A.
b. Continue to support and outreach to the South Oxnard community to increase access to MH services in the newly opened
Oxnard YFS Clinic at CenterPoint Mall in South Oxnard, which is a co-located with Adult MH services.
c. Further training and implementation of EBPs including Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) throughout the YFS Division.
d. Continue expansion of ISES services in all school districts to meet the mental health needs of children with IEPs. This
includes the underserved communities in Santa Clara Valley and Oxnard.
e. Develop and implement a Continuum of Crisis Stabilization services county- wide to decrease hospitalizations.

F
The FY 2015-16 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by the
Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.


O
Quality Assurance
a.Implementation of an enterprise reporting software.
b. Fully implement the collection of and reporting of data on referrals, crisis calls and time-to-service into Avatar.

F
The FY 2015-16 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by the
Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.


Managed Care
a. Evaluate clients who have mild to moderate functional impairments and are currently receiving outpatient mental health
services funded under the VCBH MCP who could be more appropriately served by their Medi-Cal MCP for non-specialty
mental health services.
b. Utilization Review compliance monitoring for foster programs.

F
The FY 2015-16 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by the
Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.


Juvenile Justice
a. Increase multidisciplinary involvement in treatment and milieu rehabilitation planning.
b. Implement a trauma-informed care model in collaboration with the Probation Agency.
c. Increase the number of treatment groups offered, including a group to address criminal thinking errors.
d. Increase restorative justice interventions.
e.Continue to increase family therapy services.

F
The FY 2015-16 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by the
Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.


a. Increase referrals for ADP services from Primary Care Providers as consistent with Health Care Reform's mandate for
improvement in integrated services and obtain contracts with three private insurance panels.
b. Continue to develop the components for the Electronic Health Record, for example, the ADP Admission Note and other
required documentation.
c. Improve rates of successful completions as evidenced by CalOMS data.

F
The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP and DUI programs was moved to a single agency - the
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS). ADP is hopeful to expand services with the Affordable Care Act's Medi-Cal
Expansion and the expected growth in the Behavioral Health Sub Account.


O
a.Expand community discussions about marijuana harms, especially to adolescents in terms of brain development, and
enhance parent messaging about the abuse of THC products.
b.Investigate and pursue policies which reduce the public health and safety consequences of easily-abused prescription
drugs, including fortified drug take-back programs countywide.

F
The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP and DUI programs was moved to a single agency - the
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS). ADP is hopeful to expand services with the Affordable Care Act's Medi-Cal
Expansion and the expected growth in the Behavioral Health Sub Account.


O
a.Continue the integration of mental health and alcohol/drug services at ANSFM perinatal treatment program.
b.Continue Evidenced-Based Programs for clients with co-occurring disorders, adolescent clients, and court-mandated
clients.
c.Establish an annual training schedule to reorient clinical staff to our Evidenced-Based Programs and Practices.
d.Continue to provide clinical support to clinicians by track with one time per month clinical team meetings (PC1210,
Adolescent Services, Co-occurring).
e.Increase adolescent treatment services at school sites.

F
The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP and DUI programs was moved to a single agency - the
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS). ADP is hopeful to expand services with the Affordable Care Act's Medi-Cal
Expansion and the expected growth in the Behavioral Health Sub Account.


Oa.Decrease client drop-out rate in first thirty days of treatment.

F
The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP and DUI programs was moved to a single agency - the
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS). ADP is hopeful to expand services with the Affordable Care Act's Medi-Cal
Expansion and the expected growth in the Behavioral Health Sub Account.


O
a.Increase the number of opiate-involved clients in ADP treatment sites who receive Overdose Prevention Education
sessions and complete associated questionnaire about overdose response capability.

F
The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP and DUI programs was moved to a single agency - the
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS). ADP is hopeful to expand services with the Affordable Care Act's Medi-Cal
Expansion and the expected growth in the Behavioral Health Sub Account.


Oa.Increase Medically Assisted Therapy to Medi-Cal Expansion Clients.

F
The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP and DUI programs was moved to a single agency - the
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS). ADP is hopeful to expand services with the Affordable Care Act's Medi-Cal
Expansion and the expected growth in the Behavioral Health Sub Account.


a. Continue the NIATx improvement projects at each ADP site (County and Provider) in order to improve client access,
engagement and retention, and secure good outcomes.
b. Expand NIATx improvement projects at all ADP sites to include charting timeliness, and service standards.
c. Enhance the continuum of services in the East County with the submission of an application to the Department of Health
Care Services for site certification for the Conejo Valley.
d.Increase services to newly eligible Medi-Cal Expansion clients.

F
The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP and DUI programs was moved to a single agency - the
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS). ADP is hopeful to expand services with the Affordable Care Act's Medi-Cal
Expansion and the expected growth in the Behavioral Health Sub Account.


a. Improve DUI Program internal fidelity scores for evidence-based practice through the use of clinical observations
established during PM rounds, with feedback to the counselor.
b. Increase financial stability of a self-supporting program through real-time use of data reports in the Compliance Manager
data tracking system.
c. Decrease the percentage of DUI dismissals through the use of NIATx projects focused on reducing program dismissals for
21 day loss of contact and non-payment of fees.
d. Enhance online visibility of the DUI program to increase ease of access for DUI clients.

F
Ventura County DUI is a State-licensed, community-based program located at five sites throughout the county. It is required
to be and is financially self-sufficient using sustainable funding (participant fees). While revenues will increase or decrease
based on the need for DUI programs, funding presently correlates directly to the need for DUI counter-measures and the
subsequent need for the program in our community.


O
(1) Manage HSA's budget strategically to ensure that Federal, State and County dollars are leveraged effectively, and that
the Agency is able to provide the best possible level of service to clients under any of several State budget scenarios
(2) Lead the Agency in pursuing and implementing a strategic technology agenda that is cost effective and service oriented,
including further refinement of ECM and upgrades to the Ventura County Financial Management System
(3) Leverage new strategies for service delivery such as remote/mobile worker opportunities to enhance client service and
employee productivity and performance
(4) Continue to gather "voice of the customer" data, assess customer service and implement systems that meet customers'
needs, and train staff accordingly
(5) Expand public/private relationships, communication and collaborations, as well as those among County agencies, to
meet shared missions and outcomes
(6) Continue to implement Get-To-Excellence process improvement priorities
(7) Continue to increase internal staff communications, including encouraging use of the new HSANet to promote staff
engagement.
(8) Manage facilities portfolio to effectively reduce leased facility cost overhead while enhancing county owned facility
infrastructure
(9) Relocate HSA staff from East County facilities to the newly leased office, which will facilitate greater efficiencies and
provide better customer service

F
(1) The final State budget could have significant impacts on Agency funding levels.
(2) Program funding allocations are not finalized until 3-4 months into the Budget Year; variances from projected funding
allocation levels could have significant impacts on the Agency.
(3) The overall health of the economy will impact the level of Realignment revenues received; variances from projected level
could have significant impacts on the Agency.


O
(1) AFS Administration/HMIS: Develop Case Management Curriculum and Training for community based organizations and
agencies
(2) APS: 100% case reviews to monitor compliance state mandates for in person response and duration of case remaining
open
(3) Homeless Services: 75% of clients housed will continue to be stably housed 6 months after obtaining housing. (HPRP
programs: BOS, ESG, CHSP)
(4) IHSS: Meet Agency target of 90% for timely reassessment rate (State standard is 80%)
(5) PAPG: Increase efficiency and timeliness of marshalling and documenting client assets through the use of the iPad and
skills of fiscal staff
(6) Public Authority: Increase the number of available registry providers by 8%
(7) RAIN TLC: 100% of school age children will be enrolled in school within 10 days of entry
(8) Veteran Services: Increase number of claims by 5% over LY- specifically through broadening outreach to include tricounty
outreach and county wide marketing

F
(1) Potential increase in services to the elder population as the number of people turning age 65 is increasing daily.
(2) The prevalence rate of Alzheimer Disease could impact service demands.
(3) Decrease in rental-housing, county wide will impact the rate of homelessness and the ability to rapidly re-house
individuals and families who experience homelessness.
(4) Increase in complexity of cases for Veteran Services due to prolonged and increased "tours of duty" assigned to military
personnel.


O
(1) Continue to collaborate with Ventura County Behavioral Health to strengthen mental health services for foster children
and children at risk of foster care as required by the State's Katie A. lawsuit settlement
(2) Make steady progress on the State-mandated System Improvement Plan, which establishes plans for quantitative
improvements in several key areas
(3) Implement Case Review methodology as required by the State
(4) Continue to improve usage of available technology, tools, and resources to ensure that social workers are able to remain
mobile and conduct their work from the field to the extent necessary.
(5) Continue to recruit, license, train, and retain foster families to provide caring homes for vulnerable children.

F
CHILDREN & FAMILY SERVICES:
(1) Child welfare continues to work with large numbers of families with complex family problems, which can involve multiple
siblings and allegations, and require lengthy investigations and family intervention. Efforts will continue to implement Safety
Organized Practice to work with families in a strength-based way to address the safety concerns that led to their referral to
the child welfare system.
(2) Continue to participate in State-led initiatives to review the Continuum of Care available for foster care placements, to
reduce reliance on placement in congregate care facilities
(3) Establish protocols and training to identify and serve Commercially Sexually Exploited Children (CSEC).
(4) Monitor and mitigate overtime costs for Child Welfare social workers through scheduling and supervision practices while
ensuring that the safety of children remains the priority and that social workers are fairly compensated for hours worked.
(5) The Agency will work with the CEO to determine and pursue appropriate approaches for using 2011 Realignment funds
to accomplish long-term stability for this and the other programs funded under Realignment.


O
(1) Offer effective and convenient client customer service through the Enterprise Content Management (ECM) "paperless"
filing solution for Medi-Cal and CalFresh cases.
(2) Effectively administer the Medi-Cal Orientation & Outreach Grant that provides CBO's with funds to provide Medi-Cal
application assistance for clients with barriers including mental health, substance abuse, limited English, and homelessness.
(3) Work with County partners including Sheriff, Probation, and HCA to enroll as many newly eligible people into Medi-Cal
and CalFresh as possible.
(4) Increase the number of clients participating in federally mandated, work and work-related activities
(5) Maximize utilization of subsidized job placement opportunities leading to permanent unsubsidized employment
(6) Continue expanding outreach for the Financial Empowerment Partnership

F
(1) With the implementation of health care reform, Medi-Cal cases and workload will continue to grow. Cases are projected
to grow to an expected total of 190,000 individuals in the program.
(2) CalFresh (Food Stamp) cases continue to expand. The Food & Nutrition Services Program can impose financial
sanctions for noncompliance in meeting accuracy requirements. If California exceeds the national error rate, both the State
and offending counties risk losing funding.
(3) Realignment and the transition of a large number of previously uninsured individuals to Medi-Cal could have a significant
impact on clients and health-related department funding levels.
(4) While CalWORKs cases have continued to show minor decreases, program workload has increased due to statewide
efforts to improve employment performance measures.
(5) While there are no significant programmatic changes to the structure of the CalWORKs program in the proposed 2015-16
budget, the implementation of both the Expanded Subsidized Employment program, the CalWORKs Housing Support
program, and enhanced requirements for Employment Services all result in increased workload


O
(1) Expand vocational education partnerships to provide client training for emerging occupations
(2) Increase the number of clients participating in federally mandated, work and work-related activities
(3) Maximize utilization of subsidized job placement opportunities leading to permanent unsubsidized employment
(4) Continue expanding outreach for the Financial Empowerment Partnership

F
(1) Comparing FY 2013-2014 to FY 2014-2015 to date, CalWORKs cases have decreased from an average of 6,390 served
per month to an average of 6,055 served per month.
(2) Although many factors contribute to caseload growth and decline, CalWORKs caseloads tend to increase as the
unemployment rate increases and decrease as economic conditions improve.
(3) It is projected that cost increases related to Children and Family Services implementing the CalWORKs Approved
Relative Caregiver funding option for relatives caring for foster children who do not meet the income eligibility for federallysubsidized
foster care payments through Title IV-E will be fully covered by the State for the initial years of the program. It is
projected that the NCC impacts beyond that should be minimal and the programmatic benefits significant.


O
(1) Continue to meet program guidelines and regulations, maximizing the use of the Kin-GAP program in efforts to seek
home placements that are in the best interest of the foster children involved.

F
(1) While the program will grow as Foster Care grows, the growth rates should slow as the transfer of cases from CalWORKs
(lower cost) to Foster Care (higher cost) has likely occurred.


O(1) Continue marketing and outreach efforts for new foster parents and families interested in adoption

F
(1) The Preliminary Budget Request assumes a continuance of the significant growth in case levels in recent years; a
variance from projected growth levels could significantly impact costs.


O
(1) Decrease the length of stay for all children who enter the child welfare system by analyzing the factors that lead to and
detract from permanency.
(2) Enhance services for transitional-age youth and increase housing opportunities for non-minor dependents participating in
Extended Foster Care.
(3) Continue implementation of the Extended Foster Care Program, which extends foster care from age 18 to age 21.

F
(1) During Fiscal Year 2013-2014, caseloads increased; for the first six months of Fiscal Year 2014-2015, the trend has
appeared to stabilize. The complexity of many of these cases, which can involve multiple siblings and allegations, require
lengthy investigations.
(2) Implementation of Extended Foster Care will continue to expand case management and services for youth who opt to
remain in the program.


O(1) Program staff will continue to follow guidelines and regulations of this mandated program.

F(1) The State budget will continue to be monitored to determine funding and/or programmatic impacts.


O
(1) Continue oversight of General Relief program with a focus on client benefit lifetime limits that facilitates transition of
clients onto alternate and sustainable assistance programs.

F
(1) The State budget will continue to be monitored to determine funding impacts to other safety net programs that could
result in growth of the General Relief caseload.


OThe Department will continue to follow guidelines and regulations of these mandated programs.

F
(1) Many of the programs in Direct Aid Budget Department are now funded by 2011 Realignment funds and 1991
Realignment funds that have replaced State funding. The Agency will continue to monitor Realignment funding levels and
manage Realignment revenues for the long-term stability of the programs involved.
(2) The Agency will continue to monitor the FY 14-15 State budget to determine final impacts on the Department.


O
(1) 100% of school aged children will be enrolled in school within 10 days of entry (Strategic Goal)
(2) 80% of clients housed will remain stably housed after 6 months (Strategic Goal)
(3) RAIN will maintain a 90% occupancy rate (Strategic Goal)
(4) Implement ECM for case management and intake (Strategic Goal)

F
RAIN TLC will continue to be a vital part of the County's Ten-Year Strategy to End Homelessness. RAIN will maintain its
commitment to provide immediate support and gap assistance to stabilize homeless Ventura County residents and families
at risk of homelessness while providing resources and referrals assistance to transition to permanent housing.


O
(1) Maintain the mandated response standard of two business days to initiate the investigation of decedent referrals and the
investigation of conservatorship referrals at 100%.
(2) Maintain continuous educational requirements for each Deputy PG in compliance with the 2006 Omnibus Act for 100%
Certification by the PAPGPC state Association.
(3) Increase the staff development training directed toward service to our population and specifically workplace safety
training hours by 12 hours or 25%.
(4) Use of technology by all staff via iPad's to maximize time efficiency by reducing or eliminating duplicate tasks.
(5) Develop a coordinated strategy with Adult Protective Services to provide protective services to clients referred for
Conservatorship, but not yet appointed.

F
(1) The dramatic growth of the older adult population and demand for mental health services will continue.
(2) The Public Administrator/Public Guardian expects increased caseload again this year and for many years into the future.
(3) Demand for estate administration will likely increase.
(4) Increased demands by the Probate Court for the Public Guardian to take on cases without choice are expected to
continue. These cases are typically very problematic and result from years of mismanagement by a prior conservator, or
cases of elder abuse becoming evident through the Probate proceedings.


- Methodically continue our efforts to thoroughly investigate and prosecute environmental crimes which otherwise could
have a deleterious impact our community's health and safety.
- Continue our work with regulators and other law enforcement agencies within Ventura County and its cities to hold
those who mishandle hazardous waste accountable for their actions.
- Ensure all incoming cases are carefully reviewed and prioritized by attorneys so as to allocate limited investigative
resources effectively and efficiently.
- Reduce the backlog of open investigations originated within the agency by reevaluating these cases with an eye
towards streamlining .
- Continue our collaborative efforts with other counties to hold unscrupulous businesses accountable for unlawful or
deceptive Obusiness practices perpetuated against unknowing consumers across the state.
F g g g

Persistent relative weakness in revenue to the Real Estate Fraud Trust Fund, as generated by real estate transaction activity,
will require reallocating certain staff to other revenue offset programs so as to reduce expenses commensurate with expected
revenue in the upcoming year. Efforts will be made to reduce the overall impact on the productivity of the Real Estate Fraud
Unit. Other uncertainties exist regarding the stability of funding received from the state to operate the Auto Insurance and
Workers Compensation Fraud Units. Fortunately, other revenue offset programs within Special Prosecutions continue to
achieve stated goals resulting in consistent and offsetting revenue.


- Implement an Enterprise Content Management (ECM) system to improve the receipt, organization and distribution of
the Office's hardcopy and electronic workflow.
- Develop and distribute, pursuant to SB1193, posters and other printed materials to required businesses, and work with
other County law enforcement agencies to combat human trafficking.
- Continue to explore with Ventura County's non-profit service providers and governmental agencies the creation of a Ventura
County Family Justice Center integrating services provided to victims of domestic violence, sexual assault, child abuse, elder
abuse and human trafficking.
-OContinue to aggressively pursue external funding sources to reduce general fund costs.
F
t

Shortfalls in revenues and negotiated labor cost increases will pose challenges in the coming year. Modest increases in
Proposition 172 revenue, general fund appropriations and salary savings from vacancies will ensure that the Office stays
within its budgeted appropriations. In FY 15-16 the Office will begin the implementation of an Enterprise Conten
Management (ECM) system that will dramatically improve the receipt, organization and distribution of the Office's hardcopy
and electronic workflow.


- Continue to focus on street level violent gang crimes by targeting and disrupting gang leadership.
- Continue to address the proliferation and abuse of synthetic designer drugs such as "Molly" and "Spice" currently
increasing in circulation in Ventura County.
- Continue to upgrade equipment at both Safe Harbor Centers to improve the investigation and quality of forensic evidence
in sexual assault and child abuse cases.
- Continue to aggressively combat auto theft and maintain our 100% conviction rate at jury trial on auto theft cases
through securing increased staffing of the Ventura County Auto Theft Task Force.
- Continue to enhance all of Ventura County's local law enforcement capabilities in analyzing digital forensic evidence
through membership in the Southern California High Tech Task Force. Continue to work toward establishing a countywide
program to bring training and awareness involving human trafficking, and to develop an investigative and prosecutorial
enforcement model. To distribute, pursuant to SB1193, posters and other printed materials to required businesses, and work
with other County law enforcement agencies to combat human trafficking.

F
It is anticipated that Proposition 47 will result in a significant increase in the number of misdemeanor cases submitted for
review and trials conducted in 2015-16 and beyond. As a byproduct of both Public Safety Realignment and Proposition 47,
an increase in the use of Specialty Courts has also occurred requiring the participation of a prosecutor. Finally, convicted
gang members and local gang leaders who would normally be sent to state prison are instead remaining in local jails for
shorter time periods and have increased access and ability to direct the activities of other un-incarcerated gang members
resulting in increased gang activity and an uptick in both the severity and volume of assaults within the local jail population.


- Continue to adapt to the changing landscape of state criminal law as reflected in Public Safety Realignment and now the
passage of Proposition of 47.
- Continue to assume the additional victim services responsibilities formerly performed by CDCR to ensure victims are
notified of appeal status, providing victim support at revocation hearings, developing an adequate plan to collect restitution
from defendants, and helping to develop plans to ensure compliance with Marsy's Law when offenders are released on
home detention or other alternative sentencing forms.
- Continue to contend with increased caseloads and court calendar appearances in Specialty Courts such as Veterans
Court, Mental-health Court, Drug Court, Domestic Violence Court and Homeless Court.

As state Public Safety Realignment funding fails to keep pace with the increased workload and resource burdens placed on
Ventura County's Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) agencies, the Office has voluntarily assumed a $98,000
reduction in state funding in an effort to assist the CCP in reducing it's overall structural budget by $1,000,000 in FY16. The
Office remains committed to maintaining current service levels to Realignment cases and programs and will adapt to
additional changes in workload associated with the passage of Proposition 47.


O
1) Continue to investigate and report fiscal, operational, and management issues in County departments and other local
government entities.


O1) Impanel Criminal Grand Juries to hear evidence on criminal matters on an as-needed basis.


O
1) Continue to cooperate with the Court to ensure quality legal services in those cases which the Public Defender has a
conflict of interest or is unable to act is provided to indigents in a timely, efficient, and cost-effective manner within the budget
passed by the Board.
2) Staff will continue to collaborate with the District Attorney's Office to obtain the necessary court orders for defense costs
recovery from defendants found guilty and found to have potential resources for repayment.

F
1) The uncertainty of future multiple defendant cases make it difficult to manage for indigent defense cost increases. The
staff will continue to work with the Court to implement improvements to the current system and still maintain quality defense
representation for indigents.


O
(1) Continue to participate with other criminal justice agencies in the analysis, planning and implementation of AB 109, Public
Safety Realignment, and Proposition 47.
(2) Continue to manage court ordered attorney fees in adult criminal cases.
(3) Continue to develop and refine the Integrated Public Defender Case Management system.
(4) Continue to identify and develop paperless pilot program to assist with case management and organizational efficiencies.
(5) Develop an agency strategic plan, continue to participate in the Lean Six Sigma program, review and follow-up on goals
and , and seek operational efficiencies.
(6) Continue to develop and mentor staff by providing in-house training opportunities.
(7) Participate in transition to the County's new Financial, Budget, and Payroll Systems.
(8) Participate in the County E-Performance program.


O
(1) Continue to provide quality representation to all indigent defendants at the least possible expense to the County.
(2) Utilize risk/needs assessments and evidence based practices to expand and explore alternative sentencing programs,
alternatives to jail, and ways to reduce recidivism and jail overcrowding.
(3) Continue to request court ordered attorney fees when appropriate.
(4) Continue to file Prop 47 petitions and applications.
(5) Partner with Behavior Health for Public Outreach Program wherein public defenders will present information in schools to
help suppress DUI cases.
(6) Advocate for expansion of successful Realignment programs such as Reentry Courts and Pretrial Detention.

F
(1) Proposition 47 will continue to impact our workload due to the increased number of misdemeanor trials and the
requirement of petitions/applications to reduce eligible felony convictions.
(2) Public Safety Realignment will continue to impact our business process as we continue to require office wide efforts to
obtain non-jail alternatives.
(3) Expanded opportunities for Veteran diversion may impact current workload; although the specific impacts are not yet
known.


O
(1) Continue to provide quality representation to persons qualifying for Public Defender services.
(2) Continue to closely monitor Probate and LPS Conservatorship cases to ensure that annual accounting are accurate and
timely filed.
(3) Continue to request court ordered attorney fees, when appropriate.
(4) Continue to conduct mandated investigations of placements of clients under LPS and Probate conservatorships.
(5) Explore solutions to handling increased workload in both conservatorship and contempt cases.

(1) Aging elder population and increases in dementia and Alzheimer's diagnosis' will impact our workload on probate
Fconservatorship cases.


O
- Review of IA policies and procedures.
- Reconfigure 3rd Floor workspace.
- 69 PC, 148 PC, 245 PC and 243 PC arrest audit.
- 11550 arrest audit.
- Efforts currently underway to affiliate with Ventura College with the Basic Academy class. Target date to fully integrate is
October 2015. Talks have also begun with Ventura College to begin a relationship hosting a Reserve Academy at the
Training Center.
- Preparing for the POST Basic Academy audit (BCCR - Basic Course Certification Review) scheduled for late this year.
Currently completing a self-assessment as part of that process.


O
- Implement SmartJustice, a secure and reliable web-based statewide information sharing system that will connect 58 county
law enforcement and 58 probation systems throughout California.
- Establish training program for Records personnel utilizing POST, CA-DOJ and Ventura County in-house courses and
trainings.
- Successful transition to new CAD and field reporting software impacting report, archival, and search processes.
- Continuation of CLETS development encompassing: pooling, internal controls, and update of documentation for of other
agencies ACC information and connectivity to County Message Switch.

F
- Increase of LiveScan applicants as related to CCW permits along with additional workload of increase data entry fields and
two-party entry verification of PC290 registrants related to CSAR database.
- Staff time spent on increase in more in-depth public records request for audio, video, and data analysis and increases in
applications for U and T Visas.
- Identify alternative storage options for CCW files and BI files; either off-site or electronic solution, as physical storage space
has reached maximum capacity.


O
-Decrease response times for the city of Thousand Oaks.
-Work with social services and city attorneys to reduce homelessness and panhandling.
-Complete compliance checks on local retail business regarding massage, alcohol, and tobacco.
-Maintain railroad-crossing safety through a program called "Operation Lifesaver."
-Provide emergency response kits ("go-bags") to all the schools in the Oak Park Unified School District.
-Install new security cameras in the front of station to increase citizen safety while using dispatch phones after hours.
-Increase patrol's usage of Intelligence Led Policing (ILP) data bases (iCop, Real Time Crime Map, Etc.).
-Purchase additional Automated License Plate Readers (ALPRs) for patrol units, traffic trailers, and other crime prevention
and apprehension equipment.
-Increase the number of covert and overt cameras deployed in East County patrol in partnership with Technical Services Unit
and Advanced Real Time Information Center (ARTIC).
-Apply for and receive an agency-wide Office of Traffic Safety Grant for all contract cities.
-Partner with Department of Alcohol Beverage Control and apply for funding through their Grant Assistance Program.
-Upgrade interview rooms.
-Rotate, with greater frequency, deputies through the career enhancement positions.
-Develop and institute suicide prevention training for school aged children.
-Work with GSA to refurbish the East County Sheriff's Station.
-Increase efficiency by utilization of SharePoint and other technology.
-Rewrite the Field Training Manual and have it approved by the State of California Peace Officer Standards and Training
(POST) Division.
-Remodel the Moorpark Police Station gym to promote the Sheriff's Wellness Program.

F
-Keeping pace with the technology costs associated with Intelligence Led Policing (cost unknown).
-Collaboration with other law enforcement agencies for the disbursement of realignment funding for addressing serious
habitual offenders in the communities ($92,000 for Sheriff's Office).
-Grant Assistance Program, apply for $99,000 Grant.
-Office of Traffic Safety grant, apply for $500,000.


O
-Continue reduction of property crimes with focus on intelligence led policing through an increase in the use of technology
and intelligence sharing among other local law enforcement agencies.
-More focus on primary collision factor citations at problematic - high volume traffic intersections.
-Appoint a Casa Pacifica Liaison Sergeant to help address the high volume of calls for service and to ensure the quality of
service remains high.
-Ensure more of the senior officers receive the most current training methods regarding techniques for evaluating both
narcotics and driving under the influence investigations.
-Increase the use of social media in all areas to further educate and keep the various communities informed of public safety
issues and of crime prevention measures.

F
-Continued growth of Cal State Channel Islands and the availability of student housing in the City of Camarillo and the
potential for increased calls for service.
-Increasing costs of technology: cameras, computer technology, etc.
-Increased awareness of human trafficking in and among businesses such as massage establishments - increased
inspections for both Code Enforcement and Police Department and the resources used to investigate criminal complaints.


O
-Continue pro-active gang violence interdiction, coupled with strong investigative work in all Sheriff's jurisdictions to reduce/
eliminate gang crimes.
-Work cooperatively with allied law enforcement agencies toward the same purpose.


O
-HQ will more broadly use social media outlets to communicate information to and from communities within Headquarters'
jurisdiction.
-HQ will reduce larceny crimes in North Beaches through the use of bike patrol, foot patrol, electronic signage, social media
and 'Be a Visitor, Not a Victim' pamphlet.
-HQ will increase use of California Vehicle Code to better enhance the quality of life for Headquarters communities/residents
through school zone and school bus enforcement, minor traffic concern resolution, parking enforcement, vehicle abatement,
and driver license check-points (OTS grant funding).
-Utilize the Headquarters' SST as a report writer in order to keep patrol units in the field.
-Fillmore will maximize potential of Explorer Scouts and Citizen's Patrol to expand law enforcement capacities by growth and
increasing visibility in the community.
-Fillmore to continue to enhance anti-crime and anti-graffiti programs through technological improvements with the use of
grant funded cameras.
-Fillmore is looking into the addition of a gang officer to the City of Fillmore's allocation to enhance gang reduction and
prosecution.
-Ojai Public Outreach: Establish Facebook site for station (with Twitter and Nixel additions).
-Ojai will facilitate (2) Citizens Academies and increase pool of Ojai VIPS.
-Ojai PD anticipates the acquisition of a new VIP car and cadet truck.
-SCC will increase our recruitment efforts with job fairs ($1000 recently approved for recruitment costs).
-SCC will continue efforts to fill our current dispatch vacancies. There are two vacancies projected, provided that our two
existing trainees successfully complete training.
-Staff ARTIC with two more positions. There are currently four vacancies. (This goal is wholly dependent on new hires
successfully completing their training.
-Evaluate and revise the current SCC's dispatch training program for efficiency and efficacy, under the watch of new
management.
-Complete a review and revision of the SCC Policy Manual under the direction of new management. Projected completion
date is August 2015.
-Continue with our success in overtime reduction through oversight and policy compliance. In addition, we will continue
overtime reduction by utilizing the Systems Administrator to fill in for supervisor vacancies.
-OES will continue the maintenance of programs and projects that are already proven successful - EPC, ECC, Grant
Development and management, and support for operations.
-Complete the Hazard Mitigation Planning Process.
-Actively seek funding from preparedness and Homeland Security grants.
-Develop EOC specific Training.
-Implement a reform recovery program to include disaster assistance and public assistance.

F
-Lawsuits against emergency management organizations regarding lack of preparedness for access and functional needs
(AFN) clients.
-Costs to maintain current capabilities and resources are increasing while resources at the local, state and federal levels
continue to decrease.
-The emergency management threat environment has expanded to include the cyber environment.
-The development of the Integrated public Alert and Warning System (IPAWS).
-Potential federal budget issues to include funding for Department of Homeland Security programs could negatively impact
grant funded programs.


O
-Seek an amendment to the proposed jurisdiction-wide COA from the FAA to fly the UAS (Qube) in areas with Class D
airspace (Camarillo/ Oxnard).
-Continue to expand microwave project into the Ojai Valley, Simi Valley, and Lockwood Valley.
-Continue to make progress with the .pdf archiving of major crimes case files.
-Verify the backup of major crimes databases and case files to a second offsite server.
-Continue to provide timely and comprehensive investigations into major crimes, employee-related criminal allegations, and
officer involved shootings.
-Replace tactical cameras.
-New marksmen to basic and advanced training.
-Evaluate ballistic blankets for vehicles.
-Additional training with K-9 Unit.Increase stress training.
-Purchase ScanX digital x-ray imaging system to complement current system and complete team's ability to address and
handle an incident involving a Vehicle-Borne Improvised Explosive Device (VBIED) or any other type of large structure or
object that's contents need to be evaluated by the use of x-ray technology.
-Purchase WMDTech SMRT Box x-ray controller to complement previously described system. Provides the ability to
remotely control a Golden Engineering x-ray generator, thus offering increased safety to Bomb Squad personnel during an
incident.
-Upgrade the large response truck's electronics to provide digital video capabilities and a better ability to communicate with
updated systems.
-Purchase General Dynamics Remote Firing Device (RFD), which provides personnel the ability to remotely deploy a charge
and initiate from a greater distance with greater control.
-Send four (4) Bomb Technicians to the A.T.F. sponsored Advanced Explosive Destruction Training (AEDT) course. This
course is completely free with all travel, hotel and meal expenses paid for by Federal funding. Next to HDS, this is the most
important training for technicians on the team. Currently, only two team members have been to this training.
-Upgrade current security system for the Firearms Range/Bomb Bunker. Currently uses older 2G cellular technology and has
not been upgraded since its installation almost ten (10) years ago.
-Increase the level of expertise through training and mentoring.
-Continued training for patrol personnel on DEC, Prop 215, etc.
-Institute briefing training for Butane Honey Oil labs.
-Add additional investigator from outside agencies to increase the effectiveness of the task force.
-Continue to impact the national forest cultivations utilizing an extra-help sergeant and specially trained Detention Services
deputies.
-Finance and secure a dedicated mobile surveillance platform.
-Finance and secure a remote surveillance platform.
-Create regional multiagency investigative unit.
-Develop and deploy Real Time Crime dashboard for crime control.
-Develop and deploy Offender Tracker - Phase 2 mapping offenders in real time.
-Create centralized data base for all phone numbers - Jail, VCIJIS, Cellbrite, data search warrants.
-Research and deploy visual analytical software for all Sheriff Users.

F
-Proposition 47 / Realignment - As more low level offenders are released from prison and / or are not sentenced to county
jail time, there may be an increase is misdemeanor related offenses and that may lead to an increase of felony crimes. This
will increase the work load of station detectives, who will have difficulty keeping pace, closing cases and impact their ability
to handle lower level felonies, which would then increase the workload for Major Crimes.
-Increase in drug overdose cases can actually be attributed to the above item #1. Based on the above as well as a lack of
incentive for drug users to seek treatment via Proposition 36, fewer drug users will be arrested, spend time in jail, and the
overall use will increase, thereby causing an increase in overdoses, and property related (quality of life type crimes). For
Major Crimes and Narcotics that means more time investigating overdose causes that lead to death and these investigations
are often time consuming and require significant resources.
-Diminishing care for mentally ill population that is continually growing and becoming increasingly more violent.
-Statewide drought could cause a significant rise in crop prices and those increases in values are likely to lead to more
thefts. (Agriculture Crimes)
-Eroding public trust continues to negatively impact law enforcement in our efforts to gain community support during criminal
investigations and use of force investigations.


O
- Negotiate a workable facility lease to fill unit needs, while continuing discussions to identify other suitable housing
alternatives.
- Find an acceptable helicopter platform that meets future Fire and Sheriff needs.
- Upgrade all helicopter radio equipment to meet impending 2020 standards.
- Upgrade office area to meet minimum acceptable standards, including housing a new pilot and mechanic.
- Upgrade training plan for pilots.


O
-Install/Upgrade to Windows 7 64-bit on desktop computers.
-Implement Sharepoint site to support department performance evaluations online with workflow.
-Mobile data computer replacement.
-Implement disaster recovery and document procedures.
-Automate business processes for SSB using Sharepoint Workflow.
-Remove existing server wires to the cabling installed overhead in the EOC.
-Implement Detention Services Redbooks online.


O
-Re-Organize the Detention Services Legal Unit Convert the Legal Sergeant into a "Medical Sergeant" position. Our Medical
Inmate population (including psych inmates) has been rapidly growing for years. While we have added line level staff to
assist with the logistics of having more medical and psych inmates, we have not taken a proactive step towards increasing
supervision and monitoring of this portion of the inmate population. This population tends to have a high level of acute care
issues, behavioral problems, decompensation of mental stability and other issues that result in a higher than normal level of
litigation when critical incidents take place. Replace the Legal Unit Sergeant with a Senior Program Administrator, this will
result in salary and benefit savings, allow for a longer term incumbent to improve historical perspectives and record, and
increase specialized training in the area of liability defense.
-Institute a methodical and scheduled audit process in the Legal Unit for all of Detention Services operations to ensure that
processes and programs are examined for effectiveness and sound business practices, and build ownership and deadlines
into the process to increase responsiveness and accountability.

F
-Realignment continues to have a significant impact on jail operations and budget.
-Anticipated reductions in state funding present members of the CCP with challenges in terms of fund allocation and program
development.
-Defining recidivism and developing an effective and acceptable monitoring tool is essential to forecasting funding levels
from the state.
-Work with IT Services to develop a web-based monitoring tool.
-Monitor and address potential funding challenges created by the Federal Communications Commission ruling on Inmate
phone Service commissions.
-Monitor impacts of Proposition 47 on Detention Services Operations.
-Implement new contract for Inmate Medical Services.


O
a. Provide leadership and administrative support to program operations to ensure success in achieving the Agency's
mission, vision, and values.
b. Prioritize mandated services and successful programs, while seeking the most efficient manner in which to deliver them.
c. Continue to expand the Evidence Based Practices model throughout the Agency.
d. Develop a Quality Assurance Strategic Implementation Plan to include a continuous improvement system throughout the
Agency.
e. Continue to work with our justice partners to ensure the services Probation contributes to the system address the needs of
our partners.
f. Strive to maintain critical programs for our juvenile offenders. This mission will help regulate the Juvenile Facilities'
population, contain costs, and allow us to provide services that will positively impact the youth we serve, thus resulting in
reduced recidivism and costly out-of-home placements.
g. Identify technology opportunities that increase operational efficiency and effectiveness.
h. Provide timely financial status reports to ensure the Executive Committee has the information necessary for making good
business decisions.

F
After approximately 40 years of operations, the Probation Agency will be closing down the Work Furlough custody program.
The plan is to have the facility-based program closed by the end of September 2015, to be replaced by a community-based
program utilizing electronic monitoring/Global Positioning System (EM/GPS) home detention, and a day reporting model for
the direct delivery of rehabilitative services to the inmates. We believe this new model will continue to allow appropriate
inmates to serve their sentences while remaining employed and will expand the type and intensity of programming available
to the clientele who need it.
Our administrative and Work Furlough management staff have been working with the County Executive Office (CEO) for
several years to try and make Work Furlough a more viable custody option. Over the past 15 years, we have experienced
changes in state law and local sentencing practices which have driven the population to the point where we rarely break 100
and had a low of 38 this past holiday season. Additionally, while program costs have gone up, the recession and other
economic factors have had a significant impact on our inmates and fewer of them are willing to pay the fees to participate in
the program.
At the request of the CEO and with their approval, we have agreed to develop the new program structure discussed above to
handle a capacity no smaller than 50 inmates, so as to not impact the rest of the county's custody operations. We believe
this will only be a start, as a revised program without the 24/7 staffing and facility budget will be more cost effective and the
programming options will be appropriate for a wider range of our clientele. Examples of those who could benefit range from
those newly released from custody to those needing informal sanctions like structured programming, EM supervision, or
some time on a Work Release crew doing community service. We hope to make the best use of this change to better serve
our clientele and make good use of the taxpayer money we are spending.
A workgroup has been established with the responsibility for developing plans for the reallocation of staff, making
recommendations on program content, staffing and location, and working with the Work Release and Administrative Services
units to determine if they will be staying in Camarillo or moving elsewhere. We will not be laying off any staff. Our peace
officer and civilian/support staff will be integrated into other units and we will work with the CEO to avoid the need to have
any of our support staff transfer to other county agencies. Our justice partners have been advised of this change and of our
plans for the future.
Change of this magnitude can be exciting and scary, and many of us have a fond spot in our heart for Work Furlough. In its
heyday, it was a useful and purposeful program that kept families from financial ruin while the breadwinner served custody
time. We can still reach that goal and are excited about the new possibilities ahead.


O
a. Ensure that facility infrastructure remains up-to-date and provides a safe setting for minors in our custody. The following
measures have been planned to improve safety and security for minors:
b. The Facility Inspection Team (FIT) has been fully implemented. A CSO III from the Housing Units was reassigned to
Operations to assist with compliance checks and inspections. The CSO III will also be responsible for coordinating regular
inspections by the FIT team to ensure the facility maintains a high level of cleanliness and will help keep expenses down by
ensuring that regular upkeep and maintenance of the facility is maintained.
c. Coordinate with GSA on scheduling interior painting for the facility and the Detention corridor.
d. Implement a new tracking system to increase the speed in which maintenance requests are delivered and processed.
Currently, we use a paper system in which staff hand write maintenance requests and place them in a mailbox slot for
delivery to Operations. GSA allowed Operations access into their work orders system resulting in expedited submission and
processing of the maintenance requests with the new tracking system. Maintenance requests will be submitted to GSA within
24 hours of receiving the request. The next step in this process would be to develop the electronic submission of the
maintenance requests to further reduce the submission time to GSA.

F
a. We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial condition of the JF-Operations
Unit.
b. We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.


O
Juvenile Facilities Housing
a. Continue to hire CSOs and/or incorporate the CSO pool from Work Furlough to meet staffing requirements and overtime
budget targets.
b. Provide programming to juveniles detained pending Court proceedings, primarily through Girls Inc. of Carpinteria, and the
Volunteers-in-Probation Program, which includes numerous volunteers that provide lessons in music, chess, science, etc.
Said youth will also be offered evidence based programming provided through ART, Gender Specific Programming,
Interactive Journaling, and Alcohol and Drug Counseling. 171 youth participated in drug and alcohol recovery groups lead by
Palmer Drug and Alcohol Program (PDAP) staff. 74 additional youth participated in individual sessions with PDAP
counselors.
c. Send 2-4 Secure Detention staff to train-the-trainer sessions from the Change Companies so full implementation of the
interactive journaling program can be achieved this fiscal year.
d. Continue to improve on and implement DMC/JDAI practices, policies and procedures that strive to reduce
disproportionality, for both detention and commitment populations.
e.Continue to provide juveniles serving Court-ordered commitments with evidence based programming that addresses their
criminogenic needs and comprehensive transitional services that will assist them upon release, back into the community.
f. Continue to provide ART and train additional staff to facilitate ART training.
g. Expand Paxton-Patterson program to include more detention youth, including appropriately screened/approved level 1
youth and graduates.
h. Continuation of Baby Elmo, now known as Just Beginning, which began in April, 2014.
i. JF staff will be chosen to attend the MHTCC-JJ train-the-trainer sessions. Upon completion, the expert trainers will train all
sworn JF staff in this curriculum.
Youth Offender Block Grant
a. Provide juveniles with vocational skills to be utilized upon release from the program.
b. Reduce recidivism.
c. Continue to increase programming to juveniles not participating in the Leaders Program. Programming will involve
additional male youth housed in the same housing area as the youth participating in the Leaders Program potentially
doubling the number of youth receiving services.
d. Provide comprehensive transitional services for youth returning to the community.
e. Refer more incarcerated teen youth to the Just Beginning program.
f. Purchase additional Paxton-Patterson modules to include: electrical, roof framing, hand tools, concrete, and wall framing
instruction.
g. Expand the current Chess program which is currently limited to staff participation with youth and seek volunteer help
teaching/expanding Chess to a larger variety of JF youth.
h. Procure a contract with Dr. Lee Reid to provide one-on-one sex offender treatment to select JF youth.

F
Juvenile Facilities Housing
a. We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial condition of the JF Detention or
Commitment Services.
b. In FY 2015-16 we will continue to focus efforts in filling behind position vacancies and increasing the efficiency of staffing
patterns in order to minimize the use of overtime, which includes staffing CSO II relief positions.
c. We will continue with current programming, while seeking to improve and expand those services offered to youth that will
focus on their transition back into the community and reduce recidivism.
d. We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government. This includes revisions to Juvenile Title 15 Regulations which were adopted and published in April 2014.
Youth Offender Block Grant
a. We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial condition of the JF Detention or
Commitment Services.
b. In FY 2015-16 we will continue to focus efforts in filling behind position vacancies and increasing the efficiency of staffing
patterns in order to minimize the use of overtime, which includes staffing CSO II relief positions.
c. We will continue with current programming, while seeking to improve and expand those services offered to youth that will
focus on their transition back into the community and reduce recidivism.
d. We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government. This includes revisions to Juvenile Title 15 Regulations which were adopted and published in April 2014.


O
a. Provide the court with a thorough and detailed intake report so they may make informed decisions on suitable releases
into the community.
b. Appropriately screen (through the use of a Risk Assessment Instrument) all youth brought to the JF to determine if
detention is necessary or if the youth can be safely supervised in the community using either community confinement or EM.
The screening of youth based upon a Risk Assessment Instrument (RAI) is a strategy which complies with EBP.
c. Intake will continue to assist with reviewing all bookings and making recommendations for enhancements of VCPA
information technology for collection of JDAI/ RED data to assist with reduction strategies.
d. Continue to keep the JF population down by keeping the number of youth on EM at a monthly average of approximately
40-50 youth. Continue efforts to provide resources to youth while on EM to increase their success in the program.
e. Continue to conduct daily field contacts of EM minors in the program, but to utilize staff in a more efficient manner so the
EM team is able to increase the number of weekly field contacts by 10% this year.

F
a. We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial condition of the JF Juvenile
Intake and Community Confinement Unit.
b. We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.
This includes revisions to Juvenile Title 15 Regulations, which were adopted and published in April 2014. While there are no
significant changes known, JF policies and procedures will be reviewed and compared to ensure compliance.


O
a. Prepare quality pre-disposition reports in a timely manner which are consistent with Judicial Council Rules and local
Superior Court processes.
b. Provide Courts with knowledgeable and resourceful court officers who actively assist judges in Court.
c. Accurately and thoroughly screen and assess all youth and their families to determine the most appropriate level and type
of intervention needed to eliminate risk factors while supporting existing protective factors.
d. Secure reparation for victims.
e. Protect society.
f. Encourage minors to lead law-abiding lives and deter them from future criminality.

F
a. We are in the process of changing the risks and needs assessment tool used to develop case plans. There will be a cost
to train staff on the new instrument, and to implement and validate the tool.
b. This fiscal year we will be consolidating the two Juvenile Investigations Units into one unit thus allowing the Agency to
better allocate resources.
c. We will continue to closely monitor and respond to changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.
d. Changes to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 709 and the passing of AB2212 requires counties to develop a process
to assist youth in obtaining/restoring competency. The change in law made no consideration for the real cost of Competency
Restoration Services. At this time, it is unknown which county agency will be responsible for covering these costs.


O
a. Coordinate with IT services to implement and interface our risk and needs assessment tool with our case management
system in an effort to streamline operations. Additionally, expand the use of mobile devices to increase staff operational
efficiencies and safety, as well as communications between staff in the field and their supervisors in the office.
b. Expand the use of evidence-based practices to streamline and improve the quality of supervision services.
c. Maintain programs that reduce recidivism to ensure our custody populations do not increase.
d. Continue to emphasize efforts in collecting victim restitution fees.
e. Continue to streamline fiscal items such as contracts, letters to the Board of Supervisors, and purchase order requests.
f. Begin a one month pilot program to test the viability of the Matrix on one caseload per unit with the goal of expanding its
use to all caseloads within the Juvenile Field Division the following month.

F
a. Our Agency is working very diligently with our vendor, Justice Benefits, Inc. (JBI), to ensure compliance with Title IV-E
requirements and maximize Title IV-E revenues. Training provided by JBI has proven to reduce the amount of coding errors
that were being made.
b. A key component of field supervision is to conduct unannounced home visits of high risk offenders to complete
compliance checks and search for contraband. This operation is inherently unpredictable and dangerous. Officers who
supervise high risk offenders currently carry pepper spray as a non-lethal force option. To provide officers with a more
effective non-lethal weapon to defend themselves in the field, explore the option of expanding Tasers as a force option.
c. We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


O
a. Continue to work with partners to ensure the safety of youth in placement.
b. Continue to focus efforts on family reunification, placing youth in the least restrictive setting (including adoption, legal
guardianship or placement with a relative), and provide independent living skills and transitional housing to those where
family reunification is not an option.
c. Return the youth to a safe home and complete all necessary steps to finalize the permanent placement of the minor.

F
a. In an effort to increase family engagement, we plan to add a Peer Mentor to augment services for placement youth.
b. We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


O
The objective of the JJCPA program is to provide services that will have the following results:
a. Reduction in the arrest rate
b. Reduction in the incarceration rate
c. Reduction in the probation violation rate
d. Increase in the probation completion rate
e. Increase in the restitution completion rate
f. Increase in the community service completion rate
g. Reduction in new law violation
h. Reduction in time to first arrests
i. Reduction in arrests for violent offenses

F
a. ROPP will be expanded to incorporate all cities within Ventura County. This will allow for more youth to receive services
and will increase our referral numbers to the Evening Reporting Center. The remaining JJCPA programs will remain
unchanged.
b. The THRIVE program will provide additional Parent Project classes that will be offered throughout the County in both
English and Spanish.
c. An RFP for a JJCPA program evaluator is currently pending. This evaluator will assist with identifying program gaps, may
suggest programmatic changes that need to occur and will provide a venue for program staff on how to self-evaluate their
programs thereafter. The Juvenile Justice Master Plan will also be updated by the evaluator.
d. We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


O
a. Accurately and thoroughly screen and assess all defendants to determine the most appropriate level and type of
intervention needed to eliminate risk factors while supporting rehabilitation and community safety.
b. Prepare quality pre-sentence reports in a timely manner and in accordance with Judicial Council Rules.
c. Protect society.
d. Encourage the defendant to lead a law-abiding life and deter him/her from future offenses.
e. Prevent new crimes by the defendant by isolating him/her for the period of incarceration.
f. Secure reparation for victims.

F
a. We will begin Evidence Based Sentencing by administering the ORAS during the interview with the defendant and
incorporating the results in our pre-sentence reports. This will allow us to accurately and thoroughly screen and assess all
defendants to determine the most appropriate level and type of intervention needed to eliminate risk factors, thus providing
the Court with the best quality pre-sentence report to make judgement. This new process will increase the amount of time
necessary to complete the interviews, which may require additional resources.
b. We will continue to closely monitor and respond to changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.


O
a. Implement the newly created client survey which targets performance measures of services delivered.
b. Exceed targeted goal of more than 70% completion rate of ORAS assessments within 45 days of intake on moderate to
high risk cases.
c. Exceed targeted goal of more than 70% completion rate of the SARA assessment within 45 days of intake.
d. Integrate a formalized graduated response matrix.
e. Implement the Incentives Program for clients. Including the second phase which allows clients to accumulate points for
bigger incentives.
f. Incorporate the Incentives Program within the database system to provide fiscal accountability of funds and to track the
use and effectiveness of the program.
g. Incorporate a mapping system within the database system that would allow officers to easily monitor clients.
h. Validate the ORAS assessment tools for the Ventura County population.
i. Implement a comprehensive training program and coaching system that integrates both Motivational Interviewing
techniques and cognitive behavioral interventions.
j. Incorporate a crime analyst (researcher) to the PRAS unit to enhance quality control of data collection, organization, and
analysis to improve data-driven decision making.
k. Expand the referrals to the Core Connections partnership in an effort to enhance the volume and types of services
available to the AB109 population as part of an ongoing effort to reduce recidivism rates.
l. To increase consistency in casework and field training, Training Modules were developed which include an orientation
check list, formal training modules and performance practicums for evaluation. These manuals have been developed and are
currently under review and will be implemented.

F
a. The new AB 109 funding formula is in effect this coming fiscal year. Significant changes to this formula reduced the
allocation to the county by approximately $2,000,000 for fiscal year 2014-2015 and another $1,000,000 for fiscal year
2015-2016. In response to the fiscal year 2015-2016 reduction, Probation cut $240,000 from its budget request.
b. The sources that contribute to the population served by this funding are those released from prison (PRCS) and those
sentenced to felony jail locally by the courts and released on Mandatory Supervision (MS). It is anticipated that in Fiscal Year
2015-2016, PRCS releases will remain constant. However, court sentencing practices may change under Penal Code 1170
(h)(5)(A) which as of January 1, 2015, the court must order Mandatory Supervision unless it is found not to be suitable in the
interest of justice. This may increase the number of offenders released to Probation on MS after serving a felony jail
sentence.
c. Effective January 1, 2015, Assembly Bill 2199 allows Probation to collect for supervision fees for offenders supervised
under Mandatory Supervision, subject to the offender's ability to pay. It is anticipated that the collecting of supervision fees
from this population may modestly increase revenue.
d. We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.


O
a. Continue re-organization efforts to reduce targeted caseload sizes to further implement effective EBP practices.
b. Implement the newly created client survey which targets performance measures of services delivered.
c. Exceed targeted goal of more than 70% completion rate of ORAS assessments within 45 days of intake on moderate to
high risk cases.
d. Exceed targeted goal of more than 70% completion rate of the SARA assessment within 45 days of intake.
e. Integrate a formalized graduated response matrix.
f. Implement the Incentives Program for clients. Including the second phase which allows clients to accumulate points for
bigger incentives.
g. Incorporate the Incentives Program within the database system to provide fiscal accountability of funds and to track the
use and effectiveness of the program.
h. Incorporate a mapping system within the database system that would allow officers to easily monitor clients.
i. Validate the ORAS assessment tools for the Ventura County population.
j. Implement a comprehensive training program and coaching system that integrates both Motivational Interviewing
techniques and cognitive behavioral interventions.
k. Facilitate the evaluation of the Evidence-Based Probation Supervision Program (EBPSP) through the National Council on
Crime and Delinquency.
l. Work collaboratively with Batterer's Intervention providers to adopt and implement an evidence-based curriculum for
domestic violence clients.
m. A key component of field supervision is entering into the homes of high risk offenders unannounced to conduct
compliance checks and search for contraband. This operation is inherently unpredictable and dangerous. Officers who
supervise high risk offenders currently carry pepper spray as a non-lethal force option. To provide officers with a more
effective non-lethal weapon to defend themselves in the field, explore the option of expanding Tasers as a force option for
unarmed officers.

F
a. The California Community Corrections Performance Incentives Act (Senate Bill 678) was enacted in 2009 to support
more-successful probation supervision practices for felony offenders. The legislation established a system of performancebased
funding for county probation departments to implement and maintain evidence-based practices in adult felony
probation supervision. SB 678 is structured to save state General Fund monies while reducing criminal behavior and
alleviating state prison overcrowding. Traditionally, this funding source has been unpredictable as it is based on the number
of clients sentenced to state prison and felony jail. The Chief Probation Officers of California (CPOC) is working with the
state to improve the formula used to allocate funds which would provide for a predictable base allocation annually. It is
anticipated that if the proposed formula matrix is adopted, that revenues would increase by approximately $520,000.
b. On November 7, 2014, Proposition 47 was voted into law. Prop 47 reduces the penalty for several nonviolent offenses that
were previously sentenced as a felony down to a misdemeanor. Prop 47 makes this change in sentencing retroactive. The
reduction in the offense level has impacted sentencing options ordered by the Court. Although it is too early to know the true
impact of Prop 47, there has been a decrease in offenders convicted of a Prop 47 eligible crime sentenced to probation
supervision and to the Drug Court program.
c. We are currently working collaboratively with the Courts to restructure the supervision standards for Driving Under the
Influence (DUI) clients. Part of the restructure under consideration involves an increase in supervision of multiple DUI
offenders. This could increase costs depending on the level of supervision. Another restructure under review is the
supervision fees for first-time DUI offenders. Currently, first-time DUI offenders are ordered to pay a one-time supervision fee
of $794. The restructure would involve changing from a one-time fee to a monthly fee of $52. It is unknown what the fiscal
impact of this change in fee structure would be at this time.
d. We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.


O
a. Develop a custody alternative to replace the Work Furlough program.
b. Increase the number of participants in the Work Release program by 10%.

F
WF/WR/DW revenues continue to be impacted by the current economic downturn, which has affected our clients' ability to
pay, and has resulted in an increase in the unemployed inmate population.
Due to the decrease in revenue-generating inmates and corresponding increased cost to the General Fund, the Work
Furlough Program will be closing. It is anticipated that the closure will occur no later than September 30, 2015. Probation is
committed to continuing to provide custody alternatives to the Courts. As such, custody alternative such as an electronic
monitoring program and day reporting center are being considered. The specifics of the alternative custody programs,
including staffing patterns, programming and operations, have not been established, therefore the budget for these programs
is a work in progress.


O
a. Hire only the best applicants that pass a rigorous background investigation. This ensures that the Agency retains only
those applicants that are of the highest integrity, possess superior interpersonal skills, and exhibit good decision making and
judgment.
b. Complete Administrative Investigations in a manner that respects the rights of employees while protecting the Agency and
the County from liability. Thorough Administrative Investigations enable the Agency to take appropriate action concerning
employees that do not comply with Agency policies and procedures and exonerate the wrongly accused.
c. Enhance the Agency's image and increase employee morale by conducting swearing-in ceremonies, and keeping the
Agency website up to date.
d. Provide employees with initial basic skills and build a foundation for ongoing learning. Job skills, enforcement activities,
and casework services are core and essential to the STU training program. This approach not only compliments and
supports the Agency's mission, but reinforces the concept that our employees constitute our most valuable resource for
accomplishing our mission.
e. HR strives to establish and maintain effective working relationships with management, employees, employee
representatives, staff in other agencies and the public.
f. Monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.

F
a. Currently, the State's Standards and Training for Corrections (STC) is included in the Governor's budget for FY
2015-2016. As such, there are no estimated cuts to the Agency's staff training program. The Ventura County Probation
Agency is projected to receive approximately $182,780 this fiscal year for staff training and development.


O
-Go Live July 1, 2015 (VCFMS).
-Post implementation support.
-Envision Phase for CGI Inventory module.
-Envision Phase for CGI Cash Management Module.


O
1. Hall of Administration: Thermal Energy Storage System Repairs; Department Directory Replacement; Board Room
Upgrades; ITSD Computer Room Heat Exchanger
2. Pre-Trial Detention Facility: Kitchen Freezer/Refrigerator Reconfiguration
3. Pre-Trial Detention Facility Annex: Ground Floor, ADA Restroom Upgrade
4. Pre-Trial Detention Facility, Crime Lab: HVAC Master Plan, Phase 2, Property Room; Replace Air Handler Unit
5. Government Center: Replace Exterior Water Valves; Upgrade Cameras to HD Digital; Tree Trimming
6. Todd Road Jail: Exterior Waterproofing; Public Parking Lot Upgrade
7. Juvenile Facility: Interior and Exterior Painting, Phase 2; Chiller Epoxy Coating; Retrofitting Housing Rec Yard Fencing;
Upgrade HVAC Controls Program, Phase 2
8. Partridge Bldg: Upgrade Fire Life Safety System
9. East Valley Sheriff's Station: Hot Water Heater Upgrade; Exterior Painting; Interior Painting; Fire Life Safety System
Upgrade
10. Gonzales Road: Roof Coating
11. Animal Services: Building Ventilation
12. Saticoy, GSA: Card Access System Upgrade
13. Vanguard: Restroom Upgrades
14. Hall of Justice: Replace Three Fulton Boilers
15. 669 County Square Drive: Restrooms Upgrades
16. 646 County Square Drive: Restrooms Upgrades
17. Williams Dr: Exterior Door Upgrade


O(1) Continue to monitor Piru Housing Conservation Program homeowner compliance.

F
(1) Several "cleanup bills" to clarify and revise the language of AB 1x 26 are under consideration by the State Legislature. If
enacted, they may impact the operations and actions of the County Successor Housing Agency.


O
(1) Maintain high-quality HOME program performance.
(2) Conduct annual desktop monitoring of all HOME properties still in the affordability period.
(3) Conduct annual onsite monitoring of all project properties covered by affordability periods per HOME Rule schedule.
(4) Monitor all new projects during the construction phase ensuring compliance with all HOME regulations.

F
(1) New HOME rules, found at 24 CFR 92.107 indicate that HUDmay (emphasis added) revoke a Participating Jurisdiction's
designation if a formula allocation falls below $750,000 (or $500,000 when Congress appropriates less than $1.5 million for
this program) for three consecutive years or below $625,000 (or below $410,000 as above) for two consecutive years. Given
increased vulnerability, enhanced requirements for regulatory compliance and reduced funding, it may be prudent to explore
reinstating the HOME Consortium with the City of Ventura which is experiencing similar challenges. Continued reduction in
HOME funding will have increasing adverse effects on availability of funds for projects within the county.


O
(1) Continue to improve system processes for centralized CDBG grant program administration.
(2) Encourage more efficient use of funding by focusing allocations to high priority projects and to subrecipients with the
administrative capacity to comply with reporting requirements and use funds in a timely manner.
(3) Align funding recommendations with  in the Updated Ten Year Strategy to End Homelessness adopted by the
Board in January 2013.
(4) Complete the preparation and facilitate the adoption of the 2015-2019 Consolidated Plan, and 2015-16 Annual Action
Plan, as required by HUD.

F
(1) Continued reduction in CDBG funding will have increasing adverse effects on availability of funds for county and city
programs in the entitlement area.
(2) In order to ensure the most effective use of limited resources, greater emphasis will need to be placed upon performance
outcomes, necessitating overhaul of contracts and enhanced monitoring and reporting.
(3) It is anticipated that greater regional coordination and collaboration with other Entitlement jurisdictions will improve
operational efficiencies for both staff and non-profit entities receiving funding under this program.


O
(1) Facilitate the implementation of the Emergency Solutions Grant Program under new HEARTH Act requirements, whereby
programs and activities funded are aligned with the Ten Year Strategy to End Homelessness and produce positive lasting
outcomes for persons served directly or indirectly with this funding.
(2) Conduct program reviews and perform program monitoring.
(3) Facilitate the administration of the Continuum of Care to ensure new requirements as described in the HEARTH Act are
instituted. Activities to include, but not be limited to: developing programs, policies and procedures; performing extensive
outreach to entitlements and organizations who encounter the homeless population; endorse the recalibrated Ten Year
Strategy to End Homelessness; and conducting monitoring to ensure program compliance.

F
(1) The uncertainty in annual allocation of ESG funds continues to pose difficulties for both applicants and staff when
soliciting applications for HUD funds. ESG funds cannot be depended upon and provide the only source of funds dedicated
to emergency shelter services for our homeless community.


O
(1) Continue to improve system processes for CoC grant program administration.
(2) Encourage more efficient use of funding by focusing allocations to high priority projects and to subrecipients with the
administrative capacity to comply with reporting requirements and use funds in a timely manner.
(3) Align funding recommendations with  in the Updated Ten Year Strategy to End Homelessness adopted by the
Board in January 2013.

F
(1) CoC will need to implement the Coordinated Entry system in order to be competitive for additional funding.
(2) In order to ensure the most effective use of limited resources, greater emphasis will need to be placed upon performance
outcomes, necessitating overhaul of contracts and enhanced monitoring and reporting.


O
1. Increase overall collections for the families we serve while providing excellent customer service.
2. Continue to focus resources that support the business strategies and "Key Initiatives"
3. Continue to meet all State compliance and data reliability requirements
4. Respond to customer inquiries within 3 days

F
The current economic situation may pose challenges to our goal of increasing child support collections in the upcoming year,
however, VCDCSS will continue to pursue every possible avenue to support children and families.


O
1. The VCDCSS Call Center staff is committed to responding to calls within 60 seconds.
2. To provide full resolution for 90-95% of the calls at the first point of contact.


O
Given the limited funds available, only funding to the District Attorney for vertical prosecution is included in the Preliminary
Budget as an objective for this Fund.


O
Provide education opportunities to the public on the benefits of spaying and neutering companion animals. Find new ways to
augment this fund with donor contributions and grants.

F
This program is funded through Food and Agriculture Code sections 30804.7(a) and 31751.7(a), which state that owners of
non-spayed or unneutered dogs or cats that are impounded by a county shelter shall be fined. If these mandates were to be
repealed, funds would not be available for spay and neuter programs such as those described above.


O
FY 2015-16 
Community Services and Supports Youth and Family
a.Expand the implementation of the Promotoras Project to increase enrollment in the Fillmore Community Project and to
reduce stigma within the community.
b.For the juvenile mental health court, increase percentage of clients successfully completing the program by 15%, and
increase family therapy interventions by 10%.

F
The FY 2015-16 preliminary budget balances projected revenue with anticipated increases in expenses. Unanticipated
reductions in state funding could challenge levels of service.
Revenue was projected using the Governors budget, historical trends for services, and includes the utilization of MHSA
unspent funds.
Projected expenditure increases include anticipated increases in Professional Fees (Doctors).


O
Prevention and Early Intervention
a.Promotora Model Program rolled out county-wide.
b.Expansion of EDIPP East County and Santa Clara Valley.
c.Spanish-language radio mental health and stigma reduction campaign.
d.Triple P Teen Seminar rolled out county-wide.
e.Increase parent and foster parent services in Triple P.

F
The FY 2015-16 preliminary budget balances projected revenue with anticipated increases in expenses. Unanticipated
reductions in state funding could challenge levels of service.
Revenue was projected using the Governors budget, historical trends for services, and includes the utilization of MHSA
unspent funds.
Projected expenditure increases include anticipated increases in Professional Fees (Doctors).


O
Workforce Education and Training
a. Implement PMHNP grant, increasing number of PMHNP placements in VCBH system from 1-2 annually to 14 in FY
2015-16; measurement of program will include documenting hours of supervision provided by department psychiatrist
supervisors, collecting feedback from clinic sites and school faculty regarding the program; documenting number of hours of
clinical services provided by PMHNP students.
b.Establish protocol and structure for sustaining Evidence Based Practice (EBP) training and implementation throughout
the department; measurement of project will include charting types of EBP's that will continue to be implemented; tracking
the number of staff receiving training; documenting plan to ensure sustainability of EBP.

The FY 2015-16 preliminary budget balances projected revenue with anticipated increases in expenses. Unanticipated
reductions in state funding could challenge levels of service.
Revenue was projected using the Governors budget, historical trends for services, and includes the utilization of MHSA
unspent funds.
Projected expenditure increases include anticipated increases in Professional Fees (Doctors).


Capital Facilities and IT
a. Implementation of ICD-10 Diagnostic Protocols
b. Implementation of client document scanning & storage
c. Implementation of selected Data Analytics solution

The FY 2015-16 preliminary budget balances projected revenue with anticipated increases in expenses. Unanticipated
reductions in state funding could challenge levels of service.
Revenue was projected using the Governors budget, historical trends for services, and includes the utilization of MHSA
unspent funds.
Projected expenditure increases include anticipated increases in Professional Fees (Doctors).


Innovation
a. Fully implement the Quality of Life Improvement project to include evaluation of outcomes.
b. Fully implement Health Navigation project to include evaluation of outcomes.

The FY 2015-16 preliminary budget balances projected revenue with anticipated increases in expenses. Unanticipated
reductions in state funding could challenge levels of service.
Revenue was projected using the Governors budget, historical trends for services, and includes the utilization of MHSA
unspent funds.
Projected expenditure increases include anticipated increases in Professional Fees (Doctors).


Administration
a. Create and implement an updated 3-Year State MHSA plan, ensuring long-term program sustainability, stakeholder input,
Oand health equity.

The FY 2015-16 preliminary budget balances projected revenue with anticipated increases in expenses. Unanticipated
reductions in state funding could challenge levels of service.
Revenue was projected using the Governors budget, historical trends for services, and includes the utilization of MHSA
unspent funds.
FProjected expenditure increases include anticipated increases in Professional Fees (Doctors).


O
Community Services and Supports Adults
a.Continue to improve productivity and Medi-Cal penetration rate.
b.Reduce the number of individuals placed in out-of-county IMDs through the use of intensive, wraparound services.
c.Continue the implementation of evidence-based treatment and improve fidelity.
d.Fully implement the EHR.
e. Continuous NIATx process improvement projects to improve client access, engagement, and retention.

The FY 2015-16 preliminary budget balances projected revenue with anticipated increases in expenses. Unanticipated
reductions in state funding could challenge levels of service.
Revenue was projected using the Governors budget, historical trends for services, and includes the utilization of MHSA
unspent funds.
Projected expenditure increases include anticipated increases in Professional Fees (Doctors).


(1) Business and Industry Goal: Meet the workforce needs of high-demand sectors in the Ventura County regional economy.
(2) Adults Goal: Increase the number of adults in the Ventura County region who obtain a marketable and industryrecognized
credential or degree and are placed in a related sector job, with a special emphasis on unemployed,
underemployed, low-skilled, low-income, veterans, individuals with disabilities, and other at-risk populations.
(3) Youth Goal: Increase the number of high school students in the Ventura County region who graduate and prepare for
post-secondary vocational training, further education, and/or a career, with an emphasis on at-risk youth and those from lowincome
communities.
(4) System Alignment and Accountability Goal: Support workforce development system alignment, service integration and
Ocontinuous improvement in the Ventura County region, using data to support evidence-based policymaking.

F
(1) The level of Federal funding and the allocation of these funds by the State to the County are uncertain. The Agency will
manage to the actual level of funding received.


O
(1) Ensure that pre-apprenticeship, and apprenticeship training is coordinated with one or more apprenticeship programs
registered by the U.S. Department of Labor Employment Training Administration and approved by the California Department
of Industrial Relations of Apprenticeship Standards for the occupation and geographic area.
(2) Prioritize training for occupations in priority industry sectors in the regional economy-training which results in completion
and attainment of a degree and/or other credentials valued by priority-sector employers within the region.
(3) Emphasize career pathways as a framework through which learners can connect their skills and interests with viable
career options.
(4) Provide opportunities to help adults make transitions relating to education, training, and/or employment.
(5) Collaborate with key stakeholders to establish a regional workforce and economic development partnership to leverage,
braid, and/or obtain resources that will sustain the operation of regional workforce and economic development networks over
time.
(6) Partner on strategies to reduce the overall high school dropout rate in the Ventura County region by one percent.
(7) Partner to develop and execute strategies to re-engage disconnected youth.
(8) Partner with employers, educators and others to help youth understand career pathway options and workforce pipelines.
(9) Partner to encourage youth to focus on attainment of post-secondary degrees and other credentials important to sector
employers in the regional labor market.
(10) Partner to ensure that every youth has the opportunity to develop and achieve career goals through education and/or
workforce training.
(11) Partner to promote youth services system collaboration to better serve youth with barriers and connect them to
education and employment.

F
(1) The level of Federal funding and the allocation of these funds by the State to the County are uncertain. The Agency will
manage to the actual level of funding received.


(1) Adopt an E version option for the recruitment and training of providers
(2) Hold the 9th Annual Provider conference
(3) Increase provider enrollment numbers by 8%

F
(1) Potential for increased cost as a result of the federal overtime rule. The results of an appeal decision related to Fair Labor
Standards Act for IHSS providers remains pending.
(2) The need for providers continues to increase based on the 8% caseload growth of In Home Support Services (IHSS)
caseload. The Affordable Health Care act increased the eligibility for services by a population not previously served.
(3) Any changes in Provider wages negotiated by the County will result in adjustment(s) to the County's MOE for the
program.


O
(1)Children & Family Services (CFS) will continue to actively monitor and improve strategies that are intended to decrease
the rate of domestic violence and spousal abuse.
(2)CFS domestic violence contractors intend to maintain level services to include but not limited to the following:
- Provide a shelter 24 hours/day, seven days/week in an undisclosed and secure location.
- Provide 24 hours/day, seven days/week telephone hotline for crisis calls.
- Provide temporary housing and food facilities.
- Provide psychological support and peer counseling in accordance with Section 1037.1 of the Evidence Code.
- Provide referrals to existing services in the community.
- Provide a drop-in center that operates during normal business hours to assist victims of domestic violence who have a
need for support services.
- Provide arrangements for school age children to continue their education during their stay at the domestic violence shelterbased
program.
- Provide emergency transportation as feasible (vehicles and drivers shall be available to transport victims and their children
to appropriate services as needed with a maximum two (2) hour response to such calls for assistance).
- Provide referrals to legal assistance and medical care.
- Provide information regarding other available social services.
- Work with social services agencies, schools, and law enforcement agencies in an advocacy capacity for those served by
the domestic violence shelter-based programs.
- Provide services to, or assist in referring, physically disabled victims of domestic violence to services in the community
where assistance may be obtained.

F
(1) We anticipate level funding to be available for the domestic violence services as linked to the county marriage license
fees and court fines.


O
1. Complete construction of the Donlon Road Realignment project.
2. Complete Priority 1 and 2 roads in the multi-year paving plan.
3. Complete a review and first draft update to the Encroachment ordinance and procedures.
4. Complete traffic signal modification at Rice Avenue and Channel Islands Blvd.
5. Complete the implementation of the new version of MaintStar. Develop dashboard metrics that will be available to the
Department and Agency Director.
6. Complete traffic calming study for the Newbury Park area.
7. Initiate and complete study of the Santa Rosa Road synchronized signals.
8. Initiate the "Workplace Evaluation" process for the Operation and Maintenance Division's Activity Guidelines. Develop a
schedule for analysis and implementation.
9. Complete closeout of the Lewis Road project.
10. Complete design and construct bike lanes along Santa Anna Road.

F
1. Uncertainty caused by the lack of long term Federal Transportation Program and reduced gas tax revenue.
2. Additional regulatory requirements continue to increase cost of operations. These requirements include the Countywide
Municipal Storm Water Requirements (NPDES), Diesel Particulate measures, and others. These additional costs will reduce
Road funds available for road maintenance, repair and operations.

Out Year 
O
Next fiscal year, the County Stormwater Program will continue to work closely with the Ventura Countywide Stormwater
Quality Management Program and the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board in adoption of the new 5-year
Ventura Municipal Stormwater Permit. The County Stormwater Program plans to provide overall program inter-County
agency coordination, with the following  and goals planned:
1. Participate and assist with Permit renewal process.
2. Develop Capital Improvement Program (CIP) project list for stormwater treatment and capture in the County
unincorporated areas towards TMDL and Permit compliance.
3. Seek future grant funding opportunities and fee revenue sources; develop project concepts eligible for funding to treat
and/or capture stormwater and urban runoff.
4. Complete grant funded construction of LID project in Meiners Oaks.
5. If approved by the Board of Supervisors, complete design and construction of grant funded El Rio Retrofit for
Groundwater Recharge project.
6. If approved by the Board of Supervisors, complete design and prepare for construction of grant funded Oak Park Green
Streets Retrofit project.
7. Conduct grant funded Ocean Friendly GardenTM Seminars and Workshops at the County Government Center and
communities of Meiners Oaks and Oak Park.
8. Continue implementation of the Permit's requirements including education and outreach, project conditioning for water
quality protection, conducting stormwater inspections and post-construction project tracking through Accela, preparation of
2014/2015 County Stormwater Annual Report, provide annual stormwater pollution prevention training for County
employees, and maintenance of County Stormwater Hotline.
9. Continue TMDL planning, monitoring, and implementation assistance to County Agencies to meet TMDL compliance.
10. Continue stakeholder participation and develop implementation strategy for Calleguas Creek TMDL's (trash, pesticides,
metals, toxics and others).
11. Meet implementation requirements for Malibu Creek Bacteria and Trash TMDLs.
12. Cooperate with stakeholders and develop strategies to implement Santa Clara Bacteria TMDL requirements.
13. Cooperate with stakeholders and develop strategies to implement Ventura River Algae TMDL requirements.
14. Meet implementation requirements for Ventura Coastal (Kiddie and Hobie Beaches) Bacteria TMDLs including long-term
MOA with Channel Island Beach Community Service District for dry-weather urban runoff diversion.
15. Develop strategy for County unincorporated areas to implement the statewide Trash Basin Plan Amendment.
16. Participate in development of the statewide Nutrient (nitrogen and phosphorus) and Bacteria Indicator policies.
Future Impacts
F
As described in the Accomplishments and , a new Municipal Stormwater Permit was adopted by the RWQCB on
July 8, 2010. This Stormwater Permit has increased compliance responsibilities of both County and cities resulting in a
comparable increase in financial obligations for all jurisdictions. The RWQCB incorporated a number of TMDLs into the new
Ventura Municipal Stormwater Permit to provide for an enforcement mechanism. In 2013, RWQCB adopted new Ventura
River Algae TMDL and U.S. EPA developed Malibu Creek Benthic Impairments (Nutrients and Sedimentation) TMDLs. As
presented by the County Stormwater Program to the Board of Supervisors in August 2010, the County's obligations and
costs have increased to ensure compliance with adopted and new TMDLs. A planning level compliance cost analysis
discussed in the Board Letters (dated May 6, 2014, October 7, 2014 and May 5, 2015), provided estimates of costs required
towards TMDL and Permit compliance. The County Stormwater Program will continue its efforts towards planning, concept
design, stakeholder cooperation, and seeking future funding opportunities.


O
As described in the Accomplishments and  a new Municipal Stormwater Permit was adopted by the RWQCB on
July 8, 2010. This Stormwater Permit has increased compliance responsibilities of both County and cities resulting in a
comparable increase in financial obligations for all jurisdictions. The RWQCB incorporated a number of TMDLs into the new
Ventura Municipal Stormwater Permit to provide for an enforcement mechanism. In 2013, RWQCB adopted new Ventura
River Algae TMDL and U.S. EPA developed Malibu Creek Benthic Impairments (Nutrients and Sedimentation) TMDLs. As
presented by the County Stormwater Program to the Board of Supervisors in August 2010, the County's obligations and
costs have increased to ensure compliance with adopted and new TMDLs. A planning level compliance cost analysis
discussed in the Board Letters (dated May 6, 2014, October 7, 2014 and May 5, 2015), provided estimates of costs required
towards TMDL and Permit compliance. The County Stormwater Program will continue its efforts towards planning, concept
design, stakeholder cooperation, and seeking future funding opportunities.

Next fiscal year, the County Stormwater Program will continue to work closely with the Ventura Countywide Stormwater
Quality Management Program and the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board in adoption of the new 5-year
Ventura Municipal Stormwater Permit. The County Stormwater Program plans to provide overall program inter-County
agency coordination, with the following  and goals planned:
1. Participate and assist with Permit renewal process.
2. Develop Capital Improvement Program (CIP) project list for stormwater treatment and capture in the County
unincorporated areas towards TMDL and Permit compliance.
3. Seek future grant funding opportunities and fee revenue sources; develop project concepts eligible for funding to treat
and/or capture stormwater and urban runoff.
4. Complete grant funded construction of LID project in Meiners Oaks.
5.
If approved by the Board of Supervisors, complete design and construction of grant funded El Rio Retrofit for Groundwater
Recharge project.
6. If approved by the Board of Supervisors, complete design and prepare for construction of grant funded Oak Park Green
Streets Retrofit project.
7. Conduct grant funded Ocean Friendly GardenTM Seminars and Workshops at the County Government Center and
communities of Meiners Oaks and Oak Park.
8. Continue implementation of the Permit's requirements including education and outreach, project conditioning for water
quality protection, conducting stormwater inspections and post-construction project tracking through Accela, preparation of
2014/2015 County Stormwater Annual Report, provide annual stormwater pollution prevention training for County
employees, and maintenance of County Stormwater Hotline.
9. Continue TMDL planning, monitoring, and implementation assistance to County Agencies to meet TMDL compliance.
10. Continue stakeholder participation and develop implementation strategy for Calleguas Creek TMDL's (trash, pesticides,
metals, toxics and others).
11. Meet implementation requirements for Malibu Creek Bacteria and Trash TMDLs.
12. Cooperate with stakeholders and develop strategies to implement Santa Clara Bacteria TMDL requirements.
13. Cooperate with stakeholders and develop strategies to implement Ventura River Algae TMDL requirements.
14. Meet implementation requirements for Ventura Coastal (Kiddie and Hobie Beaches) Bacteria TMDLs including long-term
MOA with Channel Island Beach Community Service District for dry-weather urban runoff diversion.
15. Develop strategy for County unincorporated areas to implement the statewide Trash Basin Plan Amendment.
16. Participate in development of the statewide Nutrient (nitrogen and phosphorus) and Bacteria Indicator policies.


OOperation and Maintenance for the Santa Rosa Road Traffic Signals will continue.


O
- Use data collected in Inmate Services Student tab in VCIJIS to monitor and evaluate program efficacy.
- Continue to strengthen existing partnerships, and continue efforts to establish additional partnerships with community
based organizations.
- Explore options to continue in-custody GED testing as the testing process changes from paper format to web/computer
based format.
- Increase program participation by inmates with security classification challenges through the use of electronic tablet
devices.

F
Inmate Services has taken a comprehensive, pro-active approach in addressing the needs of a more sophisticated inmate
population. The use of assessment tools has been valuable in helping inmates to identify and address high needs areas.
While traditional education (GED), vocation, and treatment programs are available to inmates, the addition of cognitivebehavior
restructuring programs has been instrumental for inmates to begin developing pro-social thinking, coping, and
problem-solving skills.


O
- Continue ordering and evaluation of products for longer sentenced inmates.
- Fill two vacant full-time positions.
- Provide training opportunities for staff interaction with inmates.
- Continue evaluation of vending machines and kiosks.
- Evaluate postal costs and procedures.
- Evaluate time management and procedural efficiencies.
- Implement electronic commissary ordering through inmate tablet equipment.


O
1. Complete building projects: Ojai meeting room, Fillmore meeting room, Saticoy Library
2. Evaluate open hours of each library branch. Update when beneficial to community.

F
Any increases to property tax revenue, which is the Ventura County Library's main revenue source, will be used to improve
the library collection, children and adult programming, and technology.


O
1. Continue to shift library staff towards community and away from static library service.
2. Institute customer ability to pay by credit card.
3. Use Lean Six Sigma principles to restructure budget focusing on individual community needs.

F
Any increases to property tax revenue, which is the Ventura County Library's main revenue source, will be used to improve
the library collection, children and adult programming, and technology.


O
1. Reduce costs by outsourcing media cataloguing and processing
2. Increase amount of space for community events in branches by implementing centralized access to less-used materials

F
Any increases to property tax revenue, which is the Ventura County Library's main revenue source, will be used to improve
the library collection, children and adult programming, and technology.
Electronic materials require less staff handling and maintaining which should decrease costs. However, electronic materials
are very expensive at this early stage.


O
1. Install new 1G circuits at all libraries
2. Implement new web-based and mobile services for staff
3. Implement VoIP (voice over IP) for phone service.
4. Outsource patron account services

F
Technology will be an increasing cost center in library service as the use of technology for all library services continues to
rise. Partnerships will help to remediate the costs of the data network. Further movement to cloud-based services will lessen
the needs for hardware. The library will be offering more mobile technologies for staff and customers.


O
- Create an online version of our Summer Reading Program
-Establish a children & teen resource tool on the Intranet to assist staff.
-To update Children & Teen webpages to reflect activity that is going on at the branches.

F
Any increases to property tax revenue, which is the Ventura County Library's main revenue source, will be used to improve
children programming.


O1. Increase Community Engagement by 20%.

F
Any increases to property tax revenue, which is the Ventura County Library's main revenue source, will be used to improve
adult programming.


O
-Increase number of tutoring partners at Port Hueneme
- Implement Leamos at Port Hueneme
- Host Adult Learner Leadership Bootcamp
-Increase public awareness of the READ program
- Increase number of learners served

F
Expansion of the program is contingent on receiving annuals funds from future fundraising by the Ventura County Library
Foundation for the Adult Literacy Read Program.


O
1. Accomplish all repairs and maintenance listed in report.
2. Complete build of Fillmore meeting room.
3. Complete Saticoy leasehold improvements and began operations.

The results derived from a cost analysis for outsourcing the management of the facilities determined to create contracts with
GSA to manage some of our facilities. From the cost analysis, other facilities were determined to stay on a time & material
basis with GSA..


O
1. Accomplish budget abalysis and shifts to better utilize revenues for the individual library branch needs.
2. Complete analysis to better utilize Library's tax revenue, to be able to increase collection budget and efficiency.

F
Any increases to property tax revenue, which is the Ventura County Library's main revenue source, will be used to improve
the library collection, children and adult programming, and technology.


O
1. Continue to maintain viable enterprise fund by balancing rate increases and cost reductions.
2. Continue Lean Six Sigma Process improvement.
3. Continue to maintain Contract Tower operations.
4. Restore Airline Service.


O
1. Meet all federal and state regulations to maintain airport certification for air carrier operations.
2. Maintain noise compatibility program resulting in low number of noise complaints from aircraft operations.
3. Restore viable Air Service to Oxnard Airport.

F
1. The continued planned development of new residential areas in the proximity of the airports will result in an increase in the
number of residents exposed to aircraft noise. Although such developments will be considered acceptable within the
guidelines of the Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan, it is likely that the Department will be impacted with additional
responses to an increased number of noise complaints. The environment of potential conflict between airport operations and
residential uses will continue to force focus on the acquisition of avigation easements over new development parcels.
2. Restoring scheduled passenger air service to Oxnard Airport is a top priority.


O
1. Continue with painting of hangar rows.
2. Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.

F
Oxnard Airports is a former Department of Defense facility that was constructed prior to the 1950's. A continued focus on
long range planning is needed for maintenance and replacement of aging infrastructure and to accomplish projects in a
manner that is financially sustainable while not compromising safety, security, and the quality of services.


O
1. Continue to maintain viable enterprise fund by balancing rate increases and cost reductions.
2. Continue Lean Six Sigma Process improvement.
3. Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.


O
1. Maintain noise compatibility program to result in a low number of noise complaints from aircraft operations.
2. Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.
3. Complete the Environmental Assessment for the NE hangar complex at CMA.

F
1. The continued planned development of new residential areas in the proximity of the airports will result in an increase in the
number of residents exposed to aircraft noise. Although such developments will be considered acceptable within the
guidelines of the Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan, it is likely that the Department will be impacted with additional
responses to an increased number of noise complaints. The environment of potential conflict between airport operations and
residential uses will continue to force focus on the acquisition of avigation easements over new development parcels.
2. Create additional hangar inventory to meet the demand for hangars. The waiting list for hangars at Camarillo Airport is
greater than 130 and takes approximately 7 years to move through the list.


O
1. Continue with painting of hangar rows.
2. Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.

F
Camarillo Airports is a former Department of Defense facility that was constructed prior to the 1950's. A continued focus on
long range planning is needed for maintenance and replacement of aging infrastructure and to accomplish projects in a
manner that is financially sustainable while not compromising safety, security, and the quality of services.


O
: Camarillo Airport
1. Attempt to maintain level of funding from FAA as the federal share for AIP has been reduced to 90%.
2. Complete Land Conveyance of former Navy parcel.
3. Initiate Master Plan for the Business Park.
4. Contribute towards the demolition of the building at 333 Skyway per MOU with Behavioral Health.
5. Complete the rehabilitation of the parking lot in front of the Airport Restaurant and Channel Islands Aviation.
: Oxnard Airport
1. Attempt to maintain level of funding from FAA as the AIP funding is less stable than previous years.
2. Replace roof and railing on Control Tower.
3. Replace HVAC unit on bldg. as needed.
4. Complete the re-landscaping of the bio-swale.
5. Demolish deteriorated building in maintenance yard.
6. Upgrade the entrance gate at the maintenance yard.

F
Future Impacts: Camarillo and Oxnard Airport
Federal funding for capital projects via the Airport Improvement Program may be reduced through the federal budget
process, resulting in a cutback of projects, which may require re-prioritization of projects.


O
-Opening of hiking and camping at Toland
-Striping (Steckel, Faria, Hobson and Rincon).
-Faria and Hobson campsite base material
-Contribute Off Highway Vehicle funds to USDA for restrooms in Lockwood Valley
-Develop sign program for the Ojai Valley Trail

F
Revenues are projected based on Parks facilities use levels. Actual use levels below current projections may require
adjustments to staffing, parks projects and other services during the fiscal year.


O
1. Foster Park replace domestic water line.
2. Camp Comfort asphalt repair for parking lot.
3. Saticoy Park replace ball field fencing and add foul ball fence.
4. Foster restroom fixture upgrades low flow and ADA
5. Steckel Park road repairs
6. Warring Park road and parking lot repairs
7. Oak Park play equipment replacement

F
The Parks System also has a current backlog of maintenance projects in excess of $2,421,400 for which some funding has
been identified. Revenues and appropriations for some of these projects are currently projected in the FY 2015-16 budget.


O
-Add HVAC in Multipurpose room, replace existing heater unit.
-Landscaping using a drought resistant garden to the back area of the building.

F
Funding for youth programs continues to be an issue for some lease tenants. We are working with tenants to enable them to
continue their programs and use of the facility. Use of the Art Studio continues to grow and we hope to increase kitchen
rentals for use as a certified kitchen


O
1) Work with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the President's Office of Management and Budget, and the California
Congressional delegation regarding future funding allocations to move sand down-coast, and funding for breakwater and
jetty repair.
2)Receive public comment, complete environmental review, and submit to Board of Supervisors and California Coastal
Commission both the Fisherman's Wharf and Casa Sirena replacement projects.
3)Gain approval from California Coastal Commission for the cell tower and public restroom, and allow Lessee to begin
construction.
4)Select architect for Administration Building replacement and complete plans.

F
Administration's major focus during the next year or two will be the identification of opportunities to generate revenue with
few, if any, added expenditures. Administration is also focused on revenue collection and revenue reviews to ensure full and
timely payment of rents to the County.


O
1) Maintain ongoing training schedule to maximize both employee and public safety.
2)Certify new Patrol officers to stand solo shifts and return the Department to minimal overtime.


O
1) Maintain the longstanding beach cleaning program for the safety of the general public and to minimize claims against the
County, which were zero again in FY2014-15.
2)Continue twice daily maintenance of public restrooms for general health and safety.
3)Provide beach lifeguard services from Memorial Day to Labor Day between approximately 10am and 6pm.

F
As with other areas, costs are increasing and resources are static. The Department is doing its best to keep costs within
revenue, while still providing an acceptable level of service.


O F
or the fuel dock, maintain competitive pricing with other fuel terminals, while covering all Department costs and complying
with regulatory requirements.


O
Complete negotiations, project description, and public input; submit the project for Board of Supervisors review, and submit
to the California Coastal Commission.

FReplacement of this facility will generate additional revenue that will pay for additional public improvements.


OMinimize larger maintenance requirements through diligent preventive maintenance.


OEvaluate benefit/detriment of bidding out Commercial Fishing facility to private operator.

F
Future issues for the Commercial Fishing Marina are the same as for all other Harbor work areas: declining or flat revenues,
increasing costs, and an aging facility. Careful work to identify priorities for repairs and maintenance is critical, as are
decisions regarding the level of repairs that should be undertaken: e.g., should these be short-term repairs, or ten-year
repairs?


O
1)Evaluate repair/rehabilitation alternatives for groin wall at Kiddie Beach; develop cost estimates and a potential plan for
construction.
2)Complete design and engineering for replacement of Harbor Administration Building.

F
The Department's ability to pursue capital projects in the form of refurbishment or replacement of public facilities is
dependent upon availability of grant funds or Harbor Enterprise retained earnings, and timing of Coastal and construction
permits.


O

1. Continue to meet increasing demand for safety net inpatient, specialty, and primary care services, and
2. Continue to improve the culture of quality and safety within the hospitals.
3. Continue to improve recruitment and retention efforts, and decrease use of premium pay scheduling.
4. Continue to maintain Joint Commission accreditation and other regulatory requirements through a continuous Regulatory
Survey Readiness process.
5. Continue to improve fiscal performance of each and every department.
6. Continue to strengthen the performance improvement program.
7. Continue to improve the environment of care.
8. Continue to expand community outreach efforts.
9. Enhance utilization of a fully integrated in-patient and out-patient Electronic Health Record within VCMC, SPH and
Ambulatory Care system.
10. Continue to raise money with the capital campaign for the HRW. This campaign will raise monies to assist with in kind
donations for equipment needs, as well as establish a giving process to offset the needs of this project.

F
The impact of the Affordable Care Act continues to evolve. While many patients have obtained coverage, the enrollment in
Medi-Cal continues to rise monthly. This is a potential positive impact, however, these patients will have choices and it is
imperative that VCMC is prepared to take more patients into the hospital and provide more ancillary services particularly in
the Lab and Radiology.


O

1. Continue to meet increasing demand for mental health care needs.
2.Continue to provide a safe environment for our patients and staff in this locked psychiatric unit.
3. Continue to maintain Joint Commission compliance and continue readiness efforts for first unannounced Joint
Commission survey.
4. Continue to improve fiscal performance
5. Continue to strengthen the Performance Improvement Program.
6. Continue to improve the environment of care.
7. Continue to expand community outreach efforts working with Stakeholders to be certain all needs of this community are
met.
8. Enhance utilization of a fully integrated in-patient and out-patient Electronic Health Record within VCMC, SPH and
Ambulatory Care system.
9. Develop an Adult Crisis Stabilization Unit product line within the walls of the current Inpatient Psychiatric Unit.
10. Continue to work with collaboratively Behavioral Health and other stakeholders to initiate a Pediatric Crisis Stabilization
Unit in Ventura County.

F
The VCBH department has struggled with providing suitable housing for patients who are no longer in need of acute care in
the IPU. The shortage of suitable housing causes an extended length of stay in an acute facility that is no longer needed. As
a result we are evaluating the benefit of establishing a Crisis Stabilization Unit (CSU). A CSU would provide care for patients
on a short term, observational status for up to 24 hours. Evaluation of patients for a longer period of time without admitting
them into an acute care hospital may benefit many patients, who have previously been admitted to the acute care hospital
for a short period of time. Having a Crisis Stabilization Unit allows for a more defined billing structure. It provides 24 hour
psychiatric care to ensure better stabilization of the patient. As the care and cost benefit of a CSU is evaluated, we will meet
with stakeholders and others to arrive at an outcome that is collaborative.


O
1. Continue to meet increasing demand for safety net hospital, specialty and primary care services.
2. Develop a program to enhance census at SPH. This includes the ability to transfer patients into the facility from VCMC ..
3. Establish branding of SPH in the Santa Clara Valley. Increase advertising strategies to people who live in the area.
4. Maintain Joint Commission compliance and continue readiness efforts for unannounced surveys.
5. Continue to improve fiscal performance in all areas of care.
6. Continue to strengthen the Performance Improvement Program.
7. Continue to improve the environment of care.
8. Continue to support and improve the environment of care.
9. Enhance utilization of a fully integrated in-patient and out-patient Electronic Health Record within VCMC, SPH and
Ambulatory Care system.
10. Expand specialty services in Santa Paula, including Urology, Plastic Surgery and Podiatry.
11. Expand outreach in the community to continue to build relationships with private physicians.
12. Initiate planning for a co-located services facility in the community.

F
The impact of the Affordable Care Act is not fully known. More patients will have coverage, some who are currently using our
systems and some who may not . This is a potential positive impact, however, these patients will have choices and it is
imperative that SPH is prepared to take more patients into the hospital and provide more ancillary services particularly in the
Lab and Radiology. We are developing a process to allow for more patients to be cared for in the hospital as well as
expanding availability of the operating room to provide increased volume in that area.


O
Obtain National Committee Quality Assurance accreditation - First Option
Establish a more robust Medical-Behavioral Health collaboration to better meet the multi-disciplinary needs of our members.
Continue to work to improve the provider participation in the CWS communication portals by educating providers on the
features of the CWS Provider portal, with the goal of ultimately reducing the number of incoming calls relative to eligibility.

F
Work with Providers not currently submitting electronic bills to educate them on the benefits of electronic bill submission.
This would be done with collaboration of the Claims Department and the Provider Services Administrator.
Maintain the NCQA Accreditation readiness activities for Renewal.

Out Year 
O
1. Continue search for electronic solutions for incident reporting and accident/near-miss investigation.
2. Establish outreach with agencies for Risk Management program assistance.
3. Continue exploring ECM solutions for Work Comp, Retirement and Safety Divisions.

Out Year 
O
1. Institute pharmacy benefits program.
2. Coordinate efforts with the new County Disability Management program.
3. Prepare for review and selection of third party claims administrator.
4. Continue to evaluate options for electronic claims reporting.
5. Expect to transition to new claims administration software.

Out Year 
1. Update claims locating coding allocation to assist in accurate rate development.
2. Develop "Risk" Management 101" agency outreach program.
O 3. Evaluate effectiveness of increased Self-Insured Retention.


OContinue to monitor and facilitate the alcohol and drug testing required under the Department of Transportation.


O
1. Continue review of core funds and funds within the mutual fund window for available changes to institutional funds, and
other cost savings for plan participants.
2. Continue examination of In-Plan Roth Conversion as possible enhancement to the 457 Plan (pending further direction
from the IRS).
3. Conduct Fiduciary training for the Deferred Compensation Committee.
4. Continue enhancement of participant education outreach in coordination with Fidelity.
5. Complete application and submittal for Internal Revenue Service favorable determination letter.
6. Complete Retirement Readiness Survey to identify target areas for participant education and assistance.
7. Develop campaign for 2015 National Save for Retirement Week.
8. Prepare annual benefit statements in coordination with VCERA and Towers Watson.
9. Conduct targeted campaign toward employees not currently participating in either the 401(k) and/or 457 plan.
10. Serve on Fidelity Client Panel.
11. Implement suspension tracking through Fidelity to monitor the contribution hold period for participants who have received
a 401(k) hardship and/or 457 emergency withdrawal.
12. Conduct annual business and educational outreach planning in partnership with Fidelity.
13. Submit for Leadership award from the National Association of Government Defined Contribution Administrator's
(NAGDCA) for 2014 National Save for Retirement Week campaign.
14. Develop plan branding.
15. Review 401(k) hardship and 457 emergency withdrawal processes.
16. Enhance the Preparing Your Savings for Retirement and New Employee Orientation presentations.
17. Review continuation of participant fee suspension.
18. Conduct quarterly Deferred Compensation Committee meetings.
19. Conduct annual review of Investment Policy Statement.


O
1. Continue to monitor claims experience.
2. Continue to review the fiscal impact of EDD quarterly reimbursements and the effectiveness of the UIB rate to ensure
program cost recovery and rate stabilization.

FPotential State budget cuts to the County's programs and workforce will have a fiscal impact to the UIB program.


O
1. Conduct annual Flexible Benefits program open enrollment period and retiree re-enrollment.
2. Implement employer required ACA for 2015 and continue to review, analyze other provisions and impacts of Health Care
Reform.
3. Continue plan and program audits.
4. Develop and conduct additional training for managers, department/agency staff and coordinators in Absence
Management.


O
1. Increase the following direct service contacts: 400 new clinical assessments; 1600 follow-up visits; 600 hours of training/
workshops; 150 supervisory consultations, 125 hours of mediation
2. Convert the client diagnostic code statistics to "problem areas" for greater efficiency and analysis.
3. Continue to apply revisions to the EAP website with emphasis on resources and links. Develop an online digital library on
pertinent topics in conjunction with Ventura County Library allowing access to select books and articles for County
employees.
4. Continue to collaborate with County Training on "Nuts and Bolts" Training series as well as Conflict Resolution Training
through the Training Department.
5. Develop a mandatory 30-minute orientation related to new understandings and advances in the field of substance abuse
to be offered to all County Fire personnel.
6. In conjunction with Wellness and Work and Family programs, will provide additional parenting classes and elder care
support groups.
7. Continue to provide and develop additional focus groups and corresponding training modules for departments interested
in improving areas of workplace climate and positive impacts to organizational culture. This includes areas of "Interpersonal
Quality Improvement" as well as characteristics of a motivating environment. Also includes collaboration with Service
Excellence staff and Training Division staff.
8. Assist in the Implementation of an intervention program within HSA to address vicarious trauma of CFS staff.


1. Continue providing participants with health risk appraisal including biometric screening and follow-up, coaching to
high-risk employees and educational class sessions.
2. Research and develop incentive program to promote employee health and well-being.
3. Identify and utilize Wellness champions to increase employee engagement in Wellness.
4. Continue to collaborate with Public Health and GSA on efforts to create a healthier
workplace environment.
5. Research and develop opportunities to increase fruit and vegetable consumption among County employees.
6. Initiate new marketing campaign for 2016 calendar year.

FPotential costs associated with incentives and resulting increases in participation.

O
1. Develop an online resource to identify locations of Lactation Rooms at all County sites and the appropriate contacts for
each site.
2. Design and implement lactation equipment pilot project.
3. Provide comprehensive family care resource and referral services for employees.
4. Enhance web page features.
5. Increase number of Child Care/Preschool Discount Program listings.
6. Market employee benefits available through the Coastal Housing Partnership.


O
1. Continue to monitor claims experience and review rate requirements.
2. The County will evaluate eliminating this plan and utilize reserves for alternate or replacement options such as the option
of replacing the plan with a group policy which will remain fully funded by participating employees.

F
If the direction is to replace this current short-term disability plan with a group policy, the rate structure and employee
participation may materially change.


O
1) Replace compact gas vehicles due for replacement with low emission PZEV or Hybrid technology vehicles.
2) Increase the number of medium duty trucks using hybrid technology.
3) Continue developing a fuel efficient and environmentally friendly fleet through the utilization of alternative fuel technology
and lower emission vehicles.
4) Continue to exceed minimum CARB benchmarks for lowering emission standards for off road heavy equipment. Fleet
Services is currently compliant until January 2022.

F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.
Currently, increased costs for acquiring hybrid trucks is partially off-set with State funds (VIP program). This opportunity may
not be available for future purchases.
Fleet to focus on standardization and sharing of equipment to reduce overall costs.


O
1. Introduce fractional share Remote Motor Pool vehicles at two additional County facilities.
2. Continue developing a fuel-efficient and environmentally friendly fleet through the utilization of alternative fuel technology
and lower emission vehicles. Replace older model gas vehicles with low emission technology vehicles.
3. Take advantage of in-source opportunities in the Install Shop and other shops.
4. Complete the installation of the new fuel management system.
5. Update/increase fuel storage capacity for emergency potential.

F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year. To lessen the
potential impact, Fleet Services is holding several positions vacant.
Cost increase resulting from new Tahoe patrol vehicle anticipated to continue for the next four Fiscal Years. The increased
cost of vehicles and parts is a result of purchasing new equipment for upfit versus recycling parts from old to new vehicles.
Overall increased vehicle count (85 additional vehicles/equipment in Fiscal Year 13-14 and Fiscal Year 14-15) will cause
increased parts and labor costs. Fleet will be focusing on vehicle standardization to reduce costs, potentially offsetting
anticipated increases.


O
1) Upgrade FM Systems to version 8.4 from version 8.3 and continue the implementation of FM Systems, eliminating the
need for multiple facilities management applications, providing increased reporting capabilities to operational managers and
other County users, and allowing them to better and more efficiently manage their operations.
2) Upgrade of AssetWorks to version 14 from version 13
3) Provide enhanced fuel purchase reporting to departments in accordance with Management responses to the fuel audit.
4) Work with PWA to evaluate a possible ISF rate methodology change for Heavy Equipment.
5) Create Fiscal procedural manuals in accordance with the GSA Strategic Plan.
6) Complete fiscal and operational audits of 3 of the County's lessees.
7) Prepare financial and other analysis to evaluate additional solar projects in support of the Board of Supervisor's
Sustainability Plan and goal to reduce green house gas emissions.
8) Encourage the other agencies to implement Surveyor 6.
9) Upgrade/Migrate GSA's Virtual Infrastructure to oVirt (Virtualization platform) and GlusterFS (external clustered storage
platform)
10) Implement an additional large capacity storage server for video surveillance. Increases availability and capacity of
storage.
11) Virtualize GSA's main database server in order to prevent unplanned downtime.
12) Continue job analysis and specification revisions.
13) Continue to monitor and ensure compliance with mandated training.
14) Met OSHA's implementation deadline for the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labeling of Hazardous
Chemical (GHS). Ensure workplace is compliant with GHS labeling, Safety Data Sheets obtained for all chemicals, and
mandated employee training is completed for entire staff.
15) Complete desk manuals for HR and Reception Staff
16) Complete VCFMS Upgrade training offered by the Auditor/Controller's Office for each fiscal position.
17) Launch the new ISF billing module in partnership with IT Services with a goal of providing greater customer service
through increased reporting features.

F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


O
-Outsource insurance certificate compliance/tracking.
-Add at least one Procurement-specific training video to GSA website.

F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


O
1. Define a records/information management business plan that includes clearly marketed department options for inactive/
active records storage consistent with approved retention policies; i.e. - choices can include outsource storage or backfile
imaging, GSA records center, imaging workflow, and records destruction/shredding.
2. Analyze document capture and digital mailroom scan center business growth to ensure facility, personnel, and system
support resources are defined and planned to meet department business goals.
3. Implement Docushare/Liquid Office eForm workflows within a more transparent scheduling effort that defines clear
completion dates so departments can better plan impacts on existing paper based processes.
4. Promote multi-channel document output to complement traditional print media using Xerox XMpie and Mindfire tools for
the creation and deployment of targeted, trackable cross-media marketing campaigns.
5. Complete staff transition into document management health informatics support for VCMC to ensure consistent and
conforming document resources are available on demand.
6. Ensure applicable technical training across our various Business Support disciplines are state of the art; e.g. - AIIM
certified information professional.
7. Leverage staff services specialist allocations to market and increase general business growth within existing scan, eform,
and print to mail programs by 15%, with particular emphasis on shared service opportunities within local government
programs.

F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the budget unit will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


O
1. Add three new managed inventory customers for miscellaneous goods vs. use of expensive outsourced and nonmanaged
public storage.
2. Partner with Records Center to expand pallet & crate storage capabilities of main warehouse by moving inactive records
to offsite storage at a reduced storage fee.
3. Review security exposure as a result of not having a central receiving location for all incoming packages and receiving
activity, as items are still received at non-central dock and department Government Center locations. This review
contemplates leveraging an existing web-based barcode package tracking system to increase accountability of items
received.
4. Implement enhanced security for metal recycling bin to ensure reduced dumping of items from unknown sources.
5. Increase surplus return by 15% through increased use of social media to advertise our Public Auction sales.
6. Partner with GSA Fleet to maximize return for surplus vehicles by promoting and expanding the bidder community and
achieving more regularly posted car auctions which will encourage web activity and grow the bidder base throughout the
year vs. only certain months of the year.
7. Pursue opportunities to consolidate GSA Facilities warehouse and dock operations in order to offer reduced customer
expense, increased usable space and extend processing efficiencies when leveraging central warehouse management
resources.
8. Implement fully electronic workflow for surplus pickup process, adding to existing online web request and inclusive of ECM
data collection and work order history.

F
Coordinating surplus reuse and disposition is done at no cost to County departments. Cost recovery from recycling and
surplus sales to support surplus administration efforts can vary. Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility
that the budget unit will be impacted by service level reduction requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels
and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1) Initiate Kaizen or similar effort to discuss completed county-wide courier survey data and evaluate further resource
sharing opportunities among the eight survey respondents.
2) Gauge VCMC interest in expanding the Mail Center's investments in SCLogic package tracking capabilities to support
their critical on-demand routing logistics.
3) Establish justification for Technical Specialist to administer USPS mailing software and automated mail preparation, mail
design requirements for Business reply and Courtesy reply mail, implementation of newly required online postage
statements when presenting automated mail, and performance of all liaison duties for postage automation discount
qualification with USPS representatives.
4) Implement real time delivery confirmation and signature capture when using SCLogic package tracking barcode devices
countywide.
5) Staff Services manager will work to achieve certification as a Certified Mail & Distribution Systems Manager to leverage its
knowledge base for the County.
6) Register for USPS "Earned Value Promotion" to earn future postage discount credit for using Business Reply & Courtesy
Mail.
7) Promote the USPS "Every Door" program county-wide where customers can send specific types of mail to residents
within a specific zip code so programs that require such distribution can benefit from highly discounted processing.
8) Implement rate shopping via the web to define best and least-cost routing for expedited packages sent via USPS, FedEx,
and UPS.
9) Establish marketing effort to offer mail metering services that incorporate custom return address and critical customer
Ocommunication notes in color on the face of an envelope to help achieve department goals.

Despite best efforts to project postage costs, growing USPS deficits combined with the ability of the USPS to implement
annual CPI indexed rate increases and specially approved rate changes, if the agency experiences any of these changes, it
may necessitate mid-year budget adjustments.
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
Frequests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


O
Security:
1. Acquire and transition a new Guard Services vendor into County service. The new contract requires less hours worked per
shift in the control center in order to avoid fatigue and improve performance. In support of the County's continued efforts
towards the reduction of vehicle emissions, the use of one electric vehicle for patrol is also required.
2. Replace an additional 15 cameras (analog to digital) for enhanced quality through the GenTec system on an as-needed
replacement basis.
3. Complete the three-year project to convert the Panic Alarm system from analog to digital.
Special Services:
1. Modify the monitors used for the Star Employees Website to be updated remotely via WiFi. Special programming and
applications will be installed. Special Services will continue to maintain the website on an ongoing basis.

F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


O
-Increase emphasis on water conservation efforts.
-Continue to pursue and implement GSA's strategic plan .
-Continue to pursue and implement the County's strategic plan .
-Support the County's sustainability efforts by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, reducing electricity and natural gas use,
recycling and composting waste, conserving water, installing solar PV systems and using alternative fuel vehicles.
-Encourage team building, expand vertical communication and participation within the Department, continue to emphasize
outstanding customer service, develop staff both horizontally and vertically within the Agency and develop a succession
plan.
-Improve the Department's processes using Lean Six Sigma.

F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


O
-Continue to pursue and implement GSA's strategic plan .
-Continue the inventory, condition analysis and proactive maintenance for all GSA maintained facilities and associated
services. (Strategic Plan, Focus Area 3, Strategic Goal 2, Objective 1)
-Continue installing low flow water fixtures at the Hall of Administration and Hall of Justice. (Strategic Plan, Focus Area 3,
Strategic Goal 3, Objective 1)
-Develop and implement water saving strategies to conserve water in response to California's statewide drought.
-Submit the 2015 CCFSA Award of Excellence application package for the Maintenance Division.
-Identify next building and start process to pursue LEED certification process.
-Conduct Kaizen event to investigate operational efficiencies for the Maintenance and Custodial/Landscape Division's supply
cages.

F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


O
-Complete a study of the future of thermal storage in operating Government Center buildings and implement a new operating
strategy.
-Complete the installation, commissioning and initiate operation of a 1-mw solar array at the Government Center.
-Complete the installation, commissioning and initiate operation of a 1-mw solar array at the Juvenile Justice complex.
-Install dampers in the hot deck portion of the HOA air handlers to reduce the need to provide heat to the building at
appropriate times of the year.
-Complete the installation of a new control system for the central plant of the Pre-Trial Detention Facility.

F
The drought crisis in California and the re-aligning of the electrical utilities in California away from nuclear generation
capacity may have a significant impact on utility rates in future years, which could make accurate utility budget projections
difficult.


O
1. Process Improvement - Provide leadership over the Housekeeping and Grounds Division's process improvement program,
by identifying potential opportunities to improve the manner in which business is conducted. Direct and support employees in
the improvement of the areas identified.
2. Performance Measurements - Develop Key Performance Indicators to measure the performance and outcome of the
revised training plan for the Custodial Staffing.
3. Sustainability - Improve the environment by steering employees and vendors towards greener solutions. This includes the
use of more environmentally friendly clean products and supplies, and more water and energy conservative equipment.
Continue recycling campaign by offering to inform departments on recycling efforts and what they can do.

F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


O
1) Improve the environment by moving toward greener solutions. Initiatives include the Integrated Pest Management, LEED,
Recycling, Elicit Storm Water Discharge Reduction, and Water Conservation.
2) Partner with other governmental agencies, community groups, and vendors on sustainable projects. They include
California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery (CalRecycle) for the 2014/15 Tire-Derived Product (TDP) Grant
for reuse of tire materials, Surfrider's Ocean Friendly Garden under our Prop. 84 Storm Water Implementation Grant, and
Agromin to provide free recycled tree products.
3) Implement year two of the 5 year water conservation plan and expand remote water management system to include East
County Sheriff Station.
4) Modify Grounds Division training plan to include more team building,conflict resolution, communicationand connectivity
topics.

F
Due to Statewide water conservation requirements, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level
modification requests. This may entail adjustments to staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


O
1. As an ongoing priority, lead GSA Projects Group initiatives and every-day operations to practice and implement process
improvements which achieve GSA Strategic Plan goals.
2. Manage GSA infrastructure and other Client-funded Facilities and Interiors projects, on-time and on-budget.
3. Continue to support remodeling projects funded by HSA, HCA and other Agencies.
4. Complete major HCA projects currently in design, PEC at VCMC and the ER and ICU at Santa Paula Hospital.
5. Implement FM Systems project management module to facilitate transactions and document completion and details of
projects.
Continue to CAD-map County facilities.


O
1. Discontinue use of the ISR mainframe application for internal purchase requests by adopting new workflow capabilities in
the upgraded VCFMS system
2. Improve the ITSD Approval Request process by replacing the email process with VCFMS workflow
3. Complete the project to update the County-wide technology strategic plan.

F
1. The number of retirements over the next three years is anticipated to be significantly higher and will result in loss of
significant County business knowledge and experience, as well as continuing recruitment efforts.


O
1. Upgrade/replace Data Center fire suppression system
2. Upgrade enterprise backup solution, moving from tape-based backup of servers, and off-site tape retention services, to a
disk-based backup solution with off-site or cloud-based disaster recovery replication
3. Retire the County's Metadirectory identity management system
4. Move towards a Virtualization and Cloud strategy for application hosting
5. Further the automated patch management process
6. Standardize County desktop images

F
1. Increased consumerization of technology will continue to drive demand for mobile access to government services.
2. Increased adoption of tablet devices and cloud-based solutions will drive new business solutions and the requisite
infrastructure to support management, security, and protection of citizen data.
3. Need to modernize virtualization and storage solution - hyper converged infrastructure
4. Leverage lower cost database architectures such as Dynamo, NoSQL, and Mongo


O
1. Continue to develop state-of-the-art web and mobile applications that support County agencies.
2. Continue enhancing and supporting the Ventura County Integrated Justice Information System (VCIJIS).
3. Continue supporting the County's web application portfolio.
4. Continue supporting and enhancing the County's Mobile Application portfolio.
5. Assist Sheriff's Office with replacement of their CAD (Computer Aided Dispatch) and AFR (Automated Field
Reporting) systems.

F
1. Increased consumerization of technology will continue to drive demand for mobile access to government services.
2. Increased adoption of tablet devices and cloud-based solutions will drive new business solutions and the requisite
infrastructure to support management, security, and protection of citizen data.


O
1. Complete the implementation and support of the BRASS replacement with Performance Budgeting for the CEO
2. Complete the implementation and support for the county financial system for Auditor-Controller
3. Continue migration and implementation support for new land tax system
4. Complete significant PeopleSoft integration efforts with the new employee retirement system, the new financial
management system and performance budgeting system

F
Numerous large technology initiatives continue to introduce business and organization changes to several County agencies
and departments. IT Services continues to require to provide significant training to their workforce in order to support these
new technologies.


O1. Complete the GIS geodatabase improvement project to leverage GIS tools to improve the accuracy of the GIS data

F
Numerous large technology initiatives continue to introduce business and organization changes to several County agencies
and departments. IT Services continues to require to provide significant training to their workforce in order to support these
new technologies.


O
1. Continue the Nortel Replacement Project and replace all non-supported Nortel equipment with Cisco VoIP within our voice
and data network.
2. Increase the number of WLAN access points in various County facilities where required by our client agency/departments
and upgrade our current WLAN infrastructure to handle the increased demand for wireless connectivity.
3. Upgrade our Microwave Network to increase bandwidth capabilities beyond 300 Megs.
4. Continue to increase our Public Safety Radio Network coverage and Interoperability.
5. Develop a Project Plan for the creation of a Ventura County Fiber Network

F
1. The legislative move to give Public Safety a national wireless license in the 700 MHz range will create an opportunity to
build a dedicated wireless data network with interoperability functionality nationwide. This has now been redefined as
FirstNet and Network Services is following the progress of FirstNet to determine how the County of Ventura can leverage this
opportunity to improve our wireless capabilities for Public Safety.
2. The County of Ventura has shown an ever increasing demand for bandwidth and access to the Internet. This will
eventually drive the County to higher speed Microwave and the need for development of a Fiber Network. We are currently
reviewing options for constructing a Fiber Data Network.
3. Information Security - National Cyber/security Initiative will likely become the standard by which all governmental agencies
IT Security activities are measured. It includes the following:
a. Intrusion prevention and detection systems
b. Security classification of network data


O
1.Review functionality of the VCFMS Accounts Receivable Module for use as the Agency's permit billing system.
2.Restructure the Agency's electronic storage system.
3.Utilize SharePoint to optimize functionality and streamline processes.
4.Implement E-Performance.

FLegislative and/or policy changes resulting in increased fiscal analysis and monitoring.


O
1. Lease Saticoy depot property.
2. Work with CEO and HCA on possible sale of County property to Patagonia.


O
1. Redesign and improve the process for receiving and responding to bid questions.
2. Reduce the cost of printing plans and specifications by receiving Board of Supervisor approval for electronic distribution.
3. Develop an agreement between PWA and RMA on a more efficient payment process for Building & Safety Permits.
4. Implement a Debarment Ordinance for contractors
5. Develop standardization of templates of various Project Management correspondence letters and decisions.


O
Please see General Fund G001, Orgs 4007 (Public Works General Fund Development Services) and 4009 (Public Works
General Fund Flood Plain Management).


O
A. Participate in 'Water Awareness' Month programs; sponsor the annual 'Water Awareness' poster contest; provide water
audits for our large water users, including large landscape, commercial, industrial and institutional customers; provide Water
Wise Gardening workshops. Utilize social media for water conservation outreach (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, etc.)
B. Implement out-going phone message option to provide customers with account or system updates.
C. Compare water and sewer rates with other utilities in Ventura County for benchmarking purposes.
D. Annual review of water loss in each of the water systems to assure efficient operations of the water systems.
E. Decrease water consumption by 20% to meet Governor's mandate.


O
1. Implement the Human Resource, Personnel and Training Database system.
2. Upgrade the tablet computers used for the Electronic Patient Care Records system.
3. Upgrade the roster station staffing software to a web-based version.
4. Redesign the District's public-facing websites to add features and be consistent with the County's public web pages.
5. Improve network bandwidth capacity to all fire stations.
6. Add multimedia and training capabilities to the Day Rooms at all fire stations.
7. Establish an Out-Reach recruitment program.
8. Establish career development guides for all positions.
9. Update and Implement electronic Performance Plans/Evaluation forms.
10. Training for staff in the new Ventura County Financial Management System (VCFMS) implemented by the County.


O
1. Complete an interface between Accela Automation and the in-house FHRP program for better consistency in the
conditioning of projects.
2. Implement the next Fire Safety Inspection Program (FSIP) campaign to provide periodic inspections of schools to help
reduce the number of fire incidents.
3. Configure and Implement EDR (Electronic Document Review) in Accela Automation to better serve the public by reviewing
and accepting electronic documents.
4. Implement the revised fee schedule designed to streamline and simplify the application of the fees assessed.
5. Provide iPads to engine companies to allow access to critical information in the field and help with the efficiency and
accuracy of FSIP inspections.


1. Enhance the 9-1-1 Dispatch business continuity site to provide Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) system backup
capabilities.
2. Continue the (ten year) Buena Ventura Prescription Burn Project for fuels reduction to protect the incorporated and
unincorporated communities of Ventura and Santa Paula from wind-driven wildfires.
3. Upgrade modems to 4G in first run apparatus to include Wi-Fi hotspot capabilities.
4. Accept delivery and put into service 6 new pumpers
5. Accept delivery and put into service 1 new tiller Quint ladder truck
6. Order 3 new pumpers for delivery in FY 16/17
7. Implement an internal diesel opacity testing program for heavy fleet
8. Update and automate apparatus inventory.
9. Replace mobile computers (CPU's) in all apparatus [deferred from FY15].
10. Replace mobile radios in all apparatus.
11. Replace mobile computer monitors in all apparatus.
12. Hire EMS staff for Quality Improvement (QI) reviews/metrics.
13. Identify the tablet/device utilized for EMS documentation (Electronic Patient Care Record tablets).


O
1. Begin construction of FS20 in Ojai FS27 in Fillmore and FS35 in Newbury Park.
2. Complete remodels for HQ, FS22, FS26, FS30 Phase I, FS41 and FS57.
3. Acquire land for the Regional Training Center.

Out Year 
O
1. ALERT Flood Warning System Operations: Continue Quality Control/Quality Assurance (QA/QC) work and system
enhancements required to ensure accurate, reliable and timely real-time rains and stream gauge data in support of forecast
models and emergency preparedness work. Continue the migration of the District's network to the ALERT2 protocol using
the new equipment purchased with the FERP grant funds.
2. Capital Improvement Project Delivery: Coordinate the preparation and timely submittal of the District's inputs into the PWA
FY 16-20 5-Year Capital Improvement Project Document process projecting approximately $33Million in programmed CIP
work effort through June 30, 2016.
3. FEMA Community Rating System Program: Complete Year 5 of the FEMA-mandated 5-Year Recertification of the
Community Rating System (CRS) program for Unincorporated Ventura County, and submit the CRS Re-Application package
to FEMA for the next five year CRS-program period (2015-2020).
4. Grants Program Administration: Aggressively pursue available Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization
(NGO) grant opportunities for funding assistance in support of the District's mission, and to leverage timely completion of
District priority capital projects contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP.
5. Groundwater Programs: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities. Complete 2015 Groundwater Level/Quality
Report. Continue regional implementation of CASEGEM program. Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and
provide timely and effective processing of monitoring well and new water well permit submittal requests.
6. Integration of District Core Services and Risk-Based Project Priority Ranking Methodologies: Complete the ongoing
business analytics exercise by which the District's "Core Services" are clarified, bounded, and resourced, and by which the
District's integrated, multi-benefit, mission-critical projects and programs are prioritized based on risk-based prioritization
ranking best management practices.
7. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment on and where appropriate,
condition proposed development projects. And provide timely, and effective processing of District red-line channel
encroachment and watercourse permit submittal requests.
8. Strategic Plan Development: Complete an enterprise-wide development of a Strategic Plan (SP) which is designed to
advance the District's Integrated Watershed Protection (IWP) Mission holistically, purposefully, and synergistically, thereby
aligning and optimizing the District's project development work with Board approved policy-decisions, infrastructure
investment opportunities, and available structural funding resources.

Out Year 
O
1. Annual Zone 1 Capital Improvement Project Delivery: Complete an estimated $3.7 Million in preliminary engineering
design work by June 30, 2016 advancing the following Zone 1 capital improvement projects: (1) Fresno Canyon Flood
Mitigation Diversion Project, (2) Matilija Dam Ecosystem Restoration Project (MDERP), (3) Santa Ana Bridge Replacement
Project, (4) MDERP-TAC Sediment Alternatives Study, (5) VR-1 Levee Rehabilitation Project west of the City of San
Buenaventura, and (6) VR-2 Levee Rehabilitation Project located in the unincorporated community of Casitas Springs. These
projects may change based on higher priority needs (e.g. storm damage), operational factors, and/or the unanticipated
availability and/or loss, of offsetting revenue.
2. CEQA and Environmental Regulatory Permitting Work: Initiate CEQA documentation for Zone 1 CIP and O&M
construction projects as required. Complete project mitigation and monitoring reports. And obtain USACE permit for O&M
facilities.
3. Countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities, the County and
the District regarding MS-4 Permit implementation activities, including required monitoring events and program deployment.
Submit eighteenth annual report to the LARWQCB as required by the NPDES Permit on behalf of Ventura County's eleven
general purpose governments. Support coordinated efforts to obtain a new, countywide MS-4 Permit from the LARWQCB.
4. Grants Program Work: Aggressively pursue applicable Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) grant
opportunities for funding assistance in support the District's mission and to leverage timely completion of priority projects in
Zone 1 which are contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP.
5. Groundwater Programs: Complete 2014 Groundwater Level/Quality Report. Coordinate implementation of CASEGEM
program in Zone 1. Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and process permits for monitoring wells and new
water wells in Zone 1, as required. Support ongoing cooperative intergovernmental efforts required to establish a
Groundwater Sustainability Agency (GSA) for the Upper Ventura River Basin.
6. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment, and where required condition
proposed development projects, as well as issue encroachment and/or watercourse permits in Zone 1, as required.
7. Matilija Dam Ecosytem Restoration Project: Continue Pre-construction Engineering and Design work in accordance with
existing USACE agreements, and discharge the District's project completion obligations under the terms of the Board
approved Matilija Project Grant Agreements.
8. O&M Strategic Projects: Refine, upgrade and enhance District's O&M MaintStar work order based tracking system to
ensure full integration of work planning modules and databases with the Transportation Department's systems, and achieve
functional compatibility with the Public Works Agency's VCHRP labor-costing system upgrades. Advance the completion of
the following sustainable flood protection infrastructure initiatives for Zn 1 facilities: (a) annual evaluation of the safety of
District-owned dams in the zone, as part of the District's dam-safety program, (b) sediment management plan for Districtowned
debris basins, and (c) evaluation of innovative facility maintenance and repair techniques to better align risk-based
infrastructure priority project ranking with available O&M structural revenues.
9. Integrated Regional Water Management Planning and Implementation Grant Projects: Continue regional planning
collaboration and grant-funded project implementation work regarding any Proposition 84 IRWMP Planning and
Implementation Grant projects in and/or impacting Zone 1 in consultation with the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County.
Future Impacts
F
During Fiscal Year 2009-10, the District completed Federally-mandated (i.e. 44 CFR 65.10) engineering evaluations of
eleven Provisionally Accredited Levees (PALs) located along defined reaches of the Calleguas Creek, Santa Clara and
Ventura Rivers. These levees total 17 miles in length,provide flood protection for approximately 20,000 residents living on
6,336 parcels. The District estimates that nearly $600 Million in flood damages could occur should these levees fail to
provide adequate flood protection.
The District is currently engaged in preliminary design engineering work in support of levee retrofit and/or flood-protection
enhancement projects required to certify all of its levees in full-compliance with Federal Levee Certification requirements. In
2009, a planning-level estimate of upwards of $135 Million in costs was developed to complete necessary levee certification
work countywide. As of July 1, 2015, countywide, approximately $45 million in levee rehab project work has been or is in the
process of being completed. Consequently, countywide an estimated $90 Million in levee rehab project work remains to be
funded and completed.
Major levee rehabilitation and ultimate certification projects in Zone 1 include the Ventura River (VR-1) Levee in the City of
Ventura, the (VR-2) Levee in unincorporated Casitas Springs, and the (VR-3) Levee in unincorporated Live Oak Acres.
The District is working closely with the United States Army Corps of Engineers, as well as affected cities, residents and
property owners throughout Ventura County to marshal scarce Federal, State and local funding resources necessary to
complete this very important levee retrofit public safety and flood protection projects. Once all of the District's levee retrofit
projects are completed, the District's levees will fully comply with applicable Federal Levee Certification requirements found
in 44 CFR 65.10.
At best, full completion of the District's levee rehab projects will require a minimum of five years, and could take up to ten
years or longer, depending on final design plans, environmental considerations and project funding availability.

Out Year 
O
1. Annual Zone 2 Capital Improvement Project Delivery: Complete an estimated $26 Million in engineering design,
environmental permitting, rights-of-way, construction, construction monitoring and/or mitigation work efforts by June 30, 2016
advancing the following Zone 2 projects: (1) Arundell Barranca Dam Emergency Spillway Modification, (2) J-Street Drain -
Phase 2 (Hueneme Road to Pleasant Valley Road), (3) Santa Clara River Levee (SCR-3) D/S of Hwy 101, (4) Santa Clara
River Levee (SCR-1) U/S of Hwy 101 (5) Santa Paula Creek Channel Improvement, and (6) Sespe Creek Levee (SC-2).
These projects may change based on higher priority needs (e.g. storm damage), operational factors and/or the unanticipated
availability and/or loss, of offsetting revenue.
2. CEQA and Environmental Regulatory Permitting Work: Initiate CEQA documentation for Zone 2 CIP and O&M
construction projects as required. Complete project mitigation and monitoring reports. And obtain USACE permit for O&M
facilities.
3. Countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities, the County and
the District regarding MS-4 Permit implementation activities, including required monitoring events and program deployment.
Submit eighteenth annual report to the LARWQCB as required by the NPDES Permit on behalf of Ventura County's eleven
general purpose governments. Support coordinated efforts to obtain a new, countywide MS-4 Permit from the LARWQCB.
4. Flood Control Maintenance Strategic Projects: Refine, upgrade and enhance District's MaintStar work order based
tracking system to ensure full integration of work planning modules and databases with the Transportation Department's
systems, and achieve functional compatibility with the Public Works Agency's VCHRP labor-costing system upgrades.
Advance the completion of the following sustainable flood protection infrastructure initiatives for Zn 2 facilities: (a) annual
evaluation of the safety of District-owned dams in the zone, as part of the District's dam-safety program, (b) sediment
management plan for District-owned debris basins, and (c) evaluation of innovative facility maintenance and repair
techniques to better align risk-based infrastructure priority project ranking with available structural revenues.
5. Grants Program Work: Aggressively pursue applicable Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) grant
opportunities for funding assistance in support the District's mission and to leverage timely completion of priority projects in
Zone 2 which are contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP.
6. Groundwater Programs: Complete 2015 Groundwater Level/Quality Report. Coordinate implementation of CASEGEM
program in Zone 2. Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and process permits for monitoring wells and new
water wells in Zone 2, as required. Support ongoing cooperative intergovernmental efforts required to establish a
Groundwater Sustainability Agency (GSA) for the Mound Basin.
7. Integrated Regional Water Management Planning and Implementation Grant Projects: Continue regional planning
collaboration and grant-funded project implementation work regarding any Proposition 84 IRWMP Planning and
Implementation Grant projects in and/or impacting Zone 2 in consultation with the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County.
8. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment, and where required condition
proposed development projects, as well as issue encroachment and/or watercourse permits in Zone 2, as required.
Future Impacts
F
During Fiscal Year 2009-10, the District completed Federally-mandated (i.e. 44 CFR 65.10) engineering evaluations of
eleven Provisionally Accredited Levees (PALs) located along defined reaches of the Calleguas Creek, Santa Clara and
Ventura Rivers. These levees total 17 miles in length,provide flood protection for approximately 20,000 residents living on
6,336 parcels. The District estimates that nearly $600 Million in flood damages could occur should these levees fail to
provide adequate flood protection.
The District is currently engaged in preliminary design engineering work in support of levee retrofit and/or flood-protection
enhancement projects required to certify all of its levees in full-compliance with Federal Levee Certification requirements. In
2009, a planning-level estimate of upwards of $135 Million in costs was developed to complete necessary levee certification
work countywide. As of July 1, 2015, countywide, approximately $45 million in levee rehab project work has been or is in the
process of being completed. Consequently, countywide an estimated $90 Million in levee rehab project work remains to be
funded and completed.
Major levee rehabilitation and ultimate certification projects in Zone 1 include the Sespe Creek Levee (SC-2) in the City of
Fillmore, the Santa Clara River Levee (SCR-1) U/S of Hwy 101, and the Santa Clara River Levee (SCR-3) D/S of Hwy 101
both in the City of Oxnard.
The District is working closely with the United States Army Corps of Engineers, as well as affected cities, residents and
property owners throughout Ventura County to marshal scarce Federal, State and local funding resources necessary to
complete this very important levee retrofit public safety and flood protection projects. Once all of the District's levee retrofit
projects are completed, the District's levees will fully comply with applicable Federal Levee Certification requirements found
in 44 CFR 65.10.
At best, full completion of the District's levee rehabprojects will require a minimum of five years, and could take up to ten
years or longer, depending on final design plans, environmental considerations and project funding availability.

Out Year 
O
1. Annual Zone 3 Capital Improvement Project Delivery: Complete an estimated $3.3 Million in engineering design,
environmental permitting, rights-of-way, construction, construction monitoring and/or mitigation work efforts by June 30, 2016
advancing the following Zone 3 projects: (1) Arroyo Simi Grade Stabilization - Hitch Boulevard to Los Angeles Avenue, (2)
Calleguas Creek Levee and Somis Drain Floodwall, and (3) Sycamore Canyon Dam Spillway and Basin Modification
projects. These projects may change based on higher priority needs (e.g. storm damage), operational factors and/or the
unanticipated availability and/or loss, of offsetting revenue.
2. CEQA and Environmental Regulatory Permitting Work: Initiate CEQA documentation for Zone 3 CIP and O&M
construction projects as required. Complete project mitigation and monitoring reports. And obtain USACE permit for O&M
facilities.
3. Countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities, the County and
the District regarding MS-4 Permit implementation activities, including required monitoring events and program deployment.
Submit eighteenth annual report to the LARWQCB as required by the NPDES Permit on behalf of Ventura County's eleven
general purpose governments.
4. Flood Control Maintenance Strategic Projects: Refine, upgrade and enhance District's MaintStar work order based
tracking system to ensure full integration of work planning modules and databases with the Transportation Department's
systems, and achieve functional compatibility with the Public Works Agency's VCHRP labor-costing system upgrades.
Advance the completion of the following sustainable flood protection infrastructure initiatives for Zn 3 facilities: (a) annual
evaluation of the safety of District-owned dams in the zone, as part of the District's dam-safety program, (b) sediment
management plan for District-owned debris basins, and (c) evaluation of innovative facility maintenance and repair
techniques to better align risk-based infrastructure priority project ranking with available structural revenues.
5. Grants Program Work: Aggressively pursue applicable Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) grant
opportunities for funding assistance in support the District's mission and to leverage timely completion of priority projects in
Zone 3 which are contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP.
6. Groundwater Programs: Complete 2015 Groundwater Level/Quality Report. Coordinate implementation of CASEGEM
program in Zone 3. Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and process permits for monitoring wells and new
water wells in Zone 3, as required.
7. Integrated Regional Water Management Planning and Implementation Grant Projects: Continue regional planning
collaboration and grant-funded project implementation work regarding any Proposition 84 IRWMP Planning and
Implementation Grant projects in and/or impacting Zone 3 in consultation with the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County.
8. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment, and where required condition
proposed development projects, as well as issue encroachment and/or watercourse permits in Zone 3, as required.
Future Impacts
During Fiscal Year 2009-10, the District completed Federally-mandated (i.e. 44 CFR 65.10) engineering evaluations of
eleven Provisionally Accredited Levees (PALs) located along defined reaches of the Calleguas Creek, Santa Clara and
Ventura Rivers. These levees total 17 miles in length, provide flood protection for approximately 20,000 residents living on
6,336 parcels. The District estimates that nearly $600 Million in flood damages could occur should these levees fail to
provide adequate flood protection.
The District is currently engaged in preliminary design engineering work in support of levee retrofit and/or flood-protection
enhancement projects required to certify all of its levees in full-compliance with Federal Levee Certification requirements. In
2009, a planning-level estimate of upwards of $135 Million in costs was developed to complete necessary levee certification
work countywide. As of July 1, 2015, countywide, approximately $45 million in levee rehab project work has been or is in the
process of being completed. Consequently, countywide an estimated $90 Million in levee rehab project work remains to be
funded and completed.
Major levee rehabilitation and ultimate certification projects in Zone 3 include the Arroyo Simi Floodwall-Levee (AS-7) in the
City of Simi Valley and the Calleguas Creek Levee and Somis Drain Floodwall (CC-2) in the City of Camarillo. The District is
working closely with the United States Army Corps of Engineers, as well as affected cities, residents and property owners
throughout Ventura County to marshal scarce Federal, State and local funding resources necessary to complete this very
important levee retrofit public safety and flood protection projects. Once all of the District's levee retrofit projects are
completed, the District's levees will fully comply with applicable Federal Levee Certification requirements found in 44 CFR
65.10.
At best, full completion of the District's levee rehab projects will require a minimum of five years, and could take up to ten
years or longer, depending on final design plans, environmental considerations and project funding availability.


O
1. Annual Maintenance Work: Continue to perform necessary maintenance and/or repair, construction activities required to
ensure the optimization of the flood-conveyance capacity and flood protection capability of WPD flood protection facilities
located in the Simi Sub-Zone.

Out Year 
O
1. Annual Zone 4 Capital Improvement Project Delivery: There is no CIP work programmed in Zone 4 during the next fiscal
year.
2. CEQA Work: Initiate CEQA documentation for Zone 4 CIP and O&M construction projects as required. Complete project
mitigation and monitoring reports. And obtain USACE permit for O&M facilities.
3. Countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities, the County and
the District regarding MS-4 Permit implementation activities, including required monitoring events and program deployment.
Submit eighteenth annual report to the LARWQCB as required by the NPDES Permit on behalf of Ventura County's eleven
general purpose governments.
4. Flood Control Maintenance Strategic Projects: Refine, upgrade and enhance District's MaintStar work order based
tracking system to ensure full integration of work planning modules and databases with the Transportation Department's
systems, and achieve functional compatibility with the Public Works Agency's VCHRP labor-costing system upgrades.
Advance the completion of the following sustainable flood protection infrastructure initiatives for Zn 3 facilities: (a) annual
evaluation of the safety of District-owned dams in the zone, as part of the District's dam-safety program, (b) sediment
management plan for District-owned debris basins, and (c) evaluation of innovative facility maintenance and repair
techniques to better align risk-based infrastructure priority project ranking with available structural revenues.
5. Grants Program Work: Aggressively pursue available Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) grant
opportunities for funding assistance in support the District's mission, and to leverage timely completion of priority projects in
Zone 4 which are contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP
6. Groundwater Programs: Complete 2015 Groundwater Level/Quality Report. Coordinate implementation of CASEGEM
program in Zone 5. Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and process permits for monitoring wells and new
water wells in Zone 4, as required.
7. Integrated Regional Water Management Planning and Implementation Grant Projects: Continue regional planning
collaboration and grant-funded project implementation work regarding any Proposition 84 IRWMP Planning and
Implementation Grant projects in and/or impacting Zone 4 in consultation with the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County.
8. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment, and where required condition
proposed development projects, as well as issue encroachment and/or watercourse permits in Zone 4, as needed.


O
A. Complete the design of the Moorpark Desalter Project.
B. Finalize land purchase for the Moorpark Desalter.
C. Complete the design for the Stockton Reservoir.
D. Maximize the production of local water to reduce the cost of imported water in the district.
E. Re-coat and Line Reservoirs: Mt. Meadows #2, S&K #2, Home Acres.
F. Reduce electrical costs at District facilities by revising system operations.

F
Proposed rate increases for imported water and electricity may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of our
water systems and consequently on the water rates to our customers over the next few years. California is in the fourth year
of a record setting drought, resulting in potential reductions in imported water supply allocations which could adversely
impact water rates and availability of water supplies in the County.


O
A. Complete construction of the Recycled Water System-Phase IV project.
B. Complete construction of the Moorpark WWTP Office/Lab Bldg. and Remodel.
C. Increase the number of customers using recycled water.
D. Complete cleaning and CCTV of 1/3 sewer collection systems.

F
Proposed rate increases for electricity and increased Regional Water Quality Control Board permit requirements and costs
may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of our sewer systems and consequently on the sewer rates to our
customers over the next few years.


OA. Begin construction of the high pressure pipeline between Hacienda Road and Dapplegray Road.

F
Proposed Rate increases for imported water and electricity and potential reduction in GMA allocations may have a significant
impact on the cost of the operations of our water systems and, consequently, on the rates to our customers over the next
three years.


O
FY 2015-16 
A. Complete design and begin construction of pipeline replacement project (Caltrans ROW).
B. Complete design and begin construction of Well 2 Treatment Facility
C. Maximize the production of local water to reduce the cost of imported water in the district.
D. Reduce electrical costs at District facilities by revising system operations.

F

Proposed Rate increases for imported water and electricity and continued reductions in GMA allocations may have a
significant impact on the cost of the operations of our water systems and consequently on the rates to our customers over
the next three years. California is in the fourth year of a record setting drought, resulting in potential reductions in imported
water supply allocations which could adversely impact water rates and availability of water supplies in the County.
-Water
Proposed rate increases for imported water and electricity may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of our
water systems and consequently on the water rates to our customers over the next few years. California is in the fourth year
of a record setting drought, resulting in potential reductions in imported water supply allocations which could adversely
impact water rates and availability of water supplies in the County.


OA. Complete the formation of a new waterworks district - District No. 38.

Proposed rate increases for imported water and electricity may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of our
water systems and, consequently, on the water rates to our customers over the next few years. A potential reduction in GMA
allocations may also influence operational costs and water rates charged to customers.


OContinue to monitor the county road and provide maintenance as needed


O
Continue to monitor and remediate encroaching trees and tree roots. Complete amendment of the School Crossing Guard
Agreement with Oak Park Unified School District. Where feasible and appropriate, replace irrigation sprinklers with a low
water usage system and plant drought tolerant plants.


O
CSA #29 Sewer Collection Improvements: Replace pump at Solimar Lift Station. Replace STEP Pumps as needed,
complete study for capital improvement program. Upgrade portions of alarm circuiting.

F
Proposed rate increases for electricity and increased Regional Water Quality Control Board permit requirements and costs
may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of our sewer systems and consequently on the sewer rates to our
customers over the next few years.


OCSA #30 Sewer Collection System.

F
Proposed rate increases for electricity and increased Regional Water Quality Control Board permit requirements and costs
may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of our sewer systems and consequently on the sewer rates to our
customers over the next few years.


O
- Conduct negotiations pertaining to Local Agency Management Program approval with LARWQCB staff.
- Continue interaction with LARWQCB staff to facilitate OWTS application processing and water quality protection.
- Develop proposed AB 885 Policy-conforming amendments to the Ventura County Ordinance Code, as necessary.
- Continue electronic imaging of completed OWTS project files.
- Prepare for implementation of new statewide OWTS regulations.

F
Implementation of the County response to the AB 885 Policy may result in increased costs and/or OWTS fee increases
associated with additional oversight responsibilities, such as new or increased OWTS performance monitoring and
recordkeeping.