
1. Review over 80,000 properties to identify needed changes to assessed value due to changing market conditions.
2. Continue to move away from paper inventory and processes by increasing the use of electronic documents.
3. Increase online Business Property Statement e-filing to 90%.
4. Initiate implementation of a new property tax system

1. Taxpayer market perceptions, significant court decisions, legislative changes to property tax law.
2. Recovery of residential real estate markets requiring increases to temporary value reductions.
3. Increased legal resources for complex change in ownership, assessment, and institutional exemption issues.
4. Participation in statewide assessment issues such as exemptions and embedded software exclusions.
5. Increased staffing demands and costs associated with the implementation of a new property tax system.


1. Remain independent, objective, and accountable to the public.
2. Improve transparency to the public and County agencies/departments.
3. Provide accurate and timely financial reports and maintain records that are useful to the public, county management,
and agencies/departments.
4. Ensure accountability to the public through the performance of efficient and effective audits of County services.
5. Hire, train, motivate and retain the highest quality work force.
6. Safeguard County resources and assets.
7. Increase operational efficiency through additional automation of processes.

1. Continue with the upgrade to the countywide financial system; targeted go-live July 1, 2015.
2.Review, implement, and conform to GASB pronouncements to the extent applicable to the County of Ventura.
Implement GASB 68, Accounting and Financial Reporting for Pensions in FY 2015-16.
3. Interpretation and implementation of the California Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act (PEPRA).
4. Meeting requirements set forth in ABx1 26 and AB 1484, ensuring the timely dissolution of Redevelopment Agencies
(RDA).


PROPERTY TAXES
1. Provide support to 11 Successor Agency Oversight Boards, the CEO, the State Controller, and the Department of
Finance as part of the RDA dissolution process.
2. Automate the preparation of property tax CAFR schedules.
3. Analyze options for the continued funding of the annual Teeter Buyout.
4. In conjunction with the Assessor and Tax Collector, continue with the implementation tasks for the new integrated
property tax system.
FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING SYSTEM
1. Work with each County Department and Special District to complete the implementation of the County Financial
Management System Upgrade, including the Performance Budgeting sub-system.
2. Work with the Health Care Agency to implement the Three Way Match process for VCFMS 2.2, which will provide a
foundation for the implementation of the Three Way Match process for VCFMS 3.10.
3. Continue to support the existing version of VCFMS (VCFMS 2.2) using the internal management and operational tools
that have allowed our team to re-allocate staff to support the VCFMS Upgrade Project (VCFMS.3.10).
4. Work with IT Services to develop a Historical VCFMS data warehouse universe to provide visibility of historical VCFMS
2.2 data after the implementation of the upgrade.
5. Work with ACIS and IT Services to rollout the Virtual Server version of the VCFMS 2.2 warehouse to ensure long term
user access to the historical data.
6. Work with Public Works and IT Services to implement the new LCAB Accrual interface.
7. Create an automated weekly Chart of Account extract for placement on the Auditor-Controller's Office web page.
AUDITOR-CONTROLLER INFORMATION SYSTEMS
1. Continue to publish on the Internet the Tax Rate Book, AB8 TRA History Report, District Recap Report, County
Adopted Budget Book, Budget Digest, Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, and audit reports.
2. Continue with Disaster Recovery analysis, including the researching, planning and initiating phases (COOP).
3. Provide technology guidance during the implementation of the new “Property Tax” system, which is used by the Auditor-
Controller’s Office, Assessor’s Office and the Treasurer-Tax Collector.
4. Continue to provide technology guidance during the implementation of the Ventura County Financial Management
System (VCFMS) and performance Budgeting upgrades.
5. In conjunction with ITSD’s county-wide migration of the email from Groupwise to Microsoft Office 365, complete the
upgrade of Auditor-Controller’s workstations, and provide user training to ensure smooth transition to the new system.
6. Update the Five-year Capital Projects Plan and the Information Technology Strategy for fiscal year 2014-15.
7. With the implementation of VMware ESXi servers, continue to integrate the use of virtual technology to reduce the
burden of administration and infrastructure costs.


PAYROLL
1. Continue to respond to Pension Reform initiatives as compensation definitions and interpretations are refined.
2. Continue development, configuration, testing and implementation of Retirement VCERIS (PAS) project components.
3. Continue to modify VCHRP to conform to labor Memorandum of Agreement contracts.
4. Design, develop, configure, test and implement chart of account and interface system modifications in support of the
VCFMS 3X and Performance Budgeting upgrades.
5. Resume countywide VCHRP Query training.
ACCOUNTS PAYABLE
1. Continue to assist in the implementation of the VCFMS 3X upgrade and identify enhancements for Accounts Payable,
Procurement and Vendor Self-Service processes.
2. Continue clean-up of vendor data to assist with the transition to the VCFMS 3X upgrade.
3. Continue to verify new vendor names and Taxpayer Identification Numbers with IRS records to minimize the number of
vendor 1099 mismatches.


FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT:
1. Issue the County’s CAFR for June 30, 2014, including the implementation of GASB Statement Nos. 65, 66, 67, and 70.
2. Analyze the following GASB Statements and evaluate for implementation:
a. No. 68, Accounting and Financial Reporting for Pensions – an amendment of GASB Statement No. 27;
b. No. 69, Government Combinations and Disposals of Government Operations;
c. No. 70, Accounting and Financial Reporting for Nonexchange Financial Guarantees;
d. No. 71, Pension Transition for Contributions Made Subsequent to the Measurement date – an amendment of GASB
Statement No. 68.
3. Contribute Chart of Accounts, General Ledger Cost Accounting, Grant Accounting, Accounts Receivable, and Fixed
Assets subject matter expertise for Financial Systems Upgrade Project.
FINANCIAL PLANNING:
1. Issue the Public Financing Authority Financial Statements for June 30, 2014 including the implementation of any
applicable GASB statements.
2. Complete timely submission of the County’s Adopted Budget for Fiscal Year 2014-15.
3. Provide assistance to the County Executive Office for any new debt issuance.
4. Contribute cash management and budget formulation/execution subject matter expertise for financial and budget
system upgrade projects.
5. Continue to assist the County Executive Office in developing and implementing a new cash projection system.


1. Develop an annual Internal Audit Plan that:
a. Emphasizes audits that impact on cost savings and/or result in additional revenues.
b. Focuses on performance audits to improve internal controls, promote operational economy and efficiency, and mitigate
risk to the County.
c. Seeks to maximize use of the Internal Audit team’s competencies.
2. Meet audit mandates required of the Auditor-Controller.
3. Re-launch the Control Self-Assessment Program for 2015.
4. Maintain the integrity of the Employee Fraud Hotline.
5. Monitor the submission of audits of Federal award subrecipients, special districts, and joint powers authorities.
6. Facilitate auditors’ compliance with continuing professional education requirements.
7. Develop a training schedule to complement planned engagements, and auditors’ strengths and areas in need of
improvement.
8. Promote and encourage Internal Audit staff to actively seek professional certification (e.g., CPA, CIA).


Continued study of the Personnel Rules and Regulations to identify segments that are candidates for amendment.
Continue to keep appeal hearings both cost and time efficient while affording the parties a full and fair hearing. Continue
to study the processes utilized of other county Civil Service Commissions to further streamline the operations of the
Commission’s office. Efficiently review proposed Memoranda of Agreements which are to be negotiated by the County
with various recognized employee organizations and consider revising the Commission’s By-Laws to streamline the
process for said reviews.


1. Re-evaluate the market for available Land Information Management systems.
2. Evaluate vendor solutions for a comprehensive disaster backup and recovery system.
3. Evaluate vendor or in-house solutions to expand our new Courtesy Notice Program to include a notification to
homeowners when any type of deed is recorded for their property.
4. Convert voter registration affidavits to microfilm, from 2005 to present.
5. Expand business days and services at the Thousand Oaks satellite office location.
6. Convert confidential marriage records to electronic format.
7. Install a wedding room webcam to allow for real-time viewing of civil marriage ceremonies from a remote location.


1. Continue to evaluate and improve its procedures to ensure that the voting process in Ventura County is increasingly
user-friendly for voters and Election Officers while remaining in compliance with changing federal and State requirements.
2. Continue to utilize the County’s Geographic Information System (GIS) to provide enhanced precinct data utilized by the
voter registration software and the County’s election precinct maps, and to provide polling place data for the GIS’ County
View mapping software available online to the public.
3. Maintain interaction with GIS and Public Works Surveyor staff by sharing various district data, i.e. meets and bounds,
Assessor Parcel Numbers and boundary maps.
4. Increase social media presence to promote California Online Voter Registration (COVR), Vote By Mail and Military and
Overseas Civilian voter choices.

1. AB 1436 was enacted in 2012 to establish conditional voter registration, which will allow voters to register to vote in the
Elections Division after the 15th day prior to an election or on Election Day and cast a provisional ballot to be counted if
the conditional voter registration is deemed effective. This legislation is effective on January 1 of the year following the
year in which the Secretary of State’s Help America Vote Act (HAVA) compliant statewide voter registration database
(VoteCal) is certified, which is anticipated to be in 2016. This new legislation is expected to increase election costs
(official ballots, staff labor and office space) due to the unforeseen number of voters registering to vote and receiving a
provisional ballot on Election Day.
2. Electronic voting equipment (purchased in 2006) will eventually need to be replaced with “next generation” voting
equipment when new voting equipment is available and certified by the Secretary of State.


1. Provide efficient and effective administration and attorney support services.

County Counsel expects to maintain a balance between administration and productive hours.



1. Continue to adopt technology advances to improve efficiency and effectiveness.
2. Maintain high success rate in litigated cases.
3. Handle increasing appellate workload within current budgetary constraints.

HSA funds the majority of the County Counsel's work in juvenile dependency through a cost shift. If the juvenile
dependency workload continues to increase, it may be necessary to add a full or part time attorney, necessitating either
additional cost shift or an increase in net County cost.


1. In coordination with outside counsel, successfully defend lawsuit for excess benefits under the County’s Supplemental
Retirement Plan
2. Provide legal advice and guidance necessary to processing and possible implementation of initiative petition measure
modifying employee pensions.
3. Provide legal advice and guidance necessary for adoption of regulations governing placement and maintenance of
wireless facilities on private property.
4. In coordination with outside counsel, successfully prosecute appeal of superior court judgment finding CEQA
violations in connection with construction of clinic building.
5. Provide legal guidance and support necessary to adoption of policies or ordinance amendments necessary to
effectively enforce encroachments in public right of way.
6. Continue to provide legal guidance on the County’s jurisdiction over hydraulic fracturing, and any limitations thereon,
to enable the Board of Supervisors to fully understand and exercise its authority.
7. Continue to obtain favorable results in all litigation matters.

County Counsel advisory and litigation services depend on receipt of revenue for legal charges and general fund
support. If departments reduce their use of County Counsel as cost saving measures, County Counsel may have to shift
its effort more toward traditional tort cases, or seek additional general fund support.

 FY 2014-2015
1) Continue to produce a structurally balanced budget while sustaining core public services.
2) Maintain or increase the County’s fiscal reserves.
3) Maintain and, where possible, achieve additional reductions in County overhead and ISF costs to reach the estimated
figure of $33.6 million in four-year cumulative savings through fiscal year 14/15.
4) Maintain the County’s highest possible debt and treasury pool ratings from nationally designated rating agencies.
5) Continue our increased focus on economic development by identifying additional actions and initiatives that the
County can pursue in this critical area; and further incorporate economic development as a major component of the
County’s Strategic Plan.
6) Continue to fulfill the County’s Strategic Plan ; and complete the Plan’s initial 36-month update.
7) Working with our public safety elected officials and department heads, continue to implement the County’s long-term
Public Safety Realignment Plan and supporting programs to realize the Plan’s goals.
8) Continue to implement healthcare reform, both as a service provider and as an employer.
9) Increase the County’s current $20M in annual savings from process improvement.
10) Participate in the County redevelopment agencies’ Successor Agency Boards.
11) Oversee construction, and ensure fiscal sustainability, of the County’s Hospital Replacement Wing at Ventura County
Medical Center.
12) Continue to improve County-wide automation and efficiencies by, working with our Auditor Controller’s Office to
complete the Financial Management and Budget Systems replacement project; continuing work on the Property Tax
System Replacement Project; and further expanding the County’s Website, Accela land management and Electronic
Content Management systems and programs, among others .
13) Increase County Fiscal Transparency by providing real-time graphical access to County Budget and Actual Data via
the County Website.
14) Continue to invest in our County workforce by establishing additional training programs for County leaders and staff,
including a new Leadership Academy Curriculum; grow new mentoring and intern programs, and further implementation
of the new County-wide e-Performance system.
15) Ensure that consistent customer satisfaction rating mechanisms are available to all recipients of County services and
begin collecting metrics from agencies and departments in this area.


1. Complete, in partnership with area cities, the development of a countywide Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing
Choice and a Regional 2015-19 Consolidated Plan.
2. Develop the 2015-16 Annual Action Plan.
3. Prepare the 2013-14 Consolidated Annual Performance Report.
4. Conduct compliance monitoring and program review system for all grants, including onsite monitoring of all open
HOME funded projects.
5. Facilitate implementation of the relevant portions of the Ten-Year Strategy to End Homelessness including reviewing
requests for general funds set aside for homeless facilities.
6. Continue to monitor adoption and implementation of HEARTH Act regulations and relationship to the unit’s expanded
responsibilities for homeless programs.
7. Develop policies, procedures, and strategies to improve likelihood of succeeding in applying for Continuum of Care
funding as a Unified Funding Agency.
8. Senior staff to continue to serve as the Team A Liaison Officer on the Ventura County Emergency Operations Center
(EOC).
9. Continue to explore new grant opportunities and pursue as appropriate and as staff resources allow.
10. Utilize expertise of program staff to provide GIS services to the HUD program, Continuum of Care and existing CEO
staff.
11. Continue providing staff support to the Ventura County Oversight Board for the County of Ventura, pursuing the
transfer and/or disposal of assets as appropriate for the dismantling of the Ventura County Redevelopment Agency.

1. The assumption of responsibilities for administration of the Countywide Continuum of Care is impacting current staff
and the full significance has yet to be realized. Continued uncertainty in grant funding have a corresponding adverse
impact on funding for program administration while demands for reporting, monitoring, and public outreach are
increasing. Financial and staff impacts will be monitored closely and the Board will be apprised of conditions that cannot
be absorbed within existing budgeted resources.


1. Continue efforts to achieve and maintain fiscal stability.
2. Issue $150 million in Tax and Revenue Anticipation Notes through competitive bid process.
3. Continue to automate the Budget Development Manual process.
4. Coordinate capital projects and long term debt.
5. Continue development and implementation of program-based budgeting.
6. Continue development of a county-wide strategic facilities master plan.
7. Continue implementation of the upgrade of the County’s Budget System and identify opportunities for improvement
and enhancement.
8. Expand the implementation of a county-wide Performance Management program.
9. Continue evaluation of alternative energy opportunities for existing county infrastructure and new development.
10. Coordinate and plan the County’s implementation of the public safety realignment as outlined in recently signed
legislation.
11. Assist in evaluating alternative incarceration programs in coordination with the Sheriff and Probation.
12. Develop and monitor increased Realignment programs.
13. Develop a replacement for our aging cash management and projection system.
14. Continue to work with the twelve successor agencies, of the former Redevelopment Agencies within Ventura County,
in order to wind down agency operations as outlined in ABx1.
15. Assist the Sheriff in developing funding for a vehicle/evidence storage facility and for a new CAD system for Sheriff
Communications Center.
16. Continue providing oversight management of the Property Tax Assessment and Collection System (PTACS) as a
CEO representation to the project governance committee.
17. Evaluate the program administration of the Tobacco Settlement Program and recommend program modification in
accordance to Ordinance 4428.
18. Continue to assist the Governor’s RAC in developing a permanent allocation formula for realignment funds to
counties.


GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS:
1. Develop State and Federal legislative Agendas and Platforms and pursue sound and effective local government
through the legislative process.
2. Pursue regional funding for the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County through Proposition 84 (water bond) passed
by California voters in 2006.
3. Pursue regional funding for the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County through the passage of emergency legislation
for drought-related projects.
4. Manage the $485,000 Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County Integrated Regional Water Management Planning
Grant.
5. Manage the $17.5 million Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County Integrated Regional Water Management Round 1
Implementation Grant.
6. Manage the $18 million Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County Integrated Regional Water Management Round 2
Implementation Grant.
7. Manage the Southern California Edison energy grants.
8. Manage the completion of the $25 million State Water Resources Control Board water grant.
9. Manage the Ventura County Regional Energy Alliance program.
10. Manage the Climate Protection Plan activities and responsibilities.
11. Manage the emPower comprehensive energy efficiency financing program in collaboration with Santa Barbara and
San Luis Obispo Counties.
SERVICE EXCELLENCE OFFICE:
1. Facilitate the update or creation of three Agency Executive Planning Sessions by June 30, 2015.
2. Work with agencies to support continued cost savings.
3. Work with agencies to develop agency-level dashboards.


1. Continue to provide fiscal, administrative and information technology services to County Executive Office, Board of
Supervisors, Civil Service Commission and the Grand Jury.
2. Continue to assist with the development of department program budgets, cost recovery rate calculations and workflow
models.
3. Continue to collaborate with the CEO-Budget Division and Auditor-Controller’s Office on the development and smooth
transition of the VCFMS Upgrade.


GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS:
1. Develop State and Federal legislative Agendas and Platforms and pursue sound and effective local government
through the legislative process.
2. Pursue regional funding for the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County through Proposition 84 (water bond) passed
by California voters in 2006.
3. Pursue regional funding for the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County through the passage of emergency legislation
for drought-related projects.
4. Manage the $485,000 Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County Integrated Regional Water Management Planning
Grant.
5. Manage the $17.5 million Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County Integrated Regional Water Management Round 1
Implementation Grant.
6. Manage the $18 million Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County Integrated Regional Water Management Round 2
Implementation Grant.
7. Manage the Southern California Edison energy grants.
8. Manage the completion of the $25 million State Water Resources Control Board water grant.
9. Manage the Ventura County Regional Energy Alliance program.
10. Manage the Climate Protection Plan activities and responsibilities.
11. Manage the emPower comprehensive energy efficiency financing program in collaboration with Santa Barbara and
San Luis Obispo Counties.
SERVICE EXCELLENCE OFFICE:
1. Facilitate the update or creation of three Agency Executive Planning Sessions by June 30, 2015.
2. Work with agencies to support continued cost savings.
3. Work with agencies to develop agency-level dashboards.


1. Continue to provide fiscal, administrative and information technology services to County Executive Office, Board of
Supervisors, Civil Service Commission and the Grand Jury.
2. Continue to assist with the development of department program budgets, cost recovery rate calculations and workflow
models.
3. Continue to collaborate with the CEO-Budget Division and Auditor-Controller’s Office on the development and smooth
transition of the VCFMS Upgrade.


1. Adopt Local Rules for City Selection Committee, Fire Protection District Appeals Board, and the Assessment Appeals
Board.
2. Set hearing dates for all 2014/15 Regular Assessment Appeals by March 1, 2015.
3. Request and processes updated Conflict of Interest Codes from each entity within the Board of Supervisors’ authority
as the Code Reviewing Body.
4. Provide information regarding Board/Commission appointments to the Board of Supervisors quarterly.


1. Develop/implement Strategic Leadership Academy.
2. Continue/implement Manager Nuts and Bolts Training Phase II.
3. Implement e-Performance to additional Agencies and Departments.
4. Continue implementation of Customer Service Model needs assessment.
5. Continue to provide guidance and training to agency/department staff on HR/Payroll Programs including
enhancements to VCHRP.
6. Continue evaluation of County-wide training needs.
7. Continue to represent the County in various administrative forums, as necessary.
8. Continue to improve/maintain recruitment metrics turnaround times and decrease standard deviation.
9. Continue to update and delete unused classification specifications.
10. Continue development of training curriculum based on Department/Agency staffing development needs.
11. Continue with implementation and performance measurement of Nuts & Bolts for Managers training courses.
12. Support the implementation of a new Strategic Leadership series in alignment with the Strategic Plan.
13. Design and implement “Real Colors-Team Building” to offer more training opportunities to agencies.
14. Work with Clerk of the Board to deliver and track AB1234 training.
15. Provide customized Customer Service training for IT Services to replace what has previously been contracted through
an outside vendor.
16. Support ITS with training for Office 365 implementation.
17. Support HR with training for ePerformance implementation.
18. Provide training opportunities for public employees in other jurisdictions.

1. Provide training opportunities for public employees in other jurisdictions which may result in some potential program
cost recovery.
2. Provide customized Customer Service training for IT Services, which will result in a cost savings to IT Services through
the elimination of an outside vendor contract.


1. Complete Supplemental Retirement Plan comprehensive actuarial valuation as of June 30, 2014 incorporating GASB
67 & 68 reporting requirements.
2. Serve on GASB 67 & 68 task force.
3. Prepare plan information for FY 2013/14 CAFR.
4. Research possible plan design changes and distribution alternatives.
5. Research alternative solutions for plan beneficiary record keeping.
4. Calculate department allocation of the Elected Department Head Annual Required Contribution (ARC) for the budget
development manual.
5. Complete Minimum Required Distribution payments as required under federal regulations.
6. Conduct annual benefit mailing inclusive of application requests and pertinent plan information.
7. Conduct semiannual investment reviews in adherence to the Investment Policy Statement.
8. Monitor 415 limits for Elected Department Head benefit recipients to ensure limit is not exceeded.


1. Complete bargaining with the remaining six (6) exclusive employee organizations with expired labor agreements within
the Board of Supervisors’ approved parameters and without disruption to county operations.
2. Continue to improve working relationships with county line agencies/departments and the ten (10) labor organizations
that represent county employees through thirteen (13) labor contracts.
3. Proceed with the continual update of the Labor Relations’ grievance and discipline tracking system and develop
performance indicators.
4. Hire a quality labor relations professional at the management analyst level.
5. Continue to secure appropriate and necessary professional certification of Labor Relations staff.


1. Procure a new vendor for the Mortgage Credit Certificate program, following the current provider’s retirement
2. Continue to administer the countywide Mortgage Credit Certificate Program.
3. Apply for new allocations as funds are depleted.

The current contractor for our Mortgage Credit Certificate Program is retiring, necessitating the procurement of a new
vendor for this countywide program.


1. Continue to refine and enhance the Treasurer-Tax Collector's on-line presence by utilizing social media and digital
marketing.
2. Continue to expand public relations through a presence at special community events and brand management.

The mandated requirements for both tax collections, treasury and investment are increasingly becoming complex in
nature. The Executive Management is actively engaged in and partnered with various state and national organizations to
stay abreast of any legislative changes and/or practices.


1. Continue to provide East County taxpayers a convenient location to make inquiries or tax payments during the secured
December and April collection cycles.
2. Continue to proactively engage in business process improvements that result in increase efficiencies to meet the goals
and  of the Office.
3. Continue to explore the utilization of existing equipment and staff to accept and process payments for other County
Departments and Agencies.


1. Continue to maintain the highest possible Standard and Poor’s rating of AAAF/S-1+ for the County’s investment pool.
2. Market the investment pool to local agencies to increase the size of the pool and reduce the basis points which will
leverage its operations for increased efficiencies.
3. Expand the number of Agencies/Departments that participate in online payments through the County EPay system by
collaborating with ITSD and the Auditor-Controller and coordinating services with the County bank.
4. Provide greater transparency and accountability by issuing annual audited GAAP financial reports on investment
performance.

To prepare the GAAP financial reports on investment performance, the Treasury will need to hire a Financial Analyst with
a specialty in finance and accounting.


Continue to transition permittees to electronic pesticide use reporting.
Continued refinement of permitting in Cal Ag Permits Software.
Continue to complete the mapping of the crop layer.
Continue to provide in-house training and DPR sponsored training to current and new Inspectors.
Continue to provide assistance for newly hired inspectors in passing the two examinations that focus on Pesticide Use
Enforcement
Create a specialist on staff for residue investigations.

The increase in reported Pesticide Episodes referred to the CAC and the increase in the number of possible illegal
pesticide residues on produce grown in Ventura COunty involves an inordinate amount of staff time to conduct
investigations.
The DPR decided in 2012 to cancel the registration of Iodomethane a replacement product for Methyl Bromide. While
this decision halts the political debate in California it puts increasing pressure on the existing fumigant materials, all of
which have recently undergone extensive review by USEPA with resulting changes in both Federal and State labels.
With regard to the State Budget, our partners are the California Department of Food and Agriculture and the California
Department of Pesticide Regulation. The California Department of Pesticide Regulation is not a general fund department
and we would not expect any reduction in subventions in this area.


To transition more nurseries from the Master Compliance Agreements to the Approved Treatment Program, thereby
reducing the number of nurseries that require 100% inspection of nursery stock shipped to the non-infested areas.

In addition to the impacts from the ACP quarantine Ventura County compliance agreements issued in the PDCP may also
be affected by the quarantines for other exotic pests such as the Light Brown Apple Moth and the European Grapevine
Moth. The actual legislation allowing for the funding of PDCP changed in the beginning of 2011 to allow the Wine Grape
Growers to designate funding generated by them to any pest of wine grapes. Depending on how this industry decides to
distribute the available funding, Ventura County’s program could be affected.


There are 140 Certified Producers in Ventura County. Our goal is to increase the frequency of inspection from once a
year to twice a year and to increase our presence at the fifteen Certified Farmers Markets (CFMs) in the county. The
increased focus on locally grown produce in the media has resulted in more public interest in purchasing produce at the
CFMs.

Most of the programs in this area are industry funded and we do not expect significant reductions in funding in the next
fiscal year.


We are increasing training and recruitment to mitigate the serious shortage of qualified inspectors certified as Federal
Cooperators.
The Agricultural Commissioner is working with various stakeholders to secure the best funding possible for programs that
protect the agricultural industry from the influx of exotic pests.

We have experienced a sharp increase in workload due to the Quarantine requirements for Asian Citrus Psyllid ( ACP),
Light Brown Apple Moth (LBAM), Sudden Oak Death (SOD) Disease and European Grapevine Moth (EGVM) shipments
coming into Ventura County. We have also seen an increase in the workload attendant upon certifying shipments of
citrus and berries to Australia. The shipments to Australia are reimbursed through grower fees for inspection and
certification; however the workload attendant upon incoming shipments for LBAM, SOD and EGVM are not reimbursed at
this time and are creating a serious shortage of inspectors certified as Federal Cooperators.


Our Santa Paula office is in its 2nd phase of remodel and we are near its completion. We have moved our data to a
terminal server in Saticoy so that all of our offices would have access to the data in a timely manner.
The Agricultural Commissioner recently upgraded his county website through cooperation with IT Services. The website
is more informative and easier to navigate. We plan to continue to monitor and maintain the website current so that the
public can learn and understand more about the Agricultural Commissioner's Office and about our county's agricultural
industry.

We are nearing the completion of the second phase of the remodel of our Santa Paula facility in order to create a safer
and more comfortable environment for our employees. While the initial plan was to upgrade the paint, carpet, and
furniture we have now partnered with GSA to upgrade other areas of the facility such as the restrooms, the entryway,
seismic and electrical. The second phase of this project will involves replacing the roof, upgrading the HVAC, and exterior
painting of the building.
We completed migration of our Pesticide Use and Permitting database to a terminal server offsite. Our staff is
implementing a new statewide program for issuing permits and grower operator identification numbers. While we are still
experiencing issues with data transfer speeds into the Santa Paula office, data transfer speeds have increased to
acceptable levels at our Camarillo offices.


Research and outreach in the areas of mitigating plant disease and combating pests and invasive species which can
have a devastating effect on the county’s agricultural producers and water supply mechanisms continues to be an area of
focus. We have been very active in educating county growers and the public about the Asian Citrus Psyllid (ACP), an
insect that has destroyed Florida citrus groves. A task force has been organized and outreach in this area has helped
keep this threat in check so far. This and other threats could have negative economic consequences on a $1.5 billion
county industry.
Our strawberry and vegetable advisor will perform funded research to benefit the county’s strawberry and vegetable
growers in finding cost effective, viable alternatives to methyl bromide use, increasing production and managing plant
disease. Strawberries are the leading agricultural commodity in Ventura County, with a value of $625,151,000.
We continue to be active in promoting nutrition and home gardening. More attention is being given to it as a means for
families to save on food cost and promote healthier eating habits. County Director Rose Hayden-Smith continues her
work on a USDA committee forming national gardening initiative. The coming year will see an increase in farming and
nutrition awareness programs aimed at youth that includes field trips and events the Hansen Agricultural Center
Our Master Gardener program annually contributes over 20,000 to 25,000 volunteer hours to disseminating valuable
gardening information to county school, home and community gardeners. They have active gardens projects throughout
the county including the ARC center in Ojai, Goebel Center in Thousand Oaks, “Hands On” garden programs, regular
workshops for the public, speaking engagements, and projects at the Hansen Agricultural Center in Santa Paula.
Our goals of pursuing a healthy and sustainable community by keeping agriculture viable and environmentally sound,
protecting our natural resources, developing life skills in youth, maintaining healthy eating and lifestyles for families,
developing service-oriented community volunteers and exploring stewardship opportunities are more important to the
county than ever.

The research and community projects we do now are part of a continuing effort to ensure a higher quality future for
Ventura County residents. The seeds we sow now will pay off not only in sustaining our very important agricultural
industry, but in developing our youth, supporting our families, and protecting our natural assets. Our department
accounts for a very small percentage of the general fund budget, but reaps continual and far-reaching benefits from this
important collaborative effort with the University of California system.


Create a Tumblr page for more social media exposure, create Twitter page where all stray animals will automatically be
posted on page with picture, description and location found, post all animals that are in foster care on website. Create a
trust fund where donations made to the shelter can be earmarked and allocated, renovate kennels at Camarillo and Simi
Valley shelters and front office to make the shelter animals less stressed and create an efficient animal intake process,
implement adoption counseling, offer more adoption promotions to help save more lives and continue to maintain current
and develop new lifesaving programs to lower the euthanasia rate by innovativeness.

The renovation of the shelters is crucial to the success of the Department becoming no-kill facility.


Provide all officers Iphones and laptops to increase efficiencies, create new hire training plan, properly outfit officers with
necessary equipment needed to safely perform their jobs, including protective vests and continue to work closely with
State Fish and Wildlife to develop new protocols for wildlife handling.

If the cities drop service hours, then field officers will be eliminated, which could impact service to the unincorporated
areas.


Continue to enhance the online licensing process, create QR codes on receipts and other paperwork to make licensing
pets on mobile phones user friendly and change the public counter and phone hours to reflect the peak hours of service
requests and customer needs. Increase animal licensing by 1% countywide.

There are an estimated 210,000 dogs in the county and less than one third of them are currently licensed. Other than a
seasonal canvassing program using part-time help, current staffing levels limit proactive licensing efforts.


Fill existing vacancies by hiring another Veterinarian and Veterinarian Technician to conduct in-house spays and neuters.
Create a trust fund where donations made to the shelter can be earmarked and allocated, and develop new lifesaving
programs to lower the euthanasia rate by innovativeness and enter into an agreement with local trade schools to allow
pre-veterinarian students to fulfill their internship hours in a medical facility.

The renovation of the veterinarian office and surgical unit is crucial to the success of the Department performing spays
and neuters and becoming a no-kill facility.


Continue to enhance the online licensing process, create QR codes on receipts and other paperwork to make licensing
pets on mobile phones user friendly and change the phone hours to reflect the peak hours of service requests and
customer needs. Increase animal licensing by 1% countywide.

The reorganization of the Department allows for more efficient and effective management.


Complete Year 4 of the FEMA-mandated 5-year Recertification of the CRS-Program for Unincorporated Ventura County.
Initiate the multi-year CRS Re-Application process required by FEMA in order for the Unincorporated Ventura County
areas to remain in the CRS program for the next five year period (2015-2020).


Prepare and have adopted a new Water Pipeline Franchise Ordinance; Renewal of Vintage Petroleum Oil Pipeline
Franchise; and review Oil Pipeline Franchise Ordinance for possible amendment addressing franchise fees for private
pipelines and liquidated damages for oil pipeline transfers completed without the prior approval of the Board of
Supervisors.


Improve on turnaround time for checking maps and corner records. Develop and implement Multi-Year plan for
maintenance of vertical control network. Revise the Guide for the Preparation of Maps. Coordinate with Recorder's
Office to facilitate transfer of fund for document recording.


Meet with stakeholders and finalize the Non-Development and Development Grading Standards. As a recommendation
from our customers to improve customer service the following items will be investigated, selected and implemented.
Create an electronic delivery system that allows engineering consultants to upload their grading plans and engineering
reports for plan check online. Create an electronic delivery system that can upload large files for all completed grading
plan checks and geotechnical report reviews so that the applicant and their consultants can view and download the plan
check online. Create an internal office procedure that allows construction change orders as part of a grading permit to be
approved over the counter in an expedient manner.


Finalize the Floodplain Damage Mitigation Ordinance. Examine consolidating the floodplain development permit
processing, plan check and inspections into other permits to save time and money for the permit applicants. Prepare and
pass without issue a Community Assistance Visit by FEMA in 2014/2015.


1)State Mandated Solid Waste Diversion Compliance: Comply with all aspects of the California Integrated Waste
Management Act (AB 939) and AB 341 for all non-exempted unincorporated area businesses meeting or exceeding
minimum thresholds. 2)Contract Adminstration: Administer up to 20 newly developed residential and commercial solid
waste collection agreements for sevice within the UA, including enforcement of requires collector reporting, payments, &
services. 3)Annual Fee & Rate Increases: Implement annual adjustments in solid waste-related rates & fees pursuant
both to solid waste hauler agreements as well as the Simi Valley Landfill & Recycling Cinter operating agreement.
4)Ordinance Administration: Administer existing agreements for Simi Valley Landfill, Toland Landfill, & OVO Recycling
Center. Condition all building projects meeting thresholds of the County's C&D debris recycling Oridinance 4421 while
maintainin enforcement & oversight of all other solid waste ordinance codes (i.e. Ord. 4445) within division purview.
5)Community Beautification: In cooperation with Supervisors' offices, conduct 12 CBEs among the various supervisorial
districts. 6)Pollution Prevention Center: Continue HHW collection operation in compliance with state mandate.
7)Electronic Waste Collection: Continue e-waste collection per state mandate. 8)Regional Collaboration: Maintain cordial
dialogue and mutually beneficial collaboration amongst all County jurisdictions. 9)RMDZ Program Administration:
Maintain administration of RMDZ program to provide long-term, low interest loans to eligible Ventura County businesses.
10)Represent the County on both Solid Waste and Conversion Technology Committees of CEAC.


PUBLIC COUNTER:
 Use the Planning Division website and Accela Automation with Citizens Access as a means of communication between
applicants and staff to further streamline the processing of certain types of Zoning Clearances and Tree Permits.
 Further refine and improve Accela Automation records and reports that are utilized by the Permit Administration Staff.
 Focus attention on improving the processing of ministerial lot line adjustments, ministerial lot mergers, legal lot
determinations, and conditional certificate of compliance reviews.
FILM PERMITS:
 Use the Planning Division website and Accela Automation with Citizens Access as a means of communication between
applicants and staff to further streamline the film permit process.
 Explore potential to add a Live Chat function to the Film Permit website that would allow production companies or
interested parties to chat with the Film Permit Coordinator.
 Complete the branding of the film permit program by creating a new film permit URL for the website and a new general
email address for all film permit questions.
PERMIT AND SUBDIVISION ENTITLEMENT PROCESSING:
 Further refine, and implement the use of, the new Initial Study form.
 Continue updating the standard forms and templates,
 Present recommendations to the Board of Supervisors regarding necessary amendments to the Ventura County
Subdivision Ordinance and, if authorized to do so by the Board of Supervisors, begin work on the amendments.
 Develop administrative policies or, if found to be needed, amendments to the Zoning Ordinances regarding expiration
dates for Conditional Use Permits.
 Continue to refine and improve upon the Discretionary Entitlement record in the Accela software program.
 Continue to review and update the Standard Conditions document that is used when preparing conditions of approval
for discretionary entitlements.
 Continue to efficiently process entitlement applications.
 Conduct training for Planning Division and other County agency staff on permit processing-related topics (e.g., CEQA,
select topics of the Ventura County Initial Study Assessment Guidelines).
 Monitor and, if found to be appropriate, revise permit processing procedures in accordance with new information
published by the California Coastal Commission and non-governmental organizations (e.g., The Nature Conservancy)
regarding coastal sea-level rise.
 Work with Watershed Protection District staff to initiate a California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) User Group for
County staff who are involved with the implementation of CEQA.
CUSTOMER SERVICE:
 Continue the efforts within the Planning Division to take immediate action to respond to public comments and survey
responses.
MINING AND OIL & GAS:
 Finalization of text amendments for the Non-Coastal Zoning Ordinance.
 Continued development of the SMARA Program website.
 Develop County-specific Reclamation Standards and a Vested Rights Determination process.
 Complete inspection and financial assurance process for each mining operation in the County.
 Development of County permit process for project granted a SMARA exemption by the SMGB.
 Create a stand-alone CUP application for mining and O&G projects.
 Review and implement improvements in the oil and gas permitting and condition compliance program.
 Coordinate with other County agencies and the State Division of Oil and Gas and Geothermal Resources (DOGGR) on
the inspection and monitoring of oil and gas facilities.
 Comment on the Draft EIR to be prepared by DOGGR on oil well stimulation techniques (hydraulic fracturing and
acidization).
CONDITION COMPLIANCE:
 Continue tracking of CEQA Mitigation measures to ensure long-term compliance.
 Perform regular reviews on sites with discretionary permits as staff time allows.
 Develop a protocol for annual compliance review of events held on weekends (e.g., temporary event CUPs, wedding
venues, etc.)


 Responding to changes in state law.
 Keeping pace with technological advancements in mapping and database management.
 Meeting Permit Streamlining Act deadlines.
 Keep up with programmatic and administrative needs in light of ongoing revenue limitations.


 Complete processing of, and obtain Board approval for, a Wireless Ordinance for the Non-Coastal Zoning Ordinance.
Pending available staff resources, also process a customized version for the Coastal Zoning Ordinance. Amend General
Plan maps to reflect LAFCO-approved annexations.
 Complete the 2015 Annual Report and submit to OPR and HCD as required by State law.
 Pending Board direction, process amendments to the Subdivision Ordinance, Non-Coastal Zoning Ordinance, and
Coastal Zoning Ordinance related to project notifications.
 Work cooperatively with SCAG to amend land use maps for Ventura County that affect the Regional Transportation
Plan and Regional Housing Needs Assessment.
 Continue processing grant-funded projects (see Grants and Other Programs, 4706) related to County General Plan
(including Area Plans) and Coastal or Non-Coastal Zoning Ordinance amendments.

 Responding to Board directives, changes in State law, and privately initiated applications in a timely manner with limited
staff resources.
 Keeping pace with technological advancements in mapping and database management.


GRANTS:
 Complete the Coastal Biology and develop mitigation measures for ESHA in the Santa Monica Mountains.
 Process a countywide update to the Landscape Guidelines by December 2016.
 Continue to process Phase II updates to the County’s Local Coastal Program.
 Continue efforts to complete a comprehensive update to the Saticoy Area Plan.
 Identify funding for portions of the Saticoy Area Plan CEQA document not funded through the Sustainable Communities
Grant.
 Continue to seek grant funding opportunities, such as CIAP or Coastal Commission grants, to fund additional LCP
amendments including policies related to sea-level rise.
MOBILE HOME PARK RENT REVIEW PROGRAM:
 Continue to provide staff support to the Rent Review Board (RRB) assuring compliance with Ordinance 4366.
 Ensure the RRB is properly trained to carry out its duties.
CULTURAL HERITAGE PROGRAM:
 Develop a Planning counter handout for demolition or alteration of potentially historic structures.
 Complete the historic context statement for the eastern Oxnard Plain, utilizing grant funding from SHPO.
 Continue to promote awareness and appreciation of historic resources and cultural heritage.
 Identify, document, and preserve historic resources.

 Responding to changes in state law.
 Completion of grant-funded programs with limited staff resources.
 Continue to seek grant funding opportunities.


 Maintain next day processing of inspection requests of 99%.
 Improve our current inspector/supervisor follow up and ride-along program.
 Maintain Safety Assessment Program (SAP) certification and training for inspection staff.
 Continue overall training in the latest building codes and standards from both in-house instructors and out-of-house
educational opportunities.
 Continue training inspection staff on NPDES Surface Water Quality Requirements for construction sites.
 Training and Certification for Accessibility Specialist (CASp)
 Continue training inspection staff on field enforcement of Floodplain construction standards.
 Continue training in our Injury and Illness Prevention Program.

 Preparing for changes in state building standards and regulations.
 Improving use of technological advancements in GIS, mapping and processing field inspection data.
 Staying abreast of CalEMA and Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) training requirements for damage
assessment.


 Pursue and maintain "Less than 15 Days" average turnaround standard for first plan checks while continuing to strive
for a “Less than 10 Days” average turnaround time.
 Continue training in our Injury and Illness Prevention Program.
 Obtain Plan Checker Training and Certification for Accessibility Specialist (CASp).
 Obtain additional training and certification for plan check staff in floodplain management.
 Continue to train staff on the California Energy and Green Building Codes.

 Preparing for continuing changes in state building standards and regulations, particularly in Green Building, Water
Conservation, and Energy Efficiency.
 Staying abreast CalEMA and FEMA training requirements for damage assessment.


 Continue improving and updating our public information handouts.
 Continue document imaging of division files, including migration of document images to File Net for access through
Accela Automation.
 Maintain and improve our online Policy and Interpretation Manual.
 Maintain staff training on adopted codes, ordinances and appropriate State laws effecting building construction and
continue compliance with all State Laws.
 Continue training in our Injury and Illness Prevention Program.
 Continue to train staff on the California Energy and Green Building Codes.
 Establish standard benchmarks for customer service wait times.
 Continue public outreach and education on topics such as graywater and energy conservation.
 Participate in Grading and Floodplain process improvements.

 Preparing for continuing changes in state building standards and regulations, particularly in Green Building, Water
Conservation, and Energy efficiency.
 Staying abreast CalEMA and FEMA training requirements for damage assessment.


ADMINISTRATION:
 Review agency space needs for possible master plan.
 Continue development of relevant business reports (Information Systems, Human Resources, and Fiscal data) for
agency use in operational decisions.
FISCAL SERVICES:
 Automate state reports to eliminate manual data entry.
PERSONNEL SERVICES:
 Complete update of agency job specifications to meet current standards and job requirements.
 Complete agency recruitment manual for managers.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY/GRAPHICS/WEB/ GIS:
 Implement new email system and its sharing components in coordination with Information Systems Technology
Department.
 Implement web portal for Environmental Health Cross Connection to electronically receive plans and information to
eliminate monthly manual data entry.
 Upgrade Dynamics time-keeping/ billing system.

This budget unit provides administrative and technical support services to the agency and its costs are largely funded by
the agency’s user fees.


Continue monitoring of EIR accounts and timely closure as required by the contract and initiate administrative contract
amendments.

This program is cost-neutral as applicants pay for consultant costs.


 Provide assistance to responsible parties during the transition from local oversight to State Water Resource Control
Board.

The program will be eliminated at the end of the 2013-2014 Fiscal Year. No program or financial impacts are expected
for the 2014-2015 Fiscal Year.


HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
 Continue to train and assist customers with the implementation of CERS.
 Incorporate new inspection and data software into the CUPA program to facilitate CERS implementation.
 Begin implementation of electronic submittal of program documents and inspection reports to our customers.
MEDICAL WASTE AND BODY ART:
 Implement the new requirements of the Safe Body Art Act into the existing Medical Waste Body Art program and
identify additional businesses that are subject to these requirements.
 Provide outreach to medical waste generators on the safe handling and disposal of medical waste.
 Participate on a State wide Medical Waste and Body Art technical advisory committee to develop clean-up language to
the medical waste and body art legislation.
VOLUNTARY CLEANUP PROGRAM:
 Continue to provide outreach to local businesses regarding the advantages of the program.
 Continue support and cleanup oversight for owners of non-underground storage tank contaminated properties.

 State regulations became effective January 2013 that required the electronic submittal of data from facilities subject to
CUPA jurisdiction, directly to Cal/EPA. The CUPA section is tasked with training and assisting facilities with this data
transmittal. This will continue to add costs to the CUPA program in staff time dedicated to providing this assistance.
 The Safe Body Art Act was amended in October 2013 and requires increased regulatory oversight of body art
practitioners and facilities. As additional facilities are identified that are subject to this oversight, additional staff time will
be required to provide this oversight.
 There is pending legislation that may increase regulatory oversight in the Medical Waste program. This legislation will
be tracked to determine potential impacts to these programs.
 The CUPA Forum Board has started reducing the amount of scholarship funding available each year to Environmental
Health Division staff to attend the annual CUPA conference and obtain required continuing education units. This
reduction will require an adjustment to the Division’s annual budget.


 Continue providing monthly food handling training in both Spanish and English to food service employees working in
retail food facilities in Ventura County.
 Continue providing outreach promoting Environmental Health as a career to local high school and college students.
 Continue to work with local environmental health divisions and food industry representatives in a statewide effort to
uniformly apply the California Retail Food Code.
 Continue outreach efforts to local retail food facility community to assist them in gaining compliance with State safe
food handling requirements.
 Continue mobile Food/TFF operator outreach and program streamlining.
 Continue program reviews to improve permit processes and reduce costs without compromising public health.

State law was passed which requires that food facility operators may not allow bare hand contact with prepared food
items. In most cases, this will mean that food facility operators will need to be educated on the proper use of gloves for
food service to the public. There is also an exception provided in the law which allows use of bare hands if a detailed plan
for hand washing is submitted and approved by EHD. This law change will result in additional workload to educate
business owners and process exception plans. Efforts to further revise this law are ongoing at the state level.


 Continue mosquito breeding source inspections and control activities.
 Continue responding to public complaints and service requests for mosquito control activities.
 Continue mosquito transmitted disease surveillance efforts.
 Continue disease surveillance and/or provide public information for Hantavirus, Plague, and Lyme Disease.


 Evaluate Liquid Waste Program standards and procedures, and commence alignment of these standards and
procedures with new statewide requirements.
 Continue permitting and enforcement activities pertaining to solid waste activities to insure protection of human health,
safety and the environment.
 Continue review of land use projects to insure conformance with applicable State and County requirements and
evaluate environmental impacts associated with these projects.
 Continue to secure additional State grant and other available funding for the Ocean Water Quality Monitoring Program
and conduct monitoring program consistent with available funding.
 Continue to evaluate State small water systems and individual/shared water supplies to insure conformance with State
primary drinking water standards.
 Continue data management through the use of Envision Connect and Accela to improve program efficiency and
enhance inter-program communication and data sharing.

 State regulations have been implemented requiring Registered Environmental Health Specialists to obtain Continuing
Education Contact Hours to maintain their registration status. This adds costs and increased staff time dedicated to
training.
 State funding and other potential revenue sources for the Ocean Water Quality Monitoring Program remain uncertain
from year to year.
 Implementation of new State wide onsite wastewater treatment and disposal requirements may result in increased
program costs due to more in-depth application review and water quality monitoring/data management.
 The Environmental Health Division will continue to be engaged in the local response to onsite wastewater treatment
system water quality concerns identified in Total Maximum Daily Loads adopted and/or in process by the Regional Water
Quality Control Board and/or Environmental Protection Agency. This will add costs associated with increased staff time
dedicated to this effort.


 Work with Statewide Sealers organization (CACASA) to develop accurate benchmark data with respect to individual
device inspection times. This data will be used as an assessment tool for legislative device fee increase adjustments.
 We will be sending staff to the upcoming Increase National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) HB 130 Class
on “Packaging and Labeling” in Los Angeles County and statewide training on proper Price Verification procedures.
 Develop QC equipment proposal for CACASA Trust fund reimbursement.

 Continue efforts to retain the county subvention contract from the State of California Division of Measurement
Standards (CA-DMS) for Petroleum inspections and for Weighmaster to enforce junk dealers & recyclers inspections.
 Unfortunately, CA-DMS still has discontinued support, training, and coordination activities for county Price Verification
and Quantity control programs. Several funding concepts have been developed to restore funding, including the
imposition and collection of a new surcharge on Board of Equalization Retail licenses using a price look-up system and to
add a statewide authority for consumer protection packer fees.
 Continued specialized weights and measures equipment sharing agreements with neighboring county departments to
avoid or delay purchase of this expensive testing equipment. Two examples include our use of Los Angeles County’s
mobile dynamometer for taxi testing and Santa Barbara County’s high volume prover for aviation fuel meter testing.


 Accela Citizen Access will be going live and give both property owners and complainants real time access to their case
status.
 Continue our partnership with community organizations (Habitat for Humanity, Humane Society) and other county
agencies (Sheriff, Adult Protective Services, Animal Services) to improve housing stock and the livability of
neighborhoods.
 Continue sending staff for advanced certification, such as the week long training academy accredited by the California
Association of Code Enforcement Officials (CACEO).
 Continue to send staff to CACEO training seminars and conferences to add their skills.


- Supportive services funded and provided under Title III B include: Information and Referral Services which link older
persons and their families to specific community services, in-home services such as personal care, homemaker and
chore services, adult day care, legal services to help identify legal problems and legal service needs of older persons,
case management, material aid, outreach, transportation to medical appointments, and transportation to the congregate
meal site.
- The Older Americans Act mandates the operation of a long-term-care Ombudsman program, funded in part by Title III B.
A state-certified ombudsman is a trained individual who investigates and resolves complaints made by, or on behalf of,
older individuals who are residents of long-term-care facilities, nursing homes, and residential care homes. They do not
represent the facility. Complaints may relate to inadequate hygiene; physical abuse; personal items lost, stolen, or used
by others; understaffing of the facility; action, inaction, or decisions of long-term-care providers (or their representatives),
public agencies, or social service agencies that may adversely affect the health, safety, welfare, or rights of residents.
Ombudsmen are guaranteed access to facilities and must maintain strict rules of confidentiality for clients and
complainants.
- The Senior Nutrition program (Title III C) provides both congregate and home delivered meals to seniors throughout
Ventura County. The purpose of the nutrition program is to: reduce hunger and food insecurity, promote socialization of
older individuals and promote the health and well-being of older individuals and delay adverse health conditions through
access to nutrition and other disease prevention and health promotion services. Meals and related nutrition services
(nutrition education and nutrition counseling) are provided to older individuals in a variety of settings including congregate
facilities such as senior centers; or by home-delivery to older individuals who are homebound due to illness, disability, or
geographic isolation. Services are targeted to those in greatest social and economic need with particular attention to low
income individuals, minority individuals, those in rural communities, those with limited English proficiency and those at
risk of institutional care. Nutrition Services Programs help older individuals to remain independent and in their
communities.
- Title IIID provides funding for evidence based health, prevention, wellness and medication management programs
aimed at providing seniors with the tools to maintain their health, reduce their risk of developing chronic diseases, and
manage their health to live as independently as possible.
- Title IIIE provides funding for a range of support services which assist family and informal caregivers to care for their
loved ones at home for as long as possible. Families are the major provider of long-term care, but research has shown
that care-giving exacts a heavy emotional, physical and financial toll. Through contracts and direct service provision, the
following services may be provided: information to caregivers about available services, assistance to caregivers in
gaining access to the services, individual counseling, organization of support groups, and caregiver training, respite care,
and supplemental services.
- Title V Senior Employment Services is dedicated to providing job training and employment opportunities for qualifying
adults age 55 and over.
- Title VII provides funds to develop services and program to prevent elder abuse, neglect and exploitation.
- The Health Insurance Counseling Advocacy Program (HICAP) with substantial volunteer support, provides assistance to
help seniors choose the Medicare Plan to best suit their needs, and to assist them with other health insurance related
issues.

Reduced and uncertain funding continues to threaten the safety net for Ventura County seniors and adults with
disabilities. The aging network does not have the necessary resources to serve its current clients let alone the growing
number of aging Baby Boomers. Adults with disabilities who are not eligible for services from other organizations have no
safety net. Funding reductions have been occurring in key program areas since FY 2008-09 when the State of California
reduced funding for Community Based Service Programs (CBSPs) by ten percent. In FY 2009-10 the State eliminated all
general fund support for CBSPs effective October 1, 2009.
The AAA is committed to providing service while living within our means. In April 2013, this agency was advised of federal
sequestration funding cuts of more than $225,000 for FY2013-2014. We anticipate a similar amount of funding in FY2014-
2015 as for the prior year. The net county cost will increase by $75,000 in FY2014-2015 and this will partially offset
federal funding cuts.
Although the AAA is able to leverage resources and partner with other agencies to provide services to seniors, the
increased cost of business and funding cuts of our partners will lead to decreased services. However, we will continue to
seek alternative sources of funds and utilize the funds we receive to meet the needs of the neediest of our seniors.


MSSP provides extensive assessment and care planning services, which lead to linkage to existing community services,
such as transportation, housing, meals, in-home care, adult day health care programs, therapeutic counseling, money
management, emergency response units, etc. Each client is treated on an individual basis to meet the many different
needs that client faces.

The state reduced the Multipurpose Senior Services Program (MSSP) funding by 10% in FY 2008-09; in both FY 2009-10
and FY 2010-11 the program operated on the same reduced amount of funds. In FY 2011-12, funding for the MSSP
program was further reduced by 11% to $685,600. This funding was unchanged for FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-2014 and
will be the same for FY 2014-2015. Governor Brown's office has proposed integrating MSSP as an optional benefit under
the County Managed Health Plans (i.e. Gold Coast Health Plan). This integration is anticipated to occur in January 2015.


The Area Agency on Aging will identify and address the emerging and changing needs of the 60+ population as well as
baby boomers (born 1946-1964). The Area Agency on Aging will continue to identify and explore the needs of special
populations as well as the changing and emerging needs of seniors, and will develop and expand programs to help meet
their needs. The VCAAA will be a leader in pursuing best practices and achieving results that benefit taxpayers and the
seniors and their caregivers that we serve.

The ability to secure funding from sources other than the California Department of Aging will be crucial to continue to
develop and provide innovative, cost effective direct services for seniors and their caregivers


- Reduce the hospital readmission rate by 20% for the Medicare eligible population in Ventura County.
- Add Los Robles to the hospitals being served by the program.

This reimbursement program is expected to be self-funded in FY 2014-2015 and thereafter.


1. Continue to improve and maintain the Accounts Receivables below 60 days in A.R.
2. On line training every three months for billers to keep skills and information current.
3. Quarterly billing and collection audits for compliance issues.
4. Continue to provide support for the FQHC enrollment and Change of Scope.
5. Clean up receivables for Cerner conversion, STAR, PLUS, and Medical Manager
6. Continuous review of Charge Master for compliance.
7. Prepare for implementation of ICD-10


Continue investigating deaths that occur for unknown causes or under suspicious circumstances professionally,
effectively, and efficiently with compassion. Continue to participate in multiagency groups including the elder death
review team (officially founded by the chief medical examiner in Ventura County in 2013), child death review team, and
mass disaster preparedness team. Maintain awareness for possible adoption of national investigative standards,
technological advancements, and judicial expectatio


1. Provide quality case management and treatment services to persons living with HIV/AIDS
2. Collaborate with community organizations and health care providers to enhanced HIV/AID treatment, case
management and prevention services.

HIV/AIDS programs are funded by State and Federal grants. Over the years there has been some significant changes in
funding. There are no known funding cut for FY14-15; however, should there be any further reduction in funding, program
budget will be modified to achieve balance budget.


1. Obtain national Public Health accreditation after hosting a successful site visit by the accreditation board in May 2014.
2. Identify additional funding sources to maintain current service levels given that several grant funded projects are set to
end in September and December 2014.
3. Develop and implement a department wide staff development plan to increase staff competency levels.

Even if in FY 2014-15 we do not sustain State or Federal fund reductions like in previous fiscal years, the new FY is
expected to be financially challenging given that some grants are expected to end and due to increase salaries. We may
have to reduce staffing levels and limit some of our services accordingly.


1. Continue to meet successful outcomes for school attendance and graduation, reduced repeat births, healthy birth
weights, and healthy lifestyle choices for the client and their baby.
2. Work to improve linkages and strengthen networks to support our expectant and parenting teen population.
3. All case managers will continue to be trained to increase their awareness and ability to provide intensive
comprehensive case management to the clients we serve.
1. Establish Help Me Grow Ventura County as a comprehensive county resource of best practices for standard
developmental screening, referral and follow up to resources and interventions throughout Ventura County.
2. Sustain developmental screening efforts and support RTT/QRIS preschool screening efforts.
3. Seek additional funding opportunities for Childhood Injury Prevention efforts.
4. Per our CC O&E grant, conduct 65,153 educational contacts and 27,317 outreach contacts regarding Covered
California by December 31, 2014.
1. VCPH Bus of Tobacco Horrors will extend their reach by scheduling the bus at county-wide, community events that will
include residents of all ages including teens and adults.
2. The Tobacco Prop 99 staff will be conducting a large county-wide retail survey to identify where the sale of tobacco,
alcohol and unhealthy food is being sold.

In the 13-14 FY AFLP received a 42% reduction to their MCAH Federal Title V funding which resulted in a reduction of
services. The AFLP program is funded by MCAH Federal Title V and the Federal AFLP PYD (Positive Youth
Development) grants. AFLP also matches local agency funding with the Federal Financial Participation Title XIX.
In the 14-15 FY the Title V MCAH Block Grant will see an increase of nearly $30 million over the FY 13 post-sequester
level. It is unclear how this will effect AFLP funding.
Ventura AFLP was one of 11 Pilot sites awarded the AFLP PYD funding through the 13-14 FY. In the 14-15 FY the
funding will be distributed among 33 sites.
Children’s Health Promotion & Health Coverage services are mostly funded by First 5 Ventura County. We will sustain
the same funding level with First 5 through FY 15-16 with some minor increases through December 2015 of $150,888 to
support the RTT/QRIS preschool screening efforts. We continue to explore more efficient and effective ways to provide all
of our services.
1. First 5 funding will stay consistent through FY 15-16, however the spectrum of services will decrease. Our efforts with
Health Outreach Program and Education (HOPE), application assistance for Medi-Cal, will no longer be funded by First 5
beginning in FY 14-15.
2. Childhood Injury Prevention in general does not have dedicated funding. Therefore, we are seeking grant
opportunities, such as through The Office of Traffic Safety, to continue our efforts.
3. We have been awarded the Covered California Outreach and Education grant through December 2014. We plan to
seek additional funding to support staff after December.


1. Continue collaboration with SP Hospital to engage all births with PHN post-partum home visits “Bright Beginnings.”
2. Increase case management encounter rates.
3. Increase home visitation and outreach to senior population

1. Potential for future funding to launch Bright Beginnings at other hospitals in county.
2. Increased Targeted Case Management (TCM) revenue.
3. Increased services to senior population.


Immunization Program
1. Provide outreach to health providers and community partners on standards concerning immunization practices,
education, and laws for increased immunization rates.
2. Continue the effort to maintain our 100% compliance for all future school years, that all students entering, advancing or
transferring into 7th grade have proof of an adolescent whooping cough booster immunization.
3. Educate and maintain compliance with state regulations that all child-care centers, Preschool and K-12 must keep a
blue card with all required immunizations on file for every child enrolled an updated waiver to comply with AB2109 law
that requires parents to be educated prior to signing waiver by an approved health care provider on vaccines.
4. Continue to work collaboratively with Fiscal and Billing staff to improve revenue billing and collection.
PH Clinical Services
1. Provide quality and easily accessible preventive health services to clients throughout Ventura County for all uninsured
and privately insured patients and connect to resources through the Affordable Care Act, in partnership with our Cover
California Program.
2. Prevent missed opportunities by educating and vaccinating each patient on every visit based on ACIP (CDC’s
immunization recommendations).
3. Working collaboratively with clinic, fiscal, billing and EHR experts to improve revenue billing and collection.
4. Continue working to decrease TB cases within Ventura County and partnering with State of California TB Control
Branch.
5. Staff will investigate through CMR’s, EDN, lab reports and suspect reporting form of suspected TB cases to Ventura
County TB Clinic according to standards of practice endorsed by the California TB Control Branch and the Curry National
TB Center.
6. Educate community partners, schools, physicians and providers on the spread, prevention and treatment of
Tuberculosis.
Communicable Diseases
1. The Communicable Disease Program will initiate case investigations for Title 17 reportable diseases, within 24 hours of
receipt, for those diseases specified as immediate reports 100% of the time.
2. The Communicable Disease Program will train three high-volume providers to submit their confidential morbidity
reports (CMRs) electronically through the provider portal.
3. The Communicable Disease Program will participate in five community events to provide education on the spread and
prevention of communicable diseases.

Immunization Program
The state has reduced its funding for the last 4 fiscal years. We continue to expand ways to increase our revenue by
billing Medi-Cal and Medi-Care for flu clinics and collaborating with community partners to offset staffing cost to continue
to provide services to the community.
PH Clinical Services
PH Clinics are funded with County general funds, State and Local grants, and revenue collected from client fees. If overall
State and County funds are reduced significantly, we may have to reduce level and number of services provided to clients.
Financial reports are currently not available through the Electronic Health Record (EHR) system to project cost and
revenue.
An emerging threat is medication resistant Tuberculosis. We have begun to see these cases in our County. The State
continues to provide funding for housing and related supports. The potential fiscal impact is that the State does not pay
for the medications for treatment. These medications can cost up to $3,000 per month per person. Treatment can take
about one year. The County has to cover all medication costs.


Public Health Laboratoty:
1. Make every effort to assist with the building and integration of the new Cerner system as well as become proficient in
the system.
2. Ensure PHL is prepared and inspection ready for upcoming CLIA and ELAP inspections.
Vital Records:
1. Increase collaboration with local organizations, such as MICOP, to provide education and information regarding the
birth registration process. This will decrease the need for amendments or court orders for correction of errors on birth
certificates.
2. Participate in a mass fatality exercise locally to test our functional capacity to operate effectively in this type of event.
3. Collaborate with local hospitals with birthing facilities to establish facility level goals for preparation and submission of
birth certificates in an effort to increase timeliness of registration.

Public Health Laboratory:
1. PHL continues to provide support for Animal Control free of charge and Environmental Health for a discounted price.
The increase in specimens and samples and reduction in pricing result in higher PHL costs.
2. VCMC may begin to perform in house HIV testing, which will result in a decrease in the number of specimens received
in the PHL. Confirmatory and Public Health Clinic specimens will still be tested at PHL.
Vital Records:
The Vital Records office is funded primarily by revenue generated from the sale of certified copies of birth, death, fetal
death certificates and disposition permits. Fees for birth, death and fetal death certificates increased by $5.00 per
certificate effective January 1, 2014.This should result in increased revenue for this office.


2014-2015 
1. Increase partnerships with local providers to expand the roster through outreach and education.
2. Utilize EHR for performance improvement.
3. Providing clinical experience for 5-7professional interns.
4. Develop supervision/management mentoring program for succession development to prepare interested workforce for
supervisory roles.
5.Implement a continuous process improvement system to incorporate data from care coordination to provider support
and development.

 Coordinating Affordable Care Act benefits for clients.
 Transition to MediCal managed care effects on providers wanting to continue care for clients.


2014 – 2015 
1. CHDP will implement a web-based data collection system allowing seamless electronic access and integration
between children’s health programs (CHDP, CHDP Oral Health, Health Care Program for Children in Foster Care, and
the Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program). This system will allow for a comprehensive method to retrieve and
evaluate health data from CHDP exams.
2. CHDP will continue to maintain a close working relationship with Gold Coast Health Plan in order to provide seamless,
and comprehensive health care for Medi-Cal children.
3. CHDP will continue to focus on educating providers, children and families and the community on prevention of
diseases such as dental disease, and overweight/obesity by providing oversight and training for providers on methods of
engaging their clients.
4. CHDP Foster Care (HCPCFC) will initiate a system to document and monitor the behavioral health needs of all children
in out-of-home placement and will facilitate access to available behavioral health services.

 Cost to continue enhancement of electronic data collection from enrolled providers with the goal of eliminating paper
reporting from Providers.
 Affect of realignment


2014 - 2015 
1. CLPPP will implement the new 4-Year State Contract for FY 2014-2018,
2. CLPPP will maintain and expand community outreach efforts to educate medical providers, and the community
regarding the prevention of lead exposure of young children by strengthening coordination of activities with Oral Health
Education and CHDP.


2014-15 Goals, Planned Achievements and Improvements
1. Maintain program participation at 97% of allocated caseload.
2. Maintain average wait time on WIC Call Center at < 2 minutes.
3. Enter into service contract with Public Health Foundation Enterprises WIC Program to gain access to web-based data
mining program “Raptor,” to maximize access to current participation trends for Ventura County WIC in order to assess
progress on a variety of program outcomes, assess efficient locations and delivery of WIC services and to communicate
with community partners.
4. Successful outcome(s) from 2014 California WIC Program biannual program evaluation.
5. Act as preceptor for 1-3 Dietetic Interns for a Community Nutrition rotation.
6. Establish new contract with California State WIC for next contract period.

Continued decreases in WIC participation due to lower birth rates and less Medi-Cal eligible families contribute to
challenges facing the WIC Program to meeting participation goals in the coming fiscal year.


1. Provide oversight and administration of the countywide EMS System to ensure compliance with local and state
regulations. EMS functions include providing oversight of the ambulance contracts, personnel certifications, policy
development and disaster preparedness.
2. Continue to provide coordination and planning for the countywide STEMI, Stroke and Trauma Systems.
3. Implement system update for the ImageTrend pre-hospital documentation system.
4. Evaluate AED deployment at county facilities with goal of expanding coverage and training opportunities.
5. Develop and implement updated Mobile Intensive Care Nurse training curriculum.
6. Continue rollout of the revised VCEMS Quality Improvement program.
7. Develop system specific core measures for monitoring and improvement of trauma care.
8. Continue to promote Sidewalk CPR programs to increase public awareness and participation with a goal of increasing
cardiac arrest survival rates.

EMS is funded through a combination of county allocation funds and revenue from various fees as well as court collected
assessments. No changes are currently anticipated, however, if our overall State and/or County funds are reduced
significantly, we would likely have to reduce staffing levels.


1. Coordinate Health Care Agency Continuity of Operations plan revisions.
2. Coordinating healthcare preparedness activities to include conducting drills and exercises to assure effective disaster
response and mass surge capabilities.
3. Provide oversight and coordinate training for the Health Care Agency Department Operations Center.
4. Support enhancements to the Health Care Agency Emergency Response Plan including integration and revision of all
legacy annexes.
5. Expand the Health Care Preparedness Program Coalition to include additional partners throughout the operational
area.
6. Continue bio-surveillance through EpiCenter in coordination with the Public Health Communicable Disease and Public
Health Laboratory units in support of countywide healthcare providers.
7. Develop emergency hospital bedside credentialing between Ventura County Medical Reserve Corps and countywide
hospitals.

Emergency Preparedness activities are funded through Federal grants. With the current budget status, we anticipate
lower funding levels in FY14-15, specifically a 30% reduction in the Hospital Preparedness Program portion of the grant
funds. Focus will be to maintain existing countywide emergency preparedness capability and training levels and to
expand the Health Care Preparedness Program Coalition.


1. Continue coordination of the EMS involvement in the Homeland Security grant program.
2. Coordinating a revision and update of the Mass Fatality Response Plan including procuring emergency preparedness
equipment and supplies for a mass fatality event.
3. Update of the countywide Multi-Casualty Incident training program and evaluating equipment needs.

Homeland Security programs are funded through Federal grants, and based on current estimates, we anticipate similar
funding levels in FY14-15.


a. Implement an electronic system to manage policies and procedures.
b. Manage operations within allotted resources.
c. Oversee CenterPoint Mall tenant improvements and relocation.
d. Implement the Geneva system to assist with financial reporting.

The FY 2014-15 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a. Continue to improve Medi-Cal penetration rate.
b. Improve staff productivity (documentation/billing).
c. Continue to work with board and care operators to improve the living environment, quality of care, and nutrition.
d. Fully implement all components of Electronic Health Record (EHR).
e. Expand evidence-based treatment groups for depression throughout division.
f. Ensure that all eligible self-pay clients are enrolled in either Covered California or Medi-Cal.
g. Achieve smooth opening of the second Oxnard Adult Clinic at CenterPoint Mall, thereby increasing access in south
Oxnard to underserved clients.
h. Increase participation in the Older Adult Intensive Social Rehabilitation Program and socialization events.
i. Continue NIATx performance improvement projects.

The FY 2014-15 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a. Continue to utilize Promotoras, Hispanic/Latino community members with specialized training who provide basic health
education in the community, in Santa Clara Valley to increase the Latino penetration rate.
b. Increase outreach to underserved populations and collaboration with primary care to increase Medi-Cal penetration
rates and referrals to/from primary care.
c. Continue expansion and implementation of programs in collaboration with HSA to meet the State requirements of Katie
A.
d. Fully implement all components of EHR.
e. Continue NIATx performance improvement projects.
f. Ensure that all eligible uninsured clients enroll in either Covered California or Medi-Cal.
g. Achieve smooth opening of the second Oxnard YFS Clinic at CenterPoint Mall, thereby increasing access in south
Oxnard to underserved clients.
h. Further training and implementation of EBPs including Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) throughout the YFS
Division.
i. Continue expansion of ISES services in all regions to meet needs.
j. Increase group participation in EBP countywide.

The FY 2014-15 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a. Select and implement an enterprise level reporting software (analytics).
b. Transition the collection and reporting of data on referrals, crisis calls, and time-to-service into Avatar.
c. Develop client-level outcome reports.
d. Begin the document imaging process to transition paper records into an electronic format.
e. Automate productivity reports within Avatar.
f. Develop treatment guidelines for Attention Deficit Disorders.
g. Automate contractor report within Avatar.

The FY 2014-15 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a. Evaluate clients who have mild to moderate functional impairments and are currently receiving outpatient mental health
services funded under the VCBH MCP who could be more appropriately served by their Medi-Cal MCP for non-specialty
mental health services.
b. Utilization Review compliance monitoring for foster programs.

The FY 2014-15 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a. Expand Community Outpatient Treatment census by 10% (better education and coordination with hospital staff).
b. Continue treatment and supervision to provide for community safety.

The FY 2014-15 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a. Increase multidisciplinary involvement in treatment and milieu rehabilitation planning.
b. Implement a trauma-informed care model in collaboration with the Probation Agency.
c. Increase the number of treatment groups offered, including a group to address criminal thinking errors.
d. Increase restorative justice interventions.
e. Continue to increase family therapy services.

The FY 2014-15 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a. Increase referrals for ADP services from Primary Care Providers as consistent with Health Care Reform’s mandate for
improvement in integrated services.
b. Continue to develop the components for the Electronic Health Record, for example, the ADP Admission Note and other
required documentation.
c. Improve rates of successful completions as evidenced by CalOMS data.

The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP and DUI programs was moved to a single agency, the
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS). The Federal Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant
allocations to Ventura County Alcohol and Drug Programs were expected to remain consistent with previous years;
however, the Federal sequester cuts had a negative impact on the County ADP budget. Tied to variable tax revenue, the
Behavioral Health Sub Account is expected to grow, but has been subject to fluctuations in the economy, which can, in
turn, affect service capacity. ADP is hopeful that the Affordable Care Act’s Medi-Cal Expansion and the probability that
there will not be a sequester cut this next Fiscal Year will positively impact the ADP treatment and prevention budgets.


a. Increase community understanding of marijuana harms, especially to adolescents and young adults in terms of brain
development, by sharing information on the effects of THC and “de-normalizing” adult acceptance of youth marijuana
use.
b. Carry out at least two (2) local community education events about the risks of prescription drugs, in cooperation with
civic leaders and community organizations.

The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP and DUI programs was moved to a single agency, the
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS). The Federal Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant
allocations to Ventura County Alcohol and Drug Programs were expected to remain consistent with previous years;
however, the Federal sequester cuts had a negative impact on the County ADP budget. Tied to variable tax revenue, the
Behavioral Health Sub Account is expected to grow, but has been subject to fluctuations in the economy, which can, in
turn, affect service capacity. ADP is hopeful that the Affordable Care Act’s Medi-Cal Expansion and the probability that
there will not be a sequester cut this next Fiscal Year will positively impact the ADP treatment and prevention budgets.


a. Continue and enhance the integration of mental health and alcohol/drug services at ANSFM perinatal treatment
program.
b. Continue evidenced-based programs for clients with co-occurring disorders, adolescent clients, and court-mandated
clients.
c. Continue to provide adolescent treatment services at school sites and ADP sites.
d. Continue to participate in the evaluation of outcomes and recidivism rates (both residential and non-residential) for
offenders in the AB 109 re-alignment population through collaboration with AB109 partners. County ADP has requested
that DHCS provide outcome data reports through the CalOMS for this population.
e. Decrease “no show” rate to groups by continuation of NIATx projects.

The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP and DUI programs was moved to a single agency, the
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS). The Federal Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant
allocations to Ventura County Alcohol and Drug Programs were expected to remain consistent with previous years;
however, the Federal sequester cuts had a negative impact on the County ADP budget. Tied to variable tax revenue, the
Behavioral Health Sub Account is expected to grow, but has been subject to fluctuations in the economy, which can, in
turn, affect service capacity. ADP is hopeful that the Affordable Care Act’s Medi-Cal Expansion and the probability that
there will not be a sequester cut this next Fiscal Year will positively impact the ADP treatment and prevention budgets.


Continue to participate in the evaluation of outcomes and recidivism rates (both residential and non-residential) for
offenders in the AB 109 re-alignment population through collaboration with AB109 partners. County ADP has requested
that DHCS provide outcome data reports through the State CalOMS for this population.

The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP and DUI programs was moved to a single agency, the
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS). The Federal Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant
allocations to Ventura County Alcohol and Drug Programs were expected to remain consistent with previous years;
however, the Federal sequester cuts had a negative impact on the County ADP budget. Tied to variable tax revenue, the
Behavioral Health Sub Account is expected to grow, but has been subject to fluctuations in the economy, which can, in
turn, affect service capacity. ADP is hopeful that the Affordable Care Act’s Medi-Cal Expansion and the probability that
there will not be a sequester cut this next Fiscal Year will positively impact the ADP treatment and prevention budgets.


Continue to increase number of clients tested for HIV at County ADP sites.

The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP and DUI programs was moved to a single agency, the
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS). The Federal Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant
allocations to Ventura County Alcohol and Drug Programs were expected to remain consistent with previous years;
however, the Federal sequester cuts had a negative impact on the County ADP budget. Tied to variable tax revenue, the
Behavioral Health Sub Account is expected to grow, but has been subject to fluctuations in the economy, which can, in
turn, affect service capacity. ADP is hopeful that the Affordable Care Act’s Medi-Cal Expansion and the probability that
there will not be a sequester cut this next Fiscal Year will positively impact the ADP treatment and prevention budgets.


Decrease late CalOMS submissions.

The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP and DUI programs was moved to a single agency, the
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS). The Federal Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant
allocations to Ventura County Alcohol and Drug Programs were expected to remain consistent with previous years;
however, the Federal sequester cuts had a negative impact on the County ADP budget. Tied to variable tax revenue, the
Behavioral Health Sub Account is expected to grow, but has been subject to fluctuations in the economy, which can, in
turn, affect service capacity. ADP is hopeful that the Affordable Care Act’s Medi-Cal Expansion and the probability that
there will not be a sequester cut this next Fiscal Year will positively impact the ADP treatment and prevention budgets.


a. Continue to enhance the integrated mental health and ADP clinic program at ANSFM.
b. Expand the NIATx improvement projects at each ADP site (County and Provider) in order to improve client access,
engagement and retention, and secure good outcomes.
c. Increase services to newly eligible Medi-Cal Expansion clients.

The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP and DUI programs was moved to a single agency, the
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS). The Federal Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant
allocations to Ventura County Alcohol and Drug Programs were expected to remain consistent with previous years;
however, the Federal sequester cuts had a negative impact on the County ADP budget. Tied to variable tax revenue, the
Behavioral Health Sub Account is expected to grow, but has been subject to fluctuations in the economy, which can, in
turn, affect service capacity. ADP is hopeful that the Affordable Care Act’s Medi-Cal Expansion and the probability that
there will not be a sequester cut this next Fiscal Year will positively impact the ADP treatment and prevention budgets.


a. Improve DUI Program internal fidelity scores for evidence-based practice by institutionalizing curriculum implemented
in the prior year through the use of clinical observations established during PM rounds.
b. Increase financial stability of a self-supporting program through real-time use of data reports in the Compliance
Manager data tracking system.
c. Prepare all DUI sites for the bi-annual state visit from the DHCS through the use of mock audits, increased peer audits,
and a renewed training focus on Title 9 compliance.
d. Decrease the percentage of DUI disqualification by implementing state measure in our monthly reports.

Ventura County DUI is a State-licensed, community-based program located at five sites throughout the county. It is
required to be and is financially self-sufficient using sustainable funding (participant fees). While revenues will increase or
decrease based on the need for DUI programs, funding presently correlates directly to the need for DUI countermeasures
and the subsequent need for the program in our community.


(1) Increase the Medi-Cal penetration rate to enroll as many of the newly eligible population as possible.
(2) Continue relationships with partners to increase outreach and opportunities to apply for programs – and receive
assistance with completing applications – outside of traditional Agency distribution points so that office visits are not
always required.
(3) Offer effective and convenient client customer service through the Enterprise Content Management (ECM) “paperless”
filing solution for Medi-Cal and CalFresh cases.
(4) Effectively administer the Medi-Cal Orientation & Outreach Grant that provides CBO's with funds to provide Medi-Cal
application assistance for clients with barriers including mental health, substance abuse, limited English, and
homelessness.
(5) Work with County partners including Sheriff, Probation, and HCA to enroll as many newly eligible people as possible.
(6) Expand awareness and utilization of non-traditional service offerings (e.g., web-based application options, interactive
voice response systems, etc.)

(1) With implementation of health care reform, Medi-Cal cases will continue to grow significantly, reaching an expected
total of 175,000 individuals in the program. The population grew from 112,000 to 135,000 during 2013.
(2) CalFresh (Food Stamp) cases continue to expand, growing by 3% in 2013. The Food & Nutrition Services Program
can impose financial sanctions for noncompliance in meeting accuracy requirements. If California exceeds the national
error rate, both the State and offending counties risk losing funding.
(3) Realignment and the transition of a large number of previously uninsured individuals to Medi-Cal could have a
significant impact on clients and health-related department funding levels.


(1) Manage HSA’s budget strategically to ensure that Federal, State and County dollars are leveraged effectively, and
that the agency is able to provide the best possible level of service to clients under any of several State budget scenarios
(2) Lead the agency in pursuing and implementing a strategic technology agenda that is cost effective and service
oriented, including further refinement of ECM and data management systems
(3) Manage facilities portfolio to effectively reduce leased facility cost overhead while enhancing county owned facility
infrastructure
(4) Leverage new strategies for service delivery such as remote/mobile worker opportunities to enhance client service
and employee productivity and performance
(5) Continue to gather “voice of the customer” data, implement systems that meet customers’ needs, and train staff
accordingly
(6) Expand public/private relationships and collaborations, as well as those among County agencies, to meet shared
missions and outcomes
(7) Continue to implement Get-To-Excellence process improvement priorities
(8) Expand awareness and utilization of non-traditional service offerings (e.g., web-based application options, interactive
voice response systems, etc.)

(1) The final State budget could have significant impacts on Agency funding levels.
(2) Program funding allocations are not finalized until 3-4 months into the Budget Year; variances from projected funding
allocation levels could have significant impacts on the Agency.
(3) The overall health of the economy will impact the level of Realignment revenues received; variances from projected
level could have significant impacts on the Agency.


(1) Expand outreach to the community to increase service level and access
(2) Improve the delivery of service by expanding the use of technology to field-based workers
(3) Improve skills, knowledge and ability by providing trauma informed training to staff

(1) Potential increase in services to the elder population as the number of people turning age 65 is increasing daily.
(2) The prevalence rate of Alzheimer’s Disease could impact service demands.


(1) Expand vocational education partnerships to provide client training for emerging occupations
(2) Increase the number of clients participating in federally mandated, work and work-related activities
(3) Maximize utilization of subsidized job placement opportunities leading to permanent unsubsidized employment
(4) Continue expanding outreach for the Financial Empowerment Partnership

(1) Comparing FY 2012-2013 to FY 2013-2014 to date, CalWORKs cases have decreased from an average of 6,456
served per month to an average of 6,095 served per month.
(2) While there are no significant programmatic changes to the structure of the CalWORKs program in the proposed
2013-14 budget, a number of changes stemming from previous budgets are still in the process of being implemented.
Because of the changes resulting from SB 1041 (Chapter 47, Statutes of 2012), the employment services caseload is
projected to increase; however, the overall CalWORKs caseload is projected to decrease slightly by 0.08%
(3) The State budget proposes funding of $8.5 million in 2012-13 and $62.3 million in 2013-14 for child care for those
cases being reengaged that had previously been exempt under the short-term young child exemption.
(4) The base funding for CalWORKs Administration has been decreased by $12.4 million to reflect the projected overall
caseload decrease.
(5) The State budget includes $35.9 million for Cal-Learn case management to reflect the full implementation of the
program in 2013-14.
(6) There are no changes to the current administrative structure of Childcare programs.
(7) Stage 1 child care reflects a net increase of $35.4 million. This increase is comprised of a decrease of $26.9 million to
the child care base funding, but an increase of $62.3 million for reengagement of cases as described above.
(8) Stage 2 child care reflects a decrease of $21 million non-Proposition 98 General Fund in the proposed 2013-14
budget, reflecting a total of $398.3 million. This decrease is the result of a projected decrease in CalWORKs families
eligible for Stage 2 care. This decline in eligible caseload is reflective of those families who were granted diversion
services in 2010-11, who will become eligible for Stage 3.
(9) Stage 3 child care is funded at $172.6 million, which includes an increase of $24.2 million non-Proposition 98 General
Fund. This increase is primarily due to the transfer of families into Stage 3 who had previously been granted diversion
services.


(1) Collaborate with Ventura County Behavioral Health to strengthen mental health services for foster children and
children at risk of foster care as required by the State’s Katie A. lawsuit settlement
(2) Make steady progress on the State-mandated System Improvement Plan, which establishes plans for quantitative
improvements in several key areas
(3) Continue implementing legislation that extends foster care from age 18 to age 21
(4) Continue to expand technology, tools, and resources to ensure that social workers are able to remain mobile and
conduct their work from the field to the extent necessary.
(5) Continue to recruit, license, train, and retain foster families to provide caring homes for vulnerable children.

CHILDREN & FAMILY SERVICES:
(1) Child welfare cases continue to rise. The complexity of many of these cases, which can involve multiple siblings and
allegations, require lengthy investigations.
(2) Monitor and mitigate overtime costs for Child Welfare social workers through scheduling and supervision practices
while ensuring that the safety of children remains the priority and that social workers are fairly compensated for hours
worked.
(3) The Agency will work with the CEO to determine and pursue appropriate approaches for using 2011 Realignment
funds to accomplish long-term stability for this and the other programs funded under Realignment.


(1) Expand vocational education partnerships to provide client training for emerging occupations
(2) Increase the number of clients participating in federally mandated, work and work-related activities
(3) Maximize utilization of subsidized job placement opportunities leading to permanent unsubsidized employment
(4) Continue expanding outreach for the Financial Empowerment Partnership

(1) Comparing FY 2012-2013 to FY 2013-2014 to date, CalWORKs cases have decreased from an average of 6,456
served per month to an average of 6,095 served per month.
(2) Although many factors contribute to caseload growth and decline, CalWORKs caseloads tend to increase as the
unemployment rate increases and decrease as economic conditions improve.


(1) Continue to meet program guidelines and regulations, maximizing the use of the Kin-GAP program in efforts to seek
home placements that are in the best interest of the foster children involved.

(1) While the program will grow as Foster Care grows, the growth rates should slow as the transfer of cases from
CalWORKs (lower cost) to Foster Care (higher cost) has likely occurred.


(1) Continue marketing and outreach efforts for new foster parents and families interested in adoption

(1) The Preliminary Budget Request assumes a continuance of the significant growth in case levels in recent years; a
variance from projected growth levels could significantly impact costs.


(1) Decrease the length of stay for all children who enter the child welfare system by analyzing the factors that lead to and
detract from permanency.
(2) Enhance services for transitional-age youth and increase housing opportunities for non-minor dependents
participating in Extended Foster Care.
(3) Continue implementation of the Extended Foster Care Program, which extends foster care from age 18 to age 21.

(1) During Fiscal Year 2012-2013, caseloads increased, and for the first six months of Fiscal Year 2013-2014, that trend
has continued. The complexity of many of these cases, which can involve multiple siblings and allegations, require
lengthy investigations.
(2) Implementation of Extended Foster Care will continue to expand case management and services for youth who opt to
remain in the program.


(1) Program staff will continue to follow guidelines and regulations of this mandated program.

(1) The State budget will continue to be monitored to determine funding and/or programmatic impacts.


(1) Continue oversight of General Relief program with a focus on client benefit lifetime limits that facilitates transition of
clients onto alternate and sustainable assistance programs.

(1) The State budget will continue to be monitored to determine funding impacts to other safety net programs that could
result in growth of the General Relief caseload.


The Department will continue to follow guidelines and regulations of these mandated programs.

(1) Many of the programs in this Budget are now funded by 2011 Realignment funds that have replaced State funding.
The Agency will continue to monitor 2011 funding levels and manage 2011 Realignment revenues for the long-term
stability of the programs involved.
(2) The Department will continue to monitor the FY 14-15 State budget to determine final impacts on the Department.


(1) Maintain average occupancy rate of at least 90%.
(2) Maintain that 100% of school-aged children will be enrolled in school within 10 days of residency.
(3) Decrease average stay at RAIN to 6 months.
(4) Implement program changes placing priorities on employment and housing opportunity.

As the focus and level of available funding sources change over time, The Agency will work with the CEO and Board of
Supervisors to determine how RAIN will continue to most effectively be a vital part of the County’s Ten-Year Strategy to
End Homelessness.


(1) Maintain the mandated response standard of two business days to initiate the investigation of decedent referrals and
the investigation of conservatorship referrals at 100%.
(2) Maintain continuous educational requirements for each Deputy PG in compliance with the 2006 Omnibus Act for
100% Certification by the PAPGPC state Association.
(3) Increase the staff development training directed toward service to our population and specifically workplace safety
training hours by 12 hours or 25%.
(4) Use of technology by all staff via iPad’s to maximize time efficiency by reducing or eliminating duplicate tasks.
(5) Develop a coordinated strategy with Adult Protective Services to provide protective services to clients referred for
Conservatorship, but not yet appointed.

(1) The dramatic growth of the older adult population and demand for mental health services will continue.
(2) The Public Administrator/Public Guardian expects increased caseload again this year and for many years into the
future.
(3) Demand for estate administration will likely increase.
(4) Increased demands by the Probate Court for the Public Guardian to take on cases without choice are expected to
continue. These cases are typically very problematic and result from years of mismanagement by a prior conservator, or
cases of elder abuse becoming evident through the Probate proceedings.


The County Executive Office will continue to provide oversight program management and administration. The
administrative efficiency and effectiveness will be reviewed and assessed to ensure effective program outcomes.

MSA payments have significantly reduced over the years. The MSA revenues were not designed in such a way as to
promote sustainable long-term services nor have the ability to expand services. Therefore the proposed three year plan
will begin a gradual funding reduction beginning in FY 2015-16 to align program expenditures with the actual MSA
funding received.


FY 2014/15 Program 
 Integrate a recently hired forensic accountant and environmental specialist into our investigative and prosecution
methodologies for handling complex real estate fraud, consumer protection and hazardous waste cases.
 Focus resources to reduce a backlog in the major fraud, auto insurance and real estate fraud units.
 Continue our collaborative efforts with other agencies to hold unscrupulous businesses accountable for unlawful or
deceptive business practices perpetuated against unknowing consumers.
 Work with our partners within Ventura County and its cities to hold those who mishandle hazardous waste accountable
for their actions.

With lower revenue to the Real Estate Fraud Trust Fund due to relatively weak real estate transaction activity and the
expiration of certain grant funding, challenges exist to maintain adequate resources to address both pending
investigations and other contemporary fraud. Fortunately, grant and revenue offset programs which fund non-real estate
fraud units within Special Prosecutions currently appear to be stable.


FY 2014/15 
 Migrate the office’s current network system to a Microsoft-based network structure.
 Continue to explore the applications and feasibility of deploying an Electronic Content Management (ECM) system to
reduce paper flow.
 Continue to aggressively pursue external funding sources to reduce general fund costs.

Shortfalls in revenues and negotiated labor cost increases will pose challenges in the coming year. Modest increases in
Proposition 172 revenue, general fund appropriations and salary savings from vacancies will ensure that the Office stays
within its budgeted appropriations. In addition, in FY 14-15 the Office will continue to look for innovative ways to contend
with limited office space and an aging infrastructure within the Hall of Justice.


FY 2014/2015 Program 
 Strive to reduce the abuse of pharmaceutical drugs through our membership in the Ventura County Combined Agency
Narcotic Task Force
 Continue efforts to reduce gang violence through vertical prosecution of gang members who are charged with serious or
violent felony offenses
 Continue to review claims of factual innocence in completed cases as part of the District Attorney’s Conviction Integrity
program.
 Fully implement the Victims Bill of Rights Act by expanding the services of the Crime Victims' Assistance program to
include services for all classes of crime and promote restitution for victims of crime.
 Enhance efforts to contend with a rise in vehicle theft crimes through securing increased law enforcement staffing of the
Ventura County Auto Theft Task Force.

Obtaining meaningful sentences to reduce recidivism in light of AB 109’s Public Safety Realignment remains a concern,
particularly in light of increasing rates of certain property crimes such as vehicle theft. Efforts to enhance detection and
prosecution of human trafficking crimes will also continue. In addition, the implementation of Marsy’s Law with fewer
funded victim advocate staff remains a challenge.


Continue to investigate and report fiscal, operational, and management issues in County departments and other local
government entities.


Impanel Criminal Grand Juries to hear evidence on criminal matters on an as-needed basis.


1. Continue to cooperate with the Court to ensure quality legal services to indigents in those cases which the Public
Defender has a conflict of interest or is unable to act is provided in a timely, efficient, and cost-effective manner within the
budget passed by the Board.

1. The uncertainty of future multiple defendant cases make it difficult to manage for indigent defense cost increases. The
staff will continue to work with the Court to implement improvements to the current system and still maintain quality
defense representation for indigents.


 Provide leadership and administrative support to program operations to ensure success in achieving the Agency’s
mission, vision, and values.
 Prioritize mandated services and successful programs, while strategizing the most efficient manner in which to deliver
them.
 Continue to expand the Evidence Based Practices model throughout the Agency.
 Develop a Quality Assurance Strategic Implementation Plan to include a continuous improvement system throughout
the Agency.
 Continue to work with our justice partners to ensure the services Probation contributes to the system address the
needs of our partners.
 Strive to maintain critical programs for our juvenile offenders. This mission will help regulate the Juvenile Facilities’
population, contain costs, and allow us to provide services that will positively impact the youth we serve, thus resulting in
reduced recidivism and costly out-of-home placements.
 Identify technology opportunities that increase operational efficiency and effectiveness.
 Continue to improve the quality of Title IV-E case plans to ensure risk factors that make a client at risk for removal are
being regularly addressed by staff. Develop strategies to ensure all case plans are signed by all parties within the
required time limits. JBI to continue to provide training to ensure that staff understands Title IV-E policies and
procedures.
 Provide timely financial status reports to ensure the Executive Committee obtains the information necessary for making
good business decisions.

Due to a review of two California counties conducted by the Administration of Children and Families, probation agencies
throughout the state of California were instructed to cease claiming of pre-placement activities for the first quarter of the
federal fiscal year. A corrective action plan was prepared and accepted by the ACF and presently the ability to submit
claims is pending. Our Agency is working very diligently with our vendor, JBI, to ensure that we comply with Title IV-E
requirements and maximize Title IV-E revenues.


 Prepare quality pre-disposition reports in a timely manner which are consistent with Judicial Council Rules and local
Superior Court processes.
 Provide Courts with knowledgeable and resourceful court officers who will actively assist judges in Court.
 Accurately and thoroughly screen and assess all minors and their families to determine the most appropriate level and
type of intervention needed to eliminate risk factors while supporting existing protective factors.
 Secure reparation for victims.
 Protect society.
 Encourage minors to lead law-abiding lives and deter them from future offenses.
 Deter others from criminal conduct by demonstrating the consequences

 Due to a review of two California counties conducted by the Administration of Children and Families, Probation
Agencies throughout the state of California were instructed to cease claiming of pre-placement activities for the first
quarter of the federal fiscal year. A corrective action plan was prepared and accepted by ACF and presently the ability to
submit claims is pending. Our Agency is working very diligently with our vendor, JBI, to ensure that we comply with Title
IV-E requirements and maximize Title IV-E revenues.
 We are in the process of changing the risks and needs assessment tool used to develop case plans . There will be a
cost to train staff on the new instrument, and to implement and validate the tool.
 Additionally, with the need to adhere to the Title VI-E requirements involving parent engagement, a parent signature
on the case plan is required at the time of disposition. We will need additional resources to fulfill that function.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.


 Coordinate with IT services to implement and interface our risk and needs assessment tool with our case management
system in an effort to streamline operations. Additionally, expand the use of mobile devices to increase staff operational
efficiencies and safety, as well as communications between staff in the field and their supervisors in the office.
 Expand the use of Evidence Based Practices to streamline and improve the quality of supervision services.
 Maintain programs that reduce recidivism to ensure our custody populations do not increase.
 Continue to emphasize efforts in collecting victim restitution fees.
 Continue to streamline fiscal items such as contracts, letters to the Board of Supervisors, and purchase order requests.

 Due to a review of two California counties conducted by the Administration of Children and Families, Probation
Agencies throughout the state of California were instructed to cease claiming of pre-placement activities for the first
quarter of the federal fiscal year. A corrective action plan was prepared and accepted by the ACF and presently the
ability to submit claims is pending. Our Agency is working very diligently with our vendor, JBI, to ensure that we comply
with Title IV-E requirements and maximize Title IV-E revenues.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


 Prepare quality pre-sentence reports in a timely manner and in accordance with Judicial Council Rules.
 Assist the Court in making informed bail decisions through the use of a Pre-Trial risk assessment, maximizing court
appearances and promoting community safety while reducing the jail population.
 Reduce recidivism among specifically targeted populations by providing enhanced supervision and evidence based
programming to inmates.
 Protect society.
 Encourage the defendant to lead a law-abiding life and deter him/her from future offenses.
 Deter others from criminal conduct by demonstrating the consequences.
 Prevent new crimes by the defendant by isolating him/her for the period of incarceration.
 Secure reparation for victims.

 We plan to implement the use of the ORAS with case plans at the time of sentencing and it is unknown if additional
resources may be needed.
 With the growing expansion of both the Pre-Trial and Re-Entry Court Programs additional resources may be needed.
 The increased duties and responsibilities of the Custodian of Records has required the need to make that into a
separate position rather than added to the duties of a management staff charged with running an adult investigations unit.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.


 Continue re-organization efforts to reduce targeted caseload sizes to further implement effective EBP.
 Complete Phase II of the VCRAS system which would include a quality assurance component.
 Develop and implement a client survey targeted towards performance measures.
 Achieve targeted goal of more than 70% completion rate of ORAS assessments within 45 days of intake on moderate
to high risk cases.
 Achieve targeted goal of more than 70% completion rate of the SARA assessment within 45 days of intake.
 Integrate a formalized graduated response matrix.
 Validate the ORAS assessment tools for the Ventura County population.
 Develop a pilot program supported by evidence that incorporates the comprehensive risk and needs assessment
(ORAS-CST) for the Court at sentencing which will allow conditions of probation to include treatment that targets
assessed risk factors.
 Implement a comprehensive training program and coaching system that integrates both Motivational Interviewing
techniques and cognitive behavioral interventions.
 Incorporate a crime analyst (researcher) to the PRAS unit to enhance quality control of data collection, organization,
and analysis to improve data-driven decision making.

 The sources that contribute to the population served by this funding are those released from prison (PRCS) and those
sentenced locally by the courts (MS). It is anticipated that in Fiscal Year 2014-2015, the influx of PRCS will slow;
however, court sentencing practice may change. It is possible that an increase in MS sentences would require additional
fiscal, personnel and operational resources. The AB 109 funding formula is currently in under review. Significant changes
to this formula could affect the allocation to the county, thereby impacting funding for this division.
 We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


 Continue re-organization efforts to reduce targeted caseload sizes to further implement effective EBP practices.
 Complete Phase II of the VCRAS system which would include a quality assurance component.
 Develop and implement a client survey targeted towards performance measures.
 Achieve targeted goal of more than 70% completion rate of ORAS assessments within 45 days of intake on moderate
to high risk cases.
 Achieve targeted goal of more than 70% completion rate of the SARA assessment within 45 days of intake.
 Integrate a formalized graduated response matrix.
 Validate the ORAS assessment tools for the Ventura County population.
 Develop a pilot program supported by evidence that incorporates the comprehensive risk and needs assessment
(ORAS-CST) for the Court at sentencing which will allow conditions of probation to include treatment that targets
assessed risk factors.
 Implement a comprehensive training program and coaching system that integrates both Motivational Interviewing
techniques and cognitive behavioral interventions.
 Facilitate the evaluation of the Evidence-Based Probation Supervision Program (EBPSP) through the National Council
on Crime and Delinquency.

 The California Community Corrections Performance Incentives Act (Senate Bill 678) was enacted in 2009 to support
more-successful probation supervision practices for felony offenders. The legislation established a system of
performance-based funding for county probation departments to implement and maintain evidence-based practices in
adult felony probation supervision. SB 678 is structured to save state General Fund monies while reducing criminal
behavior and alleviating state prison overcrowding.
County funding allocations are based on the number of felony probationers who were revoked to state prison in a given
year compared to those revoked in the baseline period. However, enactment of the AB 109 Public Safety Realignment
program has significantly impacted the funding allocations because fewer offenders are now eligible for revocation to
state prison than in the baseline years. As a result, the Administrative Office of the Courts (AOC), the Department of
Finance, the Chief Probation Officers of California, and the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation
(CDCR) are working together to revise the SB 678 funding formula to account for any reduction in the number of
offenders revoked to state prison as a result of the realignment rather than successful probation supervision. The new
formula will ensure that county probation departments are incentivized to continue making program improvements but will
not artificially reward counties for changes that result from AB realignment.
 We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


 Continue to work with partners to ensure the safety of youth in placement.
 Continue to focus efforts on family reunification, placing minors in the least restrictive setting (including adoption, legal
guardianship or placement with a relative), and provide independent living skills and transitional housing to those where
family reunification is not an option.
 Return the minor to a safe home and complete all necessary steps to finalize the permanent placement of the minor.

 We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial condition of the Placement
Unit.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


 Increase the Work Furlough Population to 100 inmates.
 Complete ORS or ORAS on all inmates.
 Work with Re-Entry Court for appropriate referrals to Work Furlough, Work Release, and Direct Work.
 Train DPO and CSO staff on Motivational interviewing techniques.

WF/WR/DW revenues continue to be impacted by the current economic downturn, which has affected our clients' ability
to pay, and has resulted in an increase in the unemployed inmate population.


The objective of the JJCPA program is to provide services that will result in a reduction in the following areas:
 Arrest rate
 Incarceration rate
 Probation violation rate
 Probation completion rate
 Restitution completion rate
 Community service completion rate
 New law violation
 Time to first arrests
 Arrests for violent offenses

 We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial condition of the JJCPA
program.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


 Hire only the best applicants that pass a rigorous background investigation. This ensures that the Agency retains only
those applicants that are of the highest integrity, possess superior interpersonal skills, and exhibit good decision making
and judgment.
 Complete Administrative Investigations in a manner that respects the rights of employees while protecting the Agency
and the County from liability. Thorough Administrative Investigations enable the Agency to take appropriate action
concerning employees that do not comply with Agency policies and procedures and exonerate the wrongly accused.
 Enhance the Agency’s image and increase employee morale by conducting swearing-in ceremonies, and keeping the
Agency website up to date.
 Provide employees with initial basic skills and build a foundation for ongoing learning. Job skills, enforcement
activities, and casework services are core and essential to the STU training program. This approach not only compliments
and supports the Agency’s mission, but reinforces the concept that our employees constitute our most valuable resource
for accomplishing our mission.
 HR strives to establish and maintain effective working relationships with management, employees, employee
representatives, staff in other agencies and the public.
 Monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.

 Currently, the State’s Standards and Training for Corrections (STC) is included in the Governor’s budget for FY 2014-
2015. As such, there are no estimated cuts to the Agency’s staff training program. The Ventura County Probation
Agency is projected to receive approximately $228,800 this fiscal year for staff training and development.
 STU continues to work with Santa Barbara and San Luis Obispo Counties to conduct a “Tri-Counties Deputy Probation
Officer Core”. This in-house Core training will reduce tuition and travel (i.e., meals, lodging, transportation, etc.) costs
associated with sending staff to Core courses offered in more distant locations. It will also save staff time in trying to
locate Core courses accepting outside agency enrollment. The next Core class is scheduled for April and May of 2014.


 Ensure that facility infrastructure remains up-to-date and provides a safe setting for minors in our custody. The
following measures have been planned to improve safety and security for minors:
 The Facility Inspection Team (FIT) has yet to be fully implemented. We are in the process of reassigning a CSO III
from the Housing Units to Operations to assist with compliance checks and inspections. The CSO III will also be
responsible for coordinating regular inspections by the FIT team to ensure the facility maintains a high level of cleanliness
and will help keep expenses down by ensuring that regular upkeep and maintenance of the facility is maintained.
 Complete the tier enclosures in the Detention Units (Sycamore 3/4). Sycamore 1/2 was completed in 2012. Matilija
Units 1-4, which will improve safety to minors.
 Coordinate with GSA on scheduling interior painting for the facility and the Detention corridor.
 Implement a new tracking system to increase the speed in which maintenance requests are delivered and processed.
Currently, we use a paper system in which staff hand write maintenance requests and place them in a mailbox slot for
delivery to Operations.GSA allowed Operations access into their work orders system allowing expedited submission and
processing of the maintenance requests With the new tracking system, maintenance requests will be submitted to GSA
within 24 hours of receiving the request. The next step in this process would be to develop the electronic submission of
the maintenance requests to further reduce the submission time to GSA.

 We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial condition of the JFOperations
Unit.
 We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


 Provide juveniles with vocational skills to be utilized upon release from the program.
 Reduce recidivism.
 Continue to increase programming to juveniles not participating in the Leaders Program. Programming will involve
additional male youth housed in the same housing area as the youth participating in the Leaders Program potentially
doubling the number of youth receiving services.
 Provide comprehensive transitional services for youth returning to the community.
 Expand enrichment services for female commitment youth to include programs such as Broadcast Journalism and
Paxton/Patterson.
 In March 2013, several staff were trained to facilitate the Baby Elmo program. Implementation is due to begin April,
2014. Baby Elmo is an evidenced based program, that comes to the JF from the Youth Law Center, with oversight by
Georgetown University. The Baby Elmo Program allows incarcerated teen parents to maintain contact with their children
and provides them the ability to improve their parenting skills. The intent of the program is to provide youth with an
incentive to become competent and committed parents by giving them the tools to communicate and build a positive
relationship with their child. The program is video based, using the Sesame Street Beginnings videos. The classes
include a hands-on visitation component, in which the incarcerated teen parent will be able to see their child. The visits
serve as an incentive, not only to learn about parenting, but also for improved behavior in the facility and participation in
rehabilitative activities.

 We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial condition of the JF Detention
or Commitment Services.
 In FY 2014-15 we will continue to focus efforts in filling behind position vacancies and increasing the efficiency of
staffing patterns in order to minimize the use of overtime. This will also include staffing CSO II relief positions (nine of
which will be assigned to the JF).
 We will continue with current programming, while seeking to improve and expand those services offered to youth that
will focus on their transition back into the community and reduce recidivism.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government. This includes revisions to Juvenile Title 15 Regulations which were adopted and published in April 2014.


 Provide the court with a thorough and detailed intake report so they may make informed decisions on suitable releases
into the community.
 Appropriately screen (through the use of a Risk Assessment Instrument) all youth brought to the JF to determine if
detention is necessary or if the youth can be safely supervised in the community using either community confinement or
EM. The screening of youth based upon a Risk Assessment Instrument (RAI) is a strategy which complies with EBP.
 Intake will continue to assist with reviewing all bookings and making recommendations for enhancements of VCPA
information technology for collection of JDAI/ DMC data to assist with reduction strategies.
 Global Postioning System (GPS) monitoring was attempted in prior years, but the technology was found not to be quite
sufficient enough for our needs. We are in the process of implementing a second pilot project with newer GPS equipment
this year. We anticipate that this equipment will provide better tracking of minors under our supervision.
 Continue to keep the JF population down by keeping the number of youth on EM at a monthly average of
approximately 55 youth. Continue efforts to provide resources to youth while on EM to increase their success on EM.
 Continue to conduct daily field contacts of EM minors in the program, but to utilize staff in a more efficient manner so
the EM team is able to increase the number of weekly field contacts by 10% this year.

 We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial condition of the JF Juvenile
Intake and Confinement Unit.
 We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government. This includes revisions to Juvenile Title 15 Regulations, which are due to be adopted and published in April
2014. Where there are no significant changes known, JF policies and procedures will be reviewed and compared to
ensure compliance.


 Continue to hire CSOs to meet staffing requirements and overtime budget targets.
 Provide programming to juveniles detained pending Court proceedings, primarily through Girls Inc of Carpinteria, and
the Volunteers-in-Probation Program, which includes numerous volunteers that provide lessons in music, chess, science,
etc. Said youth will also be offered evidence based programming provided through ART, Gender Specific Programming,
Alcohol and Drug Counseling and Interactive Journaling.
 Continue to improve on and implement DMC practices, policies and procedures that strive to reduce disproportionality,
for both detention and commitment populations.
 Continue to provide juveniles serving Court-ordered commitments with evidence based programming that addresses
their criminogenic needs and comprehensive transitional services that will assist them upon release back into the
community.
 Continue to provide ART and train additional staff to facilitate ART training.
 In March, 2013, several staff were trained to facilitate the Baby Elmo program. Implementation is due to begin April,
2014. Baby Elmo is an evidence based program that comes to the JF from the Youth Law Center, with oversight by
Georgetown University. The Baby Elmo Program allows incarcerated teen parents to maintain contact with their children
and provides them the opportunity to improve their parenting skills. The intent of the program is to provide youth with an
incentive to become competent and committed parents by giving them the tools to communicate and build a positive
relationship with their child. The program is video based, using the Sesame Street Beginnings videos. The classes
include a hands-on visitation component, in which the incarcerated teen parent will be able to see their child. The visits
serve as an incentive, not only to learn about parenting, but also for improved behavior in the facility and participation in
rehabilitative activities.

 We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial condition of the JF Detention
or Commitment Services.
 In FY 2014-15 we will continue to focus efforts in filling behind position vacancies and increasing the efficiency of
staffing patterns in order to minimize the use of overtime. This will also include staffing CSO II relief positions (nine of
which will be assigned to the JF).
 We will continue with current programming, while seeking to improve and expand those services offered to youth that
will focus on their transition back into the community and reduce recidivism.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government. This includes revisions to Juvenile Title 15 Regulations which were adopted and published in April 2014.


(1) Continue to participate with other criminal justice agencies in the analysis, planning and implementation of AB 109,
Public Safety Realignment.
(2) Continue to manage court ordered attorney fees in adult criminal cases.
(3) Continue to develop and refine the Integrated Public Defender Case Management system.
(4) Continue to collaborate with IT Services to identify and develop new technology to assist with case management and
organizational efficiencies.
(5) Develop an agency strategic plan, continue to participate in the Lean Six Sigma program, review and follow-up on
goals and , and seek operational efficiencies.
(6) Develop succession planning for management and administrative staff.
(7) Continue to develop and mentor staff by providing in-house training opportunities.
(8) Participate in the County E-Performance program.
(9) Explore possibilities of partnering with local law schools to develop and implement a clinical program for law students.


(1) Continue to provide quality representation to all indigent defendants at the least possible expense to the County.
(2) Continue to collaborate with other criminal justice agencies in the analysis and planning of the efficient operation of
the justice system, including implementation of AB 109, Public Safety Realignment.
(3) Provide training to our social workers, enabling them to conduct risk/needs assessments to determine appropriate
evidence based services for clients.
(4) Utilize risk/needs assessments and evidence based practices to expand and explore alternative sentencing programs,
alternatives to jail, and ways to reduce recidivism and jail overcrowding.
(5) Continue to request court ordered attorney fees when appropriate.

(1) Public Safety Realignment will continue to impact our business process; although the specific impacts are not yet
known.


(1) Continue to provide quality representation to persons qualifying for Public Defender services.
(2) Continue to closely monitor Probate and LPS Conservatorship cases to ensure that annual accounting are accurate
and timely filed.
(3) Continue to request court ordered attorney fees, when appropriate.
(4) Continue to conduct mandated investigations of placements of clients under LPS and Probate conservatorships.
(5) Explore solutions to handling increased workload in both conservatorship and contempt cases.

(1) Aging elder population and increases in dementia and Alzheimer’s diagnosis’ will impact our workload on probate
conservatorship cases.


CIT staff will continue to research and seek grant opportunities to cover the costs of the positions.
CIT will continue to increase CIT card compliance by continuing to attend monthly trainings at all stations/departments
and holding quarterly CIT Coordinator meetings.
CIT staff will create monthly briefing training videos to address a mental health, crisis intervention or community resource
item, in addition to attending briefings monthly at all stations/departments.
CIT staff will continue to train 100 individuals from the Sheriff’s Patrol, Sheriff’s Communication Center, and Probation.
In addition CIT will work with the County Mental Health Department, Prevention Early Intervention, to secure continued
training funds.
CIT staff will nominate and award a CIT Officer of the Year, to acknowledge outstanding service to the community. The
award will be presented at the annual Medal of Valor ceremony.
Ensure processing and assignment of Divisional investigations and attain an 80% compliance rate with our target of
finishing Divisional investigations within 90 days.
Continue to integrate features of the Sheriff’s Wellness Program department-wide. So far, the following four (4) efforts
are also in progress:
1.Voluntary participation in wellness screenings by Employee Health Services-County Wellness Program
2.Modify Food in Staff Dining
3.Develop wellness videos for briefings
4.Create labels for food served in staff dining.
Prepare for Regular Basic Course (RBC) audit by POST with self-assessment in 2015 followed by POST audit in 2015 /
2016.
Continue with NIMS training compliance working with Sheriff’s OES.
Work with Sheriff’s Business Office to research the current accuracy of cost structure in terms of range fees charged by
outside entities for use of our Sheriff’s Firearms Range.
Look into feasibility of smaller units (motors, detectives etc…) and collaterals participating in perishable skills together
during each 2-year perishable skills cycle, which would allow for team building and emphasis on specific skills in addition
to the standard curriculum.
Continue to increase the number of DRE’s on department to build on the great strides made in this area during 13/14
accomplishment in same area noted above.
Produce six (6) additional in-house training videos on pertinent issues and post on Sheriff’s Intranet for viewing at
briefings.
We operate a regional training center. With this in mind, we will look into hosting additional training classes tied into L.A.
Clear who offers training classes in Clark, L.A., San Bernardino and San Luis Obispo Counties. In doing so we will be better represented and provide more cost effective options for our personnel to attend classes here locally.
Utilize existing training cadres (ARCON, First Aid etc….) already assigned to different stations to conduct short refresher
training at briefings on a regular basis. Examples would be ARCON instructors refreshing sworn personnel in the area of
weapon retention and escort control holds (normally mandated every 2-years). First Aid instructors could refresh
employees on CPR and tourniquet procedures (normally mandated every 3-years).
Continue to expand the use of the Predictive Index in the pre-employment screening and promotional processes and
explore ways to further utilize its capabilities for employee development and organization effectiveness. (Expanded uses
may include: assessment of motivating needs, fit-gap analysis, and measurement of morale.)
Continue to operate within budget by accurately projecting expenditures and tracking expenses.
Complete a minimum of two audits per year primarily using Internal Affairs investigators. In the event a large-scale audit
is needed, establish a task force of various employees within as well as outside of Support Services.
Keep the Sheriff’s Policy Manual accurate and up-to-date via Lexipol LLC and the Sheriff’s Policy Committee.
Continue to pursue opportunities to target recruitment of women, minorities and veterans into all positions including job
fairs and participate with RoadRunner Sports on their Ladies Night Out event.
Work collaboratively with CEO-Risk Management to determine ways to reduce injured workers’ time off and manage the
time away from work as a result of work-related injuries.
Develop an HR Background Investigator’s manual to improve consistency within the unit.
Convert pertinent information from the Sheriff’s Personnel Tracking System (SPTS) to Ventura County Human Resource
and Payroll (VCHRP) thereby eliminating the need for SPTS which is no longer vendor supported and requires
ActiveDirectory that is being eliminated with the Microsoft 365 implementation.


 Implement SmartJustice, a secure and reliable web-based statewide information sharing system that will connect 58
county law enforcement and 58 county probation systems throughout California.
 Complete work on the transition to the new CLETS message switch.


Enhance the Moorpark Station security system by updating the video surveillance system station wide. Work with the
City of Moorpark.
Update the interview room surveillance system. Work with East County Detective Bureau and the City of Moorpark.
Continue annual threat assessment program for local schools and any other business within the Moorpark area.
Work towards implementation of one full time senior deputy beat coordinator for the unincorporated areas within the
Moorpark Station.
Maintain railroad-crossing safety through a rail safety program called “Operation Lifesaver.” Provide informational
exchanges with the public and business community on identity theft, scams, graffiti issues, and general crime prevention.
Re-model Moorpark front office area for better work flow and public reception.
Continue to deter credit card skimming operation within the City of Moorpark through the task force approach using
community volunteers, business, and law enforcement personnel.
Establish a department wide program for identifying, tracking and investigating suspicious pawn activity.
Purchase additional License Plate Readers (ALPRs) and other crime prevention and apprehension equipment.
Thousand Oaks to continue to participate in the Office of Traffic Safety DUI checkpoints.
Reduce the number of DUI related and fatal traffic collisions in Thousand Oaks.
Coordinate a multi-agency training in reference to enacting social host ordinances.
Develop protocol for the enforcement of social host penalties.
Implement social media virtual neighborhood watch known as “Next Door”.
Continue Active Shooter and Threat Assessment trainings.

Keeping pace with the technology costs associated with Intelligence Lead Policing (cost unknown).
Collaboration with other law enforcement agencies for the disbursement of realignment funding for addressing serious
habitual offenders in the communities ($92,000 for Sheriff’s Office).


Attempt to acquire future funding for the "Homeless Intervention" deputy position.
Continued partnership with the Moose Club and the Safe Surfing Foundation for an internet safety/predator program. A
computer was donated by the Moose Club and was installed and it is an anticipated that investigators will be trained by
mid-2014.
Continue implementation of law enforcement technology to assist with the detection of crime and the apprehension of
offenders.
Reduce number of traffic collisions through education, engineering, and enforcement.
Evaluating the installation of gates at the Premium Outlet Center in order to deter late night criminal activity.

Increase in homeless population throughout the city and adjoining county areas.
City of Camarillo is still recovering from recession which is still impacting the city's general fund.
The planned increase in residents/clients at Casa Pacifica will impact calls for service.


 West County Patrol will develop and implement the Real Time Information Center into the existing Sheriff’s
Communications Center. The purpose of the RTIC is to consolidate existing data resources to provide field deputies with
current, comprehensive information in a real time environment to improve policing, identify patterns, and emerging crime.
It delivers a proactive approach to law enforcement during developing situations with an overall outcome of reducing
crime and improving the quality of life for residents within the Sheriff’s jurisdictions.
 Create a multi-station bicycle enforcement team for deployment to the communities of Ojai, Fillmore, Moorpark and
Headquarters areas during the summer months. Using the multi-station approach allows sharing of resources and
personnel to keep costs minimal while providing greater delivery of services to a larger population.
 Maximize potential of Explorer Scouts to experience law enforcement duties by supplementing front counter staffing
during summer months
 Update the Ventura County Code / resource booklet.
 At Ojai Police, replace sprinkler heads and valves to save water and install wood bark landscaping in 50% front portion
of the station to save water and improve the appearance.
 SCC to work closely with the Real Time Information Center project and to reconfigure a portion of the SCC to facilitate
the RTIC program. SCC to hire and train three new dispatchers and place one dispatcher through a Tactical Dispatcher
Course.
 SCC will continue to save money by having the systems administrator fill in supervisor overtime hours by flexing his/her
time to accommodate.
 Office of Emergency Service (OES) will maintain the effort for programs and projects that are already successful – EPC,
ECC, Grants, Deployment, Operations. Improve secondary EOC capabilities and obtain preparedness and homeland
security grants.
 OES to begin the Hazard Mitigation Planning process and develop EOC section specific training.
 OES to reform the Recovery Program to include disaster assistance and public assistance
 Fillmore to continue to enhance anti-graffiti program through technological improvements with the use of grant funded
cameras.
 Install crime prevention signs in high crime areas to reduce thefts from cars and supplement with the installation of
license plate reader cameras to identify suspect vehicles.

Lawsuits against Emergency Management organizations regarding a lack of preparedness for access and functional
needs (AFN) clients.
1. Costs to maintain current capabilities and resources are increasing while resources at the local, state and federal
levels continue to decrease.
2. The Emergency Management threat environment has expanded to include the cyber environment.


Seek: a jurisdiction-wide COA from the FAA to fly the SUAS (Qube); funding to continue staffing 2 part-time investigators
in the Cold Case Task Force through the “Solving Cold Case DNA Grant” in cooperation with the Crime Lab; additional
data transfer options for surveillance operations. (Major Crimes and TSU)
Revise/Update Swat Policy. Continue T&E and selection of new ballistic helmets, Replace tactical cameras (Remington
Eyes & SWAT CAM).
Evaluation of Marksmen Weapons. (SWAT)
Evaluate ballistic blankets for vehicles. (SWAT)
Create designated training schedule to include four quarterly team trainings. (TNU)
Delegate team leaders to manage training events. (TNU)
Implement database, website and open source search training with department experts (i.e. Crime Analysis, SGU, and
SED). (TNU)
Fill next negotiator vacancy with an employee skilled in database, website, open source, and social media searches.
This will increase the collection of intelligence and information gathered on persons and locations involved in negotiated
events. (TNU)
Reconditioning and upgrade 2 existing Segway Human Transporters with batteries and electronics. (Bomb Unit)
Purchase “XTK Precision Aim Point Kit” (allows for surgical aim and precision disruption using existing xrays and
disruptors), “Scanex” Xray reader, eight (8) tactical ballistic helmets for explosive breaching and “General Dynamics”
wireless remote firing system (transmitter & receivers). (Bomb Unit)
Increase the level of expertise through training and mentoring. (Narcotics/VCAT/Bomb Unit/SWAT)
Provide training for patrol personnel on DEC, Prop 215, etc.
Add additional investigator from outside agencies to increase the effectiveness of the task force. Santa Paula P.D. and
the CHP have committed to providing an investigator. (Narcotics/VCAT)
Increase the number of marijuana plants seized and arrests from the National Forest cultivations utilizing an extra-help
sergeant and specially trained Detention Services deputies. (Narcotics/VCAT)
Complete real time mapping project county-wide. (Special Crimes/Intel)
Expand crime report taking through I-Cop App. (Special Crimes/Intel)
Expand joint training plan for Sheriff’s Office SED teams with a focus on Informant Management, Surveillance, and
Dynamic Entries. Offer timely phone analysis crime mapping for all area stations, finish VCIJIS wants project which will
allow entry of PC wants and other vital information into VCIJIS and assist with the implementation of ARTIC (Special
Crimes/Intel)


 To implement a property/evidence pre-booking system for deputies to create a more efficient system of booking
property into the evidence room.
 To complete the off-site warehouse at Todd Road Jail that is currently in the planning stage, which will increase
storage capacity for the future.


 Begin to modernize the fleet by replacing an aging helicopter with a suitable, modern helicopter; estimated cost
$9,000,000.
 Replace second aging Jet Fuel Tanker Truck; estimated cost $350,000.
 Build-up Bell Long Ranger airframe; estimated cost $800,000.
 Seek additional revenue sources to offset costs.
 Expand the partnership between Sheriff and Fire to include shared costs on staffing and aircraft
development/replacement.
 Develop a long-term strategic plan for aircraft and facility sustainability.


Migrate Novell environment to Microsoft Active Directory. Replace existing Groupwise email with Office 365.
Mobile Data computer replacement.


 Build cooperative relationships with the Courts and the offices of the Public Defender and District Attorney to facilitate
efficient trial operations while maintaining jail security and safety.
 Continue to maintain constitutionally valid jail operations.
 Continue with realignment implementation and evaluation.
 Create a database for the tracking of inmate suicide and suicide attempts.
 Continue to evaluate the housing operation to ensure we are meeting all standards of reasonable care.
 Continue to evaluate and update the Divisional Policy to stay current with County, State and Federal laws, as well as
established case law.
 Respond, monitor, and evaluate critical incidents in the jail to help reduce liability. Facilitate information exchange with
Risk Management, County Counsel, Special Counsel, and others regarding such incidents.

 Realignment continues to have a significant impact on the Divisional budgeting and operations. The expansion of
services associated with Realignment has been costly. State funding at the current level, and thereafter adjusted
annually for inflation, will be vital to maintaining effective services consistent with Governor Brown’s Realignment vision.


 Improve customer service, relationships with general public (phone and public reception lobby) AND relationships and
interactions with peers (quads/levels); (CIR)
 Additional training for staff in various areas of clerical work, customer service and peer interactions; (CIR)
 The need to reclassify Sheriff’s Intake and Release Specialist position(s) having the ability to evaluate their current
salary, compared to other counties. Last reclassification was approximately 2000. (CIR)
 Continue great customer service, relationships with general public when they are in need of help and or answers to
their mail processing questions; (Jail Mailroom)
 Additional training for staff in various areas of clerical work, customer service and peer interactions and obtain the
knowledge of “Inmate Con Games” for better processing of mail and the review of such. (Jail Mailroom)


2014 Court Security Goals
 Currently working with GSA and the Court on plans to address the inadequate security kiosk located at the entrance to
the HOJ. The ultimate goal is to not only retrofit current space with more suitable furniture, but also integrate ballistic
material in several areas to provide cover in an active shooter situation.
 Create a database that contains information on significant incidents and trials that we have planned for and executed in
the past. This will help future Court Services staff and us from having to “re-invent the wheel” when presented with similar
situations.
 Complete the Judicial Protection Unit (JPU) database, which will help us quickly locate and track the progress of JPU
investigations.
 Continue the lunchtime trainings with topics that cover all aspects of law enforcement.
 Continue preparing for and execute the security for the upcoming Joshua Packer murder trial.
 Completion of the major incident reference manual.
 Continue to evaluate the impact of realignment on the courthouse and make necessary changes.
 Complete the evaluation of courtroom inmate restraints:
o Chair with belly chain cable
o Soft shackles
o Taser belt/sleeve
o This will include training with our agency’s ARCON instructors
Court Administration
 Continue with new radio transition for all Sheriff Court services.
 Install all new carpet in all Court Security locker rooms (approved).
 Get updated aerial photos of all Sheriff Court services buildings .
 Get MOU approved and signed.
 Complete review and updating of bureau policy and procedures.
 Install gun safes in transportation vans/ordered - in progress.
 Research and development of new inmate movement cameras to include upstairs in holding areas and Civil system.
 Acquire a black and white for JJC staff for safety, first responders and obvious Sheriff presence.
Transportation
 New video security camera system for HOJ Inmate Movement area.
 Install Plexiglas on the elevator gates (top portion) so inmates will not be able to spit on transporting deputy.
 Block visibility of inmates being housed in condos so they cannot communicate with others in holding tanks (tint
windows so inmate cannot look out but deputy can look inside condo).
 New radio chargers/ batteries for handhelds.
 Work with PTDF staff to select a better location for (10-35) interviews instead of using level one control holding area.
The Court Services Bureau, in all areas, will continue to look for more efficient ways to conduct business, improve
delivery of service, while reducing costs whenever possible.


 Continue to evaluate vocational opportunities for female inmates.
 Continued partnership with GSA to complete water recycling project.
 Continue partnership with CEO/PWA/GSA to build the forensic evidence warehouse on TRJ grounds.
 Continue the process to obtain 64 bed medical / mental health expansion.
 Continue to evaluate options for medical services as it relates to dental and optometry for 11770 inmates.
 Continue evaluation of door controls in housing units and cluster control. This includes the upgrade to touch screen
technology.
 Continue to evaluate the use of technology updates to improve jail operations.
 Complete kitchen floor tile repair project.
 The completion of the plumbing upgrade and shower upgrade projects in the housing units.
 Identify and repair soft water issues in the kitchen.
 Complete the Public Reception counter / work station upgrade.
 Continue to condense the use of Connex boxes and replace the rented units.
 Remove existing glass in Central Control (public side) and replace with Level III ballistic glass.
 Completion of the new Forensics Evidence Storage warehouse.

 The development of a “Gray Water” recycling program.
 Evaluating alternatives in laundry operations that may reduce energy use and increase efficiency.


Once upgrade is complete, benefits to the County are as follows:
1. Increased reporting strength, with reports that meet GASB and Cost-Based healthcare requirements
2. Improved potential for future grant awards and increased opportunities for expense tracking, resulting maximization of
grant reimbursements
3. Move County towards paperless financial processes - leveraging/utilizing the County's investment in Enterprise
Content Management Programs
4. Business friendly Vendor Self Service for bidding on County procurements
5. Enable Program and Performance Budgeting in support of County's Strategic Plan


1. Install low flow water fixtures
2. Hall of Justice; Upgrade restrooms and break rooms; Waterproof exterior walls; Waterproof Underground Parking
Garage; Replace Three Fulton Boilers; Replace revolving doors; Upgrade ceiling and lights; Cathodic Protection,
Discontinuity pile group
3. Hall of Administration: Replace Main Electrical Switchgear Distribution Sections; Remove palm trees; Upgrade
restrooms and break rooms; Board Room, Cover Chairs; Board Room HVAC Upgrade; Computer Room, Fire
Suppression and HVAC consolidation; Upgrade ceiling and lights
4. PTDF: HVAC Modernization Plan, Construct Phase 2; Kitchen/Freezer reconfiguration; Upgrade restrooms and break
rooms; Upgrade grease pit
5. Juvenile Facility: Upgrade HVAC Controls Program, Phase 1; Multipurpose Building, Floor Repair; Waterproof Exterior
Walls, Phase 2, Housing; Interior and Exterior Painting, Phase 2; Walkway Addition; Rebuild walk-in freezer
6. Todd Road Jail: HVAC Master Plan, Construct Phase 3; Upgrade Storm Water Drainage System; Upgrade Irrigation
Well and Tank Filter System; Vacuum Toilet Upgrade, Phase 3; Replace Class Room Split Systems; Replace
Refrigerator/Freezer Cooling Units
7. Government Center: Repair Parking Lot D and F; Survey and Comply with Arc Flash Requirements; Main electrical
service preventive maintenance, Phase 2
8. Service Building: Upgrades restrooms to ADA
9. Vanguard Building: Elevator Upgrade; Public Area Flooring Replacement; Upgrade restroom
10. East Valley Sheriff's Station: Paint building exterior; Upgrade hot water boiler; Upgrade elevator; Upgrade Fire Life
Safety System
11. Telephone Road Building: Landscape Upgrades and Smoking Shelter Relocation; Replace doors and frames
12. Camarillo Animal Services: Upgrade Public Restrooms; Doors and Frames
13. Partridge Building: Upgrade Fire Life Safety System; Install Flag Pole
14. 669 CSD: Paint Building Exterior; Upgrade second floor: Upgrade restrooms
15. 646 CSD: Upgrade ceiling and lighting, Second floor; Upgrade restrooms
16. Williams Drive: Upgrade HVAC, Phase 2
17. East County Court House: Upgrade break rooms; Upgrade elevator controls
18. FPD, Headquarters and 911: Re-Commission Lighting/HVAC
19. Moorpark Road Yard: HVAC upgrade
20. Work Furlough: Paint Building Exterior


1. The VCDCSS Call Center staff is committed to responding to calls within 60 seconds.
2. To provide full resolution for 90-95% of the calls at the first point of contact.


1. Increase State and Federal Performance Measures related to child support collections
A. Increase percentage of Collections on Current Support – Federal Performance Measure # 3
B. Increase percentage of Cases with Arrears Collections – Federal Performance Measure # 4
2. Continue to focus resources that support the business strategies and “Key Initiatives”
3. Continue to meet all State compliance and data reliability requirements
4. Respond to customer inquiries within 3 days

The current economic situation may pose challenges to our goal of increasing child support collections in the upcoming
year, however, VCDCSS will continue to pursue every possible avenue to support children and families.


1. Continue to improve system processes for centralized CDBG grant program administration.
2. Encourage more efficient use of funding by focusing allocations to high priority projects and to subrecipients with the
administrative capacity to comply with reporting requirements and use funds in a timely manner.
3. Align funding recommendations with  in the Updated Ten Year Strategy to End Homelessness adopted by
the Board in January 2013.
4. Participate in preparation of the 2015-2019 Consolidated Plan, and 2015-16 Annual Action Plan, as required by HUD.

1. Continued reduction in CDBG funding will have increasing adverse effects on availability of funds for county and city
programs in the entitlement area.
2. In order to ensure the most effective use of limited resources, greater emphasis will need to be placed upon
performance outcomes, necessitating overhaul of contracts and enhanced monitoring and reporting.
3. It is anticipated that greater regional coordination and collaboration with other Entitlement jurisdictions will improve
operational efficiencies for both staff and non-profit entities receiving funding under this program.


1. Maintain high-quality HOME program performance.
2. Conduct annual onsite monitoring of all project properties covered by affordability periods per HOME Rule schedule.

1. New HOME rules, found at 24 CFR 92.107 indicate that HUD may (emphasis added) revoke a Participating
Jurisdiction’s designation if a formula allocation falls below $750,000 (or $500,000 when Congress appropriates less than
$1.5 million for this program) for three consecutive years or below $625,000 (or below $410,000 as above) for two
consecutive years. Given increased vulnerability, enhanced requirements for regulatory compliance and reduced funding,
it may be prudent to explore reinstating the HOME Consortium with the City of Ventura which is experiencing similar
challenges. Continued reduction in HOME funding will have increasing adverse effects on availability of funds for projects
within the county.


Given the limited funds available, only funding to the District Attorney for vertical prosecution is included in the
Preliminary Budget as an objective for this Fund.


Provide education opportunities to the public on the benefits of spaying and neutering companion animals. Find new
ways to augment this fund with donor contributions and grants.

This program is funded through Food and Agriculture Code sections 30804.7(a) and 31751.7 (a), which state that owners
of non-spayed or unneutered dogs or cats that are impounded by a county shelter shall be fined. If these mandates were
to be repealed, funds would not be available for spay and neuter programs such as those described above.


a. Expand the Transitions Program to the Santa Clara Valley region.
b. Implement Promotoras to increase enrollment in the Fillmore Community Project.
c. For the juvenile mental health court, increase percentage of clients successfully completing the program by 15%, and
increase family therapy interventions by 20%.

The FY 2014-15 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or State funding, utilized by
the Department for Federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a. Integrate MHFA training for new County law enforcement officers.
b. Increase parent and foster parent services in Triple P.
c. Develop MOUs with community agencies being trained in Triple P to ensure community level implementation.
d. Develop outcome measures for agencies implementing Triple P for community rollout.
e. Continue to implement PEI 5-year Strategic Plan with measurable outcomes for each program.
f. Targeted outreach to the senior community on suicide prevention and MHFA training.
g. Collaborate with agencies providing aftercare for family members impacted by suicide. Develop their membership in
the CCC.
h. Expand MHFA in Spanish to Santa Clara Valley.
i. Expand VIPS to Santa Clara Valley.
j. Coordinate Mental Health Board recognition for MHFA trainers and Olweus Bullying Prevention schools who have
successfully implemented.

The FY 2014-15 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or State funding, utilized by
the Department for Federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a. Mental Health Certificate Program: Complete the third and final cohort of the Mental Health Certificate Program.
b. High School Outreach: Provide the curriculum developed by WET and piloted at Hueneme High School to the VCCCD
and VCOE to explore inclusion in future career ladder programs.
e. Language Assistance Project: Implement the use of treatment plans in the language of preference for Spanishspeaking
consumers/family members.
f. Staff Training: Continue to provide training to build competence with electronic resources, increase implementation of
EBP, and improve leadership and management skills.
f. Implement the Psychiatric/Mental Health Nurse Practitioner loan assumption program to enhance recruitment of nurse
practitioners with a psychiatric/mental health specialty, to alleviate the shortage of psychiatrists, and to increase the
availability of psychiatric professionals to provide medication management services.
g. Continue to facilitate the clinical training opportunities with current internships which include the Mental Health
Associate Internship, the Master’s in Social Work internship, the Master’s in Family Therapy (MFT) traineeship, the
doctoral practicum program, the MFT/Art Therapy traineeship, and the Psychiatric/Mental Health Nurse Practitioner
clinical training program.
h. Continue to implement financial incentive programs which include the bilingual internship stipend and the staff
scholarship program.

The FY 2014-15 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or State funding, utilized by
the Department for Federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a. Support department effort to implement document imaging
b. Support department effort to implement analytic software.
c. Develop and implement an e-signature process.
d. Feasibility assessment and integration of information with other County systems.
e. Implement scheduling module in the EHR.
f. Research and implement a data warehouse solution for managing large amounts of data.

The FY 2014-15 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or State funding, utilized by
the Department for Federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a. Fully implement the Quality of Life Improvement project to include evaluation of outcomes.
b. Fully implement Health Navigation project to include evaluation of outcomes.

The FY 2014-15 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or State funding, utilized by
the Department for Federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a. Create and implement an updated 3-Year State MHSA plan, ensuring long-term program sustainability.

The FY 2014-15 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or State funding, utilized by
the Department for Federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a. Continue to improve productivity and Medi-Cal penetration rate.
b. Reduce the number of individuals placed in out-of-county IMDs through the use of intensive, wraparound services.
c. Continue the implementation of evidence-based treatment and improve fidelity.
d. Fully implement the EHR.
e. Continuous NIATx process improvement projects to improve client access, engagement, and retention.
f. Expand Older Adult day treatment programming to East County.

The FY 2014-15 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or State funding, utilized by
the Department for Federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


(1) Children & Family Services (CFS) will continue to actively monitor and improve strategies that are intended to
decrease the rate of domestic violence and spousal abuse.
(2) CFS domestic violence contractors intend to maintain level services to include but not limited to the following:
- Provide a shelter 24 hours/day, seven days/week in an undisclosed and secure location.
- Provide 24 hours/day, seven days/week telephone hotline for crisis calls.
- Provide temporary housing and food facilities.
- Provide psychological support and peer counseling in accordance with Section 1037.1 of the Evidence Code.
- Provide referrals to existing services in the community.
- Provide a drop-in center that operates during normal business hours to assist victims of domestic violence who have a
need for support services.
- Provide arrangements for school age children to continue their education during their stay at the domestic violence
shelter-based program.
- Provide emergency transportation as feasible (vehicles and drivers shall be available to transport victims and their
children to appropriate services as needed with a maximum two (2) hour response to such calls for assistance).
- Provide referrals to legal assistance and medical care.
- Provide information regarding other available social services.
- Work with social services agencies, schools, and law enforcement agencies in an advocacy capacity for those served
by the domestic violence shelter-based programs.
- Provide services to, or assist in referring, physically disabled victims of domestic violence to services in the community
where assistance may be obtained.

(1) We anticipate level funding to be available for the domestic violence services as linked to the county marriage license
fees and court fines.


(1) Implement replacement of Caretracker for PA Registry Provider Database. This system may include enrollment
documents for auto-population.
(2) Increase availability of IHSS/PA Social Workers to assist consumers in hiring and retaining providers through
individual consumer training in the home.
(3) Increase recruiting to 40 new providers per month and training of Registry Providers to meet the needs of new federal
OT legislation that may change the ability for consumers to have only one provider.
(4) Install video conferencing equipment in the training room in Ventura and Simi Valley that will allow for training to be
held simultaneously for East and West County providers.
(5) Conduct outreach to IHSS-PA providers to help them understand their options for insurance through Medi-Cal or
Covered California.

(1) Potential for increased cost as a result of the federal overtime rule
(2) The growing senior population will likely continue to have an impact on IHSS caseloads.
(3) Any changes in Provider wages negotiated by the County will result in adjustment(s) to the County’s MOE for the
program.


(1) Business and Industry Goal: Meet the workforce needs of high-demand sectors in the Ventura County regional
economy.
(2) Adults Goal: Increase the number of adults in the Ventura County region who obtain a marketable and industryrecognized
credential or degree and are placed in a related sector job, with a special emphasis on unemployed,
underemployed, low-skilled, low-income, veterans, individuals with disabilities, and other at-risk populations.
(3) Youth Goal: Increase the number of high school students in the Ventura County region who graduate prepared for
post-secondary vocational training, further education, and/or a career, with an emphasis on at-risk youth and those from
low-income communities.
(4) System Alignment and Accountability Goal: Support workforce development system alignment, service integration
and continuous improvement in the Ventura County region, using data to support evidence-based policymaking.

(1) The level of Federal funding and the allocation of these funds by the State to the County are uncertain. The Agency
will manage to the actual level of funding received.


(1) Ensure that pre-apprenticeship, and apprenticeship training is coordinated with one or more apprenticeship programs
registered by the U.S. Department of Labor Employment Training Administration and approved by the California
Department of Industrial Relations of Apprenticeship Standards for the occupation and geographic area.
(2) Prioritize training for occupations in priority industry sectors in the regional economy—training which results in
completion and attainment of a degree and/or other credentials valued by priority-sector employers within the region.
(3) Emphasize career pathways as a framework through which learners can connect their skills and interests with viable
career options.
(4) Provide opportunities to help adults make transitions relating to education, training, and/or employment.
(5) Collaborate with key stakeholders to establish a regional workforce and economic development partnership to
leverage, braid, and/or obtain resources that will sustain the operation of regional workforce and economic development
networks over time.

(1) The level of Federal funding and the allocation of these funds by the State to the County are uncertain. The Agency
will manage to the actual level of funding received.


(1) Partner on strategies to reduce the overall high school dropout rate in the Ventura County region by one percent.
(2) Partner to develop and execute strategies to re-engage disconnected youth.
(3) Partner with employers, educators and others to help youth understand career pathway options and workforce
pipelines.
(4) Partner to encourage youth to focus on attainment of post-secondary degrees and other credentials important to
sector employers in the regional labor market.
(5) Partner to ensure that every youth has the opportunity to develop and achieve career goals through education and/or
workforce training.
(6) Partner to promote youth services system collaboration to better serve youth with barriers and connect them to
education and employment.

(1) The level of Federal funding and the allocation of these funds by the State to the County are uncertain. The Agency
will manage to the actual level of funding received.


1. Increase promotional materials for external programming by 20%.
2. Engage two embedded staff in local organizations.

Any increases to property tax revenue, which is the Ventura County Library’s main revenue source, will be used to
improve the library collection, children and adult programming, and technology. The following annual target performance
measures have been adjusted to compensate for the departure of the Simi Valley Library from the VCLS.


1. Reorganize administration staff.
2. Institute customer ability to pay by credit card.
3. Create and implement a new service model based on “Beyond Bricks and Mortar” plan.

Any increases to property tax revenue, which is the Ventura County Library’s main revenue source, will be used to
improve the library collection, children and adult programming, and technology.


1. Analyze e-magazine service for effectiveness.
2. Project manager for Saticoy Library move and renewal.
3. Review more outsourcing options for selection.

Any increases to property tax revenue, which is the Ventura County Library’s main revenue source, will be used to
improve the library collection, children and adult programming, and technology. Electronic materials require less staff
handling and maintaining which should decrease costs. However, electronic materials are very expensive at this early
stage of development.


1. Create new data network for greater bandwidth.
2. Institute online payments for payment of fines and fees.
3. Add new mobile devices for mobile circulation, mobile reference.

Technology will be an increasing cost center in library service as the use of technology for all library services continues to
rise.


1. To lead and organize the Children’s Services Staff that now directly reports to Children’s Services.
2. To continue with centralized collection development team that will develop a collection, in all formats, for children &
teens that complements our database resources and addresses the needs of the communities with a focus on Common
Core State Standards (CCSS).
3. To continue with early literacy based Storytimes using the 5 practices and incorporating eResources into Storytimes.
Skyping early literacy based Storytimes from branch to branch & onto our website.
4. To be more visible in the community. Making presentations about library resources to the schools and various
community organizations. Making connections in the community to take children & teen programs out to areas that are
under served.
5. To continue to evaluate the Summer Reading Program and make adjustments that will encourage children & teen
success.


PROGRAMS FOR THE PUBLIC – Increase events by 20%, attendance by 40%
1. Director’s grant programming: Second year projects can include musical events, community input on the new Saticoy
facility, author and writing events, MakerSpace instructionals, robotics clubs, community activism.
2. Preparation for 100th anniversary (2016) of the Ventura County Library.
3. Partnership with Reagan Presidential Museum for the Baseball exhibit. Associated awareness of the rich history of
baseball in programs, collections and promotions within each library.
4. Partnership with CAPS television will offer more library programming presentations.
5. External event participation will include informational presentations at the Senior Expo, Summerfest , all invitationals.
6. Investigate sustainable programs with embedded library staff.
COLLECTION –
Increase collections by 20% in quality book and electronic material
Using State grants, Increase collections by 20% to support Common Core needs
Increase electronic collections by 20%
Increase automated selection by 50% using standing order and automatic tools
Develop Bookmobile collection policy


1. Host Literacy Fair Public Awareness event to celebrate READ’s 30th Anniversary
2. Host Adult Learner Leadership Bootcamp
3. Increase public awareness of the READ program
4. Increase number of learners served

Expansion of the program is contingent on receiving annuals funds from future fundraising by the Ventura County Library
Foundation for the Adult Literacy Read Program.


Accomplish all repairs and maintenance listed in report.

The results derived from a cost analysis for outsourcing the management of the facilities will determine if we fill the staff
vacancy, or transfer this function to GSA.


During the FY 14-15, interest earned on this fund will be transferred to the Ventura County’s Operating Fund 1075 and
used to purchase books.


1. Revise encroachment Ordinance.
2. Implement wireless interconnect on Pleasant Valley Road from Eubanks Street to Airport Way.
3. Complete traffic signal modification at Rice Avenue and Channel Islands Blvd.
4. Implement some of the recommendations from the Silver Strand traffic-calming study.
5. Complete traffic-signal installation at the intersection of Rose Avenue and Collins Street.
6. Apply for approximately $3.0 million in grant funds (ATP and TDA).
7. Revise, improve, and augment user-friendly web-based GIS mapping for the public (provide additional road information
in County View).
8. Complete pavement management services for City of Ojai.
9. Provide cost estimate for pavement management services to City of Santa Paula and possibly provide pavement
management services to the city.
10. Redesign transportation internet web page to be user and customer service friendly.
11. Present to the BOS the next five-year Pavement Plan for approval.
12. Design and possibly construct bike lanes along Santa Anna Road.

1. Uncertainty caused by the lack of long term Federal Transportation Program and reduced gas tax revenue.
2. Additional regulatory requirements continue to increase cost of operations. These requirements include the
Countywide Municipal Storm Water Requirements (NPDES), Diesel Particulate measures, and others. These additional
costs will reduce Road funds available for road maintenance, repair and operations.


Next fiscal year, the UA County’s stormwater quality program will continue to work closely with the Ventura Countywide
Stormwater Quality Management Program and the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board in implementing
the fifth year of the 5-year MS4 Stormwater NPDES Permit. The County Program plans to provide overall program inter-
County agency coordination, with the following  and goals planned:
1. Government Center Parking Lot Green Streets Retrofit project County HOA/HOJ Parking Lot Green Street Retrofit
Project - Complete construction, monitoring and educational outreach for the County.
2. Continue implementation of the Permit’s requirements including education and outreach, project conditioning for water
quality protection, conducting stormwater inspections and post-construction project tracking through Accela, preparation
of 2013/2014 County Stormwater Annual Report, provide annual stormwater pollution prevention training for County
employees, and maintenance of County Stormwater Hotline.
3. Continue TMDL planning, monitoring, and implementation assistance to County Agencies to meet TMDL compliance.
4. Design of concept Low Impact Development/Green Street Retrofit projects for County Unincorporated areas, and
prepare grant applications for funding opportunities if available.
5. Initial development of 5 and 10-year Capital Improvement Project (CIP) list for County’s compliance with TMDLs and
Permit requirements.
6. Development of implementation tools for Hydromodification Control Plan requirements in the County UAs.
7. Continue stakeholder participation and develop implementation strategy for Calleguas Creek TMDL’s (trash,
pesticides, metals, toxics and others).
8. Meet implementation requirements for Malibu Creek Bacteria and Trash TMDL’s.
9. Establish MOA with responsible parties for TMDL Implementation Plan development for Santa Clara Bacteria TMDL.
10. Establish MOA with responsible parties for TMDL Implementation Plan development for Ventura River Algae TMDL.
11. Meet implementation requirements for Ventura Coastal (Kiddie and Hobie Beaches) Bacteria TMDL’s.
12. Participate in development of the statewide trash and nutrient (nitrogen and phosphorus) policies.
13. Assist with preparation for the Permit renewal process and preparation of Report of Waste Discharge submittal to
Regional Board.

As described in the Accomplishments and  a new MS4 Stormwater Permit was adopted by the RWQCB on July
8, 2010. This Stormwater Permit has increased both County and city responsibilities resulting in a comparable increase in
financial obligations for all jurisdictions. The RWQCB incorporated a number of TMDLs into the new Ventura Countywide
MS4 Stormwater Permit to provide for an enforcement mechanism. In 2013, RWQCB adopted new Ventura River Algae
TMDL and U.S. EPA develop Malibu Creek Benthic Impairments (Nutrients and Sedimentation) TMDLs. As presented by
the County Program to the Board of Supervisors in August 2010, the County’s obligations and costs have increased to
ensure compliance with adopted and new TMDLs. A planning level compliance cost analysis discussed in the Board
Letter dated May 6, 2014, provided estimates of costs required towards TMDL and Permit compliance. The County
Stormwater Program will continue its efforts towards planning, concept design, and searching for project funding
opportunities.


Operation and Maintenance for the Santa Rosa Road Traffic Signals will continue.


 Continue ordering and evaluation of products for longer sentenced inmates.
 Fill two vacant full-time positions.
 Provide training opportunities for staff interaction with inmates.
 Continue evaluation of vending machines and kiosks.
 Evaluate postal costs and procedures.
 Evaluate time management and procedural efficiencies.


 Use data collected in Inmate Services Student tab in VCIJIS to monitor and evaluate program efficacy.
 Continue to strengthen existing partnerships, and continue efforts to establish additional partnerships with community
based organizations.
 Explore options to continue in-custody GED testing as the testing process changes from paper format to web/computer
based format.

Inmate Services has taken a comprehensive, pro-active approach in addressing the needs of a more sophisticated
inmate population. The use of assessment tools has been valuable in helping inmates to identify and address high needs
areas. While traditional education (GED), vocation, and treatment programs are available to inmates, the addition of
cognitive-behavior restructuring programs has been instrumental for inmates to begin developing pro-social thinking,
coping, and problem-solving skills.


1) Continue to maintain viable enterprise fund by balancing rate increases and cost reductions.
2) Continue Lean Six Sigma Process improvement.
3) Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.


1) Maintain noise compatibility program to result in a low number of noise complaints from aircraft operations.
2) Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.
3) Complete formal design of Phase I NE hangar complex at CMA.

1) The continued planned development of new residential areas in the proximity of the airports will result in an increase in
the number of residents exposed to aircraft noise. Although such developments will be considered acceptable within the
guidelines of the Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan, it is likely that the Department will be impacted with additional
responses to an increased number of noise complaints. The environment of potential conflict between airport operations
and residential uses will continue to force focus on the acquisition of avigation easements over new development parcels.
2) Create additional hangar inventory to meet the demand for hangars. The waiting list for hangars at Camarillo Airport is
greater than 150 and takes approximately 8 years to move through the list.


1) Continue with painting of hangar rows.
2) Continue the rebuild of hangars that have aged.
3) Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.

Camarillo Airports is a former Department of Defense facility that was constructed prior to the 1950’s. A continued focus
on long range planning is needed for maintenance and replacement of aging infrastructure and to accomplish projects in
a manner that is financially sustainable while not compromising safety, security, and the quality of services.



1) Continue to maintain viable enterprise fund by balancing rate increases and cost reductions.
2) Continue Lean Six Sigma Process improvement
3) Maintain Contract Tower operations.
4) Restore Airline Service.


1) Meet all federal and state regulations to maintain airport certification for air carrier operations.
2) Maintain noise compatibility program resulting in low number of noise complaints from aircraft operations.
3) Restore viable Air Service to Oxnard Airport.

1) The continued planned development of new residential areas in the proximity of the airports will result in an increase in
the number of residents exposed to aircraft noise. Although such developments will be considered acceptable within the
guidelines of the Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan, it is likely that the Department will be impacted with additional
responses to an increased number of noise complaints. The environment of potential conflict between airport operations
and residential uses will continue to force focus on the acquisition of avigation easements over new development parcels.
2) Restoring scheduled passenger air service to Oxnard Airport is a top priority.


1) Continue with painting of hangar rows.
2) Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.

Oxnard Airports is a former Department of Defense facility that was constructed prior to the 1950’s. A continued focus on
long range planning is needed for maintenance and replacement of aging infrastructure and to accomplish projects in a
manner that is financially sustainable while not compromising safety, security, and the quality of services.


Rehabilitate section of Durley Ave.


1) Rehabilitate pavement on Aviation Drive.
2) Attempt to maintain level of funding from FAA as the federal share for AIP has been reduced to 90%.

Federal funding for capital projects via the Airport Improvement Program may be reduced through the federal budget
process, resulting in a cutback of projects, which may require re-prioritization of projects.


1)Complete Land Conveyance of former Navy parcel.
2)Replace an HVAC unit on bldg. in business park


Attempt to maintain level of funding from FAA as the AIP funding is less stable than previous years, and may be reduced.

Federal funding for capital projects via the Airport Improvement Program may be reduced through the federal budget
process, resulting in a cutback of projects, which may require re-prioritization of projects.


1) Replace roof and railing on Control Tower.
2) Replace hangar doors on maintenance hangar.
3) Replace HVAC unit on bldg. as needed.


1.Operation of Piru Town Square.
2.Striping (Steckel, Faria, Hobson and Rincon).
3.Steckel and Tapo trash enclosures.
4.Faria and Hobson campsite base material.

Revenues are projected based on Parks facilities use levels. Actual use levels below current projections may require
adjustments to staffing, parks projects and other services during the fiscal year.


1.Soule restroom fixture upgrades loflow, ADA and sidewalk.
2.Soule Park replace water main loop.
3.Foster Park replace domestic water line.
4.Replacement of Soule Park Area 1 & 2 play equipment.
5.Camp Comfort asphalt repair for parking lot.
6.Saticoy Park replace ball field fencing and add foul ball fence.
7.Foster restroom fixture upgrades loflow and ADA

With the closure of the Redevelopment Agency, transfer of the PiruTown Square is expected to occur by fiscal year 2014-
15. The Parks System also has a current backlog of deferred maintenance in excess of $4,034,000 for which some
funding has been identified. Revenues and appropriations for some of these projects are currently projected in the FY
2014-15 budget.


1.Add HVAC in Multipurpose room, replace existing heater unit.
2.Replace wall furnaces in classrooms with HVAC upgrade.
3.Install fire alarm system for kitchen/auditorium.
4.Replace T12 light fixtures with T8 and install day lighting controls.
5.Repair and replace playground asphalt.
6.Replace exterior down lighting in walkways.

Funding for youth programs continues to be an issue for some lease tenants. We are working with tenants to enable
them to continue their programs and use of the facility. Use of the Art Studio continues to grow and we hope to increase
kitchen rentals for use as a certified kitchen.


1)Complete construction of Beach Restroom and Lifeguard Tower
2)Work with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the President’s Office of Management and Budget, and the California
Congressional delegation regarding future funding allocations given the reduced total federal budget and loss of
earmarks, intended to move sand down-coast, and funding for breakwater and jetty repair
3)Complete design of Santa Barbara Island Park and Harbor Boulevard Monument sign, pending funding
4)Oversee lease end for the Casa Sirena and identify new development strategy

Administration’s major focus during the next year or two will be the identification of opportunities to generate revenue with
few, if any, added expenditures. Administration is also focused on revenue collection and revenue reviews to ensure full
and timely payment of rents. Finally, Administration will be reviewing Maintenance Division priorities to further minimize
the need for repairs through preventive measures as much as possible.


1)Continue to support Harbor educational and promotional events.

Revenue decreases have resulted in employees with other full-time duties taking on this time-consuming, but important,
part of the Harbor operations. With a lingering recession, adjustments may need to be made because employees may
not be able to handle the additional work load over the long term.


1)Maintain ongoing training schedule to maximize both employee and public safety.

No real increase in Department revenue is projected, resulting in few expenditure increases related to Patrol other than
salary steps.


1)Maintain the longstanding beach cleaning program for the safety of the general public and to minimize claims against
the County, which were zero again in FY2013-14.
2)Continue twice daily maintenance of public restrooms for general health and safety.
3)Provide beach lifeguard services from Memorial Day to Labor Day between approximately 10am and 6pm.

As with other areas, costs are increasing and resources are static.


1) For the fuel dock, maintain competitive pricing with other fuel terminals, while covering all Department costs.
2) For CISCO, develop long term plans for facility replacement.

Sportfishing revenue has held steady or increased over the past few years, offering recreational services to the public and
contributing to the Harbor’s fiscal health. The fuel dock operation is an essential service, with the goal of ensuring that
revenues and expenditures result in no net cost to the Harbor, and are designed to generate net revenue.


1)Reorganize Maintenance Division in consideration of staffing and budget changes.
2)Communicate clear project priorities within the maintenance division.
3)Continue to emphasize maintenance crew safety.
4)Update a five-year projection of capital needs Harbor-wide, prioritized.

Future issues for the Maintenance Division are the same as for all other Harbor work areas: flat revenues, increasing
costs, and an aging facility. Careful work to identify priorities for repairs and maintenance is critical, as are decisions
regarding the level of repairs that should be undertaken: e.g., should these be short-term repairs, ten-year repairs or fiftyyear
repairs.


1)Continue to manage maintenance costs carefully, while watching for structural issues, because of the higher average
cost of marine-based maintenance and construction.

Demand for slips is lower than historic levels nationwide, including Channel Islands Harbor. These particular slips are at
or near the end of their useful life, and will need full or partial replacement or removal in the next few years. During this
period, a careful evaluation of slip demand and maintenance repair costs must continue. It may be prudent to take some
slips out of service. The need for and use of slips may change with the redevelopment of Fisherman’s Wharf.


1)Patch, slurry seal and stripe west side Phase III parking and roadway areas, to be funded by area Lessees and County
proportionately.
2)Minimize larger maintenance requirements through diligent preventive maintenance.

Administration will be reviewing Maintenance Division priorities in this area to minimize expensive repairs through
preventive measures as much as possible.


1)Evaluate benefit/detriment of bidding out Commercial Fishing facility to private operator.

Future issues for the Commercial Fishing Marina are the same as for all other Harbor work areas: declining or flat
revenues, increasing costs, and an aging facility. Careful work to identify priorities for repairs and maintenance is critical,
as are decisions regarding the level of repairs that should be undertaken: e.g., should these be short-term repairs, or tenyear
repairs?


1)Complete construction of Silver Strand restroom and lifeguard tower.
2)Complete reseal coat and striping of the Phase III parking lot.
3)Evaluate repair/rehabilitation alternatives for groin wall at Kiddie Beach; develop cost estimates and a potential plan for
construction.
4)Complete design and engineering for replacement of Harbor Administration Building.

The Department’s ability to pursue capital projects in the form of refurbishment or replacement of public facilities is
dependent upon availability of grant funds or Harbor Enterprise retained earnings, and timing of Coastal and construction
permits.


1. Continue to meet increasing demand for safety net inpatient, specialty and primary care services.
2. Continue to improve recruitment and retention efforts.
3. Continue to enhance medical equipment purchases by managing the fixed asset process and budget.
4. Continue to maintain continuous Joint Commission readiness efforts and accreditation.
5. Continue to improve fiscal performance of each and every department.
6. Continue to strengthen the performance improvement program.
7. Continue to improve the environment of care.
8. Continue to expand community outreach efforts.
9. Enhance utilization of a fully integrated in-patient and out-patient Electronic Health Record within VCMC, SPH and
Ambulatory Care system.
10. Continue to raise money with the capital campaign for the HRW. This campaign will raise monies to assist with in
kind donations for equipment needs, as well as establish a giving process to offset the needs of this project.

The impact of the Affordable Care Act is not yet known. More patients will have coverage, some who are currently using
our systems and some who may not be. This is a potential positive impact, however, these patients will have choices and
it is imperative that VCMC is prepared to take more patients into the hospital and provide more ancillary services
particularly in the Lab and Radiology. VCMC will continue to enhance services in the PICU by providing transportation of
patients from other hospitals in the county to our PICU. This program is projected to be established in FY14/15.


1. Continue to meet increasing demand for mental health care needs.
2. Continue to provide a safe environment for our patients and staff in this locked psychiatric unit.
3. Continue to maintain Joint Commission compliance and continue readiness efforts for first unannounced Joint
Commission survey.
4. Continue to improve fiscal performance
5. Continue to strengthen the performance improvement program.
6. Continue to improve the environment of care.
7. Continue to expand community outreach efforts working with Stakeholders to be certain all needs of this community
are met.
8. Enhance utilization of a fully integrated in-patient and out-patient Electronic Health Record within VCMC, SPH and
Ambulatory Care system.
9. Develop a Psychiatric Emergency Services product line within the walls of the current Inpatient Psychiatric Unit.

The VCBH department has struggled with providing suitable housing for patients who are no longer in need of acute care
in the IPU. This causes an extended length of stay in an acute facility that is no longer needed. This has brought us to
evaluate the benefit of establishing a Psychiatric Emergency Service (PES) in the unit. This would provide care for
patients on a short term, observational status. Evaluation of patients for a longer period of time without admitting them
into an acute care hospital will benefit many patients, who have previously been admitted to the acute care hospital for a
short period of time. Having a PES allows for a different billing structure. As well it provides round the clock psychiatrist
care to provide better stabilization of the patient. As we evaluate this for the care and cost benefit we will meet with
stakeholders and others to arrive at an outcome that is collaborative.
The impact of the Affordable Care Act is not yet known. More patients will have coverage, some who are currently using
our systems and some who may not be. This is a potential positive impact, however, these patients will have choices and
it is imperative that the IPU is prepared to take more patients into the hospital.


1. Continue to meet increasing demand for safety net hospital, specialty and primary care services.
2. Develop a program to enhance census at SPH. This includes having the ability to transfer patients into this facility for
care that are at the hospitals and patient who are at VCMC.
3. Establish branding of SPH in the Santa Clara Valley. Increase advertising process to people who live in this area.
4. Maintain Joint Commission compliance and continue readiness efforts for unannounced surveys.
5. Continue to improve fiscal performance in all areas of care.
6. Continue to strengthen the performance improvement program.
7. Continue to improve the environment of care.
8. Continue to support and improve the environment of care.
9. Enhance utilization of a fully integrated in-patient and out-patient Electronic Health Record within VCMC, SPH and
Ambulatory Care system.
10. Expand specialty services in Santa Paula, including Urology and Podiatry.
11. Expand outreach in the community to continue to build relationships with private physicians.

The impact of the Affordable Care Act is not yet known. More patients will have coverage, some who are currently using
our systems and some who may not be. This is a potential positive impact, however, these patients will have choices and
it is imperative that SPH is prepared to take more patients into the hospital and provide more ancillary services
particularly in the Lab and Radiology. We are developing a process to allow for more patients to be cared for in the
hospital as well as expanding availability of the operating room to provide increased volume in that area.


 Obtain National Committee Quality Assurance accreditation – First Option
 Establish a more robust Medical-Behavioral Health collaboration to better meet the multi-disciplinary needs of our
members.
 Work to improve the communication portals and inter-activeness of the website for both members and providers (CWS)

 March 4, 2014 Board of Supervisors approved the County to offer VCHCP to County Intermittent, Extra Help and Per
Diem staff. The initial mailing offer will be to 811 eligible employees.


1. Conduct annual Flexible Benefits program open enrollment period and retiree re-enrollment.
2. Implement employer required ACA for 2015 and continue to review, analyze other provisions and impacts of Health
Care Reform.
3. Continue plan and program audits.
4. Develop and conduct additional training for managers, department/agency staff and coordinators in Absence
Management.


1. Increase the following direct service contacts: 400 new clinical assessments; 1700 follow-up visits; 800 hours of
training/workshops; 300 supervisory consultations.
2. Increase supervisor referral rate by an additional 5-10% via increased education, orientations and outreach to the
supervisor/management employee population.
3. Increase Satisfaction Questionnaire response by at least 50% (currently 25% return rate) by converting to a email
survey procedure (with authorization).
4. Convert the client diagnostic code statistics to “problem areas” for greater efficiency and analysis.
5. Continue to apply revisions to the EAP website with emphasis on resources and links. Develop an online digital library
of books and articles on pertinent topics in conjunction with Ventura County Library.
6. Continue to collaborate with County Training on “Nuts and Bolts” Training series and Strategic Leadership Training
series (in development).
7. Provide a Substance Use and Abuse Identification training to Fire Department Battalion Chiefs and other personnel.
Develop a 30-minute orientation related to new understandings and advances in the field of substance abuse to be
offered to all County Fire personnel.
8. In conjunction with Wellness and Work and Family programs will provide additional parenting classes and elder care
support groups.
9. Continue to provide and develop additional focus groups and corresponding training modules for departments
interested in improving areas of workplace climate and positive impacts to organizational culture. This includes areas of
“Interpersonal Quality Improvement” as well as characteristics of a motivating environment.
10. Continue as an active participant in emergency/disaster mental health response network. Participate in the formation
of the Community Resiliency Workgroup comprising members of local school districts, County Behavioral Health and
other community partners. The objective is to bring additional training specifics to trauma response and rapid clinical
intervention in the event of a disaster


1. Provide participants with a health risk appraisal including Wellness Profile results report and follow-up.
2. Provide ongoing follow-up and coaching to new Health Track high-risk clients.
3. Increase educational class sessions offered at outlying locations.
4. Continue to support Sheriff’s Lifetime Wellness Committee in efforts to reduce health risks.
5. Initiate new marketing campaign for 2015 calendar year.


1. Develop an online resource for Lactation Rooms at all County sites and the appropriate contacts for each site.
2. Enhance web page features.
3. Increase number of Child Care/Preschool Discount Program listings.


1. Continue to monitor claims experience and review rate requirements.
2. The County will evaluate eliminating this plan and utilize reserves for alternate or replacement options, and the option
of replacing the plan with a group policy which will remain fully funded by participating employees.

If the direction is to replace this current short-term disability plan with a group policy, the rate structure and employee
participation may materially change.


1. Continue to monitor claims experience.
2. Continue to review the fiscal impact of EDD quarterly reimbursements and the effectiveness of the UIB rate to ensure
program cost recovery and rate stabilization.

Potential State budget cuts to the County’s programs and workforce will have a fiscal impact to the UIB program.


Continue to monitor and facilitate the alcohol and drug testing required under the Department of Transportation.


1. Continue review of core funds and funds within the mutual fund window for available changes to institutional funds, and
other cost savings for plan participants.
2. Continue examination of In-Plan Roth Conversion as possible enhancement to the 457 Plan (pending further direction
from the IRS).
3. Develop fee and revenue share policy for the Deferred Compensation Committee.
4. Continue enhancement of participant education outreach in coordination with Fidelity.
5. Complete application and submittal for Internal Revenue Service favorable determination letter.
6. Develop fee disclosure statement.
7. Develop campaign for 2014 National Save for Retirement Week.
8. Explore options for providing a Target Income Replacement Metric or Lifetime Income Projections.
9. Prepare annual benefit statements in coordination with VCERA and Towers Watson.
10. Transition to electronic receipt of Committee meeting materials.
11. Serve on Fidelity Client Panel.
12. Conduct Due Diligence site visit to Fidelity Westlake Texas facility.
13. Conduct annual business and educational outreach planning in partnership with Fidelity.
14. Submit for Leadership award from the National Association of Government Defined Contribution Administrator’s
(NAGDCA) for 2013 National Save for Retirement Week campaign.
15. Develop plan branding.
16. Enhance the Deferred Compensation website.
17. Enhance the Preparing Your Savings for Retirement and New Employee Orientation presentations.
18. Review continuation of participant fee holiday.
19. Conduct quarterly Deferred Compensation Committee meetings.

1. Finalize the transition of the restructured Training Program by utilizing the remaining available resources in the Training
Internal Service Fund.


1. Explore possibility of digital incident/claim reporting.
2. Continuing developing ECM solutions for Work Comp and Safety divisions.
3. Develop standardized building water intrusion guidelines for County-wide use.
4. Develop loss prevention resource library on CEO intranet site.


1. Complete transfer of payment administration to user agencies.
2. Finalize the transition of the restructured HazMat program as part of the Risk Administration's Health and Safety
Prevention Program.


1. Complete Return to Work process improvement project.
2. Evaluate options for pharmacy benefits administrator.
3. Explore possibilities for expedited claims reporting via electronic means.


1 Complete transition to new claims administration software.
2. Develop in-house electronic document management program.
3. Increase agency outreach with claims reviews and agency orientation programs.


1.Continue the implementation of FM Systems, eliminating the need for multiple facilities management applications,
providing increased reporting capabilities to operational managers and other County users, and allowing them to better
and more efficiently manage their operations.
2.Provide enhanced fuel purchase reporting to departments in accordance with Management responses to the fuel audit.
3.Work with PWA to evaluate a possible ISF rate methodology change for Heavy Equipment.
4.Create Fiscal procedural manuals in accordance with the GSA Strategic Plan.
5.Complete fiscal and operational audits of 3 of the County’s lessees.
6.Prepare financial and other analysis to evaluate additional solar projects in support of the Board of Supervisor’s
Sustainability Plan and goal to reduce green house gas emissions.
7.Continue to strengthen the collaborative relationship between GSA Fiscal and the operational managers in order to
ensure that operations continue to be managed with fiscal responsibility.
8.Encourage the other agencies to implement Surveyor 6.
9.Continue job analysis and specification revisions.
10.Continue to monitor and ensure compliance with mandated training.

Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1.Continue to pursue and implement GSA’s strategic plan .
2.Continue to pursue and implement the County’s strategic plan .
3.Support the County’s sustainability efforts by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, reducing electricity and natural gas
use, recycling and composting waste, conserving water, installing solar PV systems and using alternative fuel vehicles.
4.Encourage team building, expand vertical communication and participation within the Department, continue to
emphasize outstanding customer service, develop staff both horizontally and vertically within the Agency and develop a
succession plan.
5.Improve the Department’s processes using Lean Six Sigma.

Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1.Continue to pursue and implement GSA’s strategic plan .
2.Continue to pursue USGBC LEED Green Building Certification for the Telephone Road Building. (Strategic Plan, Focus
Area 3, Strategic Goal 3, Objective 3)
3.Continue the inventory, condition analysis and proactive maintenance for all GSA maintained facilities and associated
services. (Strategic Plan, Focus Area 3, Strategic Goal 2, Objective 1)
4.Continue installing low flow water fixtures at the Hall of Administration and Hall of Justice. (Strategic Plan, Focus Area
3, Strategic Goal 3, Objective 1)
5.Develop and implement water saving strategies to conserve water in response to California’s statewide drought.
6.Submit the 2014 CCFSA Award of Excellence application package for the Maintenance Division.
7.Implement MaintStar’s timecard module and the use of tablet computers for the line staff, increasing use of real time
data entry into computerized maintenance management system and improving maintenance delivery system.
8.Conduct Kaizan event to investigate operation efficiencies for the Maintenance and Custodial/Landscape Division’s
supply cages

Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1.Complete a lighting retrofit of the interior and exterior at the East County Courthouse and at 1911 Williams Drive.
2.Complete the installation, commissioning and initiate operation of a 1-mw solar array at the Government Center.
3.Install dampers in the hot deck portion of the HOA air handlers to reduce the need to provide heat to the building at
appropriate times of the year.
4.Add a monitoring and control system to the boiler and hot water systems at Juvenile Justice Detention to reduce natural
gas consumption.
5.Complete the installation of a new control system for the central plant of the Pre-Trial Detention Facility.

The drought crisis in California and the re-aligning of the electrical utilities in California away from nuclear generation
capacity may have a significant impact on utility rates in future years, which could make accurate utility budget projections
difficult.


1.Streamline the inspection process to enable the Department to handle the additional assignment of the HCA Clinics
without an increase in resources.
2.Continue recycling campaign by offering to inform departments on recycling efforts and what they can do.
3.Complete new contract transition from Kelly Cleaning to Universal Building Maintenance.
4.Convert equipment ordering process from period purchasing to on demand. Potential saving projected is $20,000
annually.
5.Conduct an RFP for housekeeping services at HCA clinics.

Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1.Reduce water consumption by optimizing evapotranspiration data calculated from weather station micro climate data.
2.Work with the Purchasing Department to conform a new landscape vendor agreement.
3.Allow shrubs to grow into their natural contour using professional pruning practices. This will require less trimming and
reduce labor.
4.Pursue sustainable landscape maintenance equipment.

Due to Statewide water conservation requirements, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level
modification requests. This may entail adjustments to staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1.Lead GSA Projects Group initiatives and every-day operations to practice and implement process improvements as an
ongoing priority which achieve GSA Strategic Plan goals to deliver timely, cost effective, and high quality service to our
customers. Manage GSA infrastructure and other Client-funded facilities and Interiors projects, on-time and on-budget.
We anticipate ever increasing priority for energy conservation and other green projects. We anticipate continuing Client
TI and system furniture remodeling projects by HSA, HCA and Probation upgrading their patron service offices
countywide. We anticipate smaller targeted VCMC projects for selected infrastructure upgrades of existing functional
facilities interim to HRW completion.
2.Support GSA Strategic Plan goals and  with other GSA managers.
3.Achieve GSA Strategic Plan sustainability objective to install 1MW solar photo-voltaic array at the Government Center,
Juvenile Facility, or other County Facility.
4.Support GSA Strategic Plan technology and productivity objective working with GSA Fiscal managers to implement
available new FM Systems software module as a primary tool to facilitate project management transactions and
document completion and details of facility infrastructure upgrade projects.
5.Support GSA Strategic Plan technology and productivity objective working with GSA Fiscal to expand sophistication
detail of County facilities CAD-mapping database entry into FM Systems software.

Variations to Client Facilities and Interiors furnishings budget levels and overall workload may entail adjustments to
staffing levels or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1.Schedule four training sessions for both existing and new customers to promote use of VCPrint web submission of
customer documents, Docushare Mobile Client, Print to Mail and Digital Mailroom resource opportunities.
2.Create and manage at least ten event and/or campaign management projects for County customers which include
integration of direct mail, email, mobile, print, web and other media to deliver relevant and personalized messages to our
County customer’s target audience.
3.Within our creative services and design capabilities, provide a service to customers giving data metrics and possible
CRM integration regarding customer use of chosen media sources for published material; e.g. - how many responded
and attended customer event via website publication versus direct mail.
4.Increase document management content solutions within our Xerox Docushare ECM for Public Health and VCMC
Ambulatory Care to enhance existing VCMC content value.
5.Increase color print volume through promotion of enhanced quality output from our latest color press system, bringing
10% of formerly outsourced work in-house at reduced cost and improved quality.
6.Define and implement capture solutions for County departments that feed MS Sharepoint portals and other repositories
incorporating federated search, mobile remote capture, and content integration resources.
7.Promote and expand digital mailroom document capture applications for County customers, including accounts payable
processing solutions, in order to increase scan volume by 1 million images per year.
8.Implement use of a document processing assessment tool to support definition of customer’s “before and after”
expected information processing improvement results when leveraging use of Document Management solutions.

Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the budget unit will be impacted by service level
reduction requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1.Implement performance indicators for warehouse sales, dock and customer inventory management activities in order to
better evaluate program needs and status of .
2.Increase the number of customers selecting surplus property for reuse through continued education using a variety of
communication channels.
3.Maximize value of surplus property sales for Public Guardian/Public Administrator, Fleet Services, and the County as a
whole using multi-channel promotional outlets.
4.Participate in and promote the countywide analysis of individual department warehouse storage and distribution needs
in order to offer reduced expense and processing efficiencies when leveraging central warehouse management
resources.
5.Evaluate use of hybrid/electric trucks and vans for surplus pickup and product delivery to possibly replace existing box
truck and one ton van.

Coordinating surplus reuse and disposition is done at no cost to County departments. Cost recovery from recycling and
surplus sales to support surplus administration efforts can vary. Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a
possibility that the budget unit will be impacted by service level reduction requests. This may entail adjustments to our
staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1.Increase percentage of mail that qualifies for full automation discounts vs presort discounts when customer one time
mail quantities exceed 200 pieces per mailing.
2.Evaluate opportunity to qualify County Business Reply Mail for highest volume QBRM postage fee discounts.
3.Collaborate with GSA Document Management on customer outgoing mail production when it is part of a campaign or
event in order to assess incorporation of multi-channel marketing; social media, email, websites etc., to gain better
audience response and expand customer communication channels.
4.Schedule four training sessions to educate key customers on how to qualify their outgoing mail for greater discounts
and to leverage multi-channel output opportunities such as mobile, email, and web as part of an overall campaign.

Despite best efforts to project postage costs, growing USPS deficits, combined with the ability of the USPS to implement
annual CPI indexed rate increases and specially approved rate changes, may necessitate mid-year budget adjustments.
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1.Investigate insurance certificate compliance/tracking by outsourcing.
2.Add at least one Procurement specific training video to GSA website.

Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1.Add additional cameras to the new Gen Tec system to enhance the value of the current security service.
2.Establish a priority and upgrade analog cameras to HD in order provide a better quality video.
3.Complete the panic alarm upgrade project.
4.Continue workplace shooting campaign of education, training and drills to improve County response should an event
occur. In addition, the annual training has been increased to twice a year. Individual training has been provided to RMA,
Assessors, Gonzales Road building tenants and HCA.
5.Bring cameras from two sites (offsite from the Government Center) into the Security Control Center utilizing the Gen
Tec system.
6.Institute an improved emergency notification plan to improve emergency communications in GSA managed buildings.
Special Services:
1.Upgrade/replace the Room Reservation Scheduler (2) E-Kiosks and (7) monitors outside the conference rooms with
new, upgraded software and hardware.
2.Accept Option Year 1 to the Camarillo Sheriff’s Avanti Market contract upon completion of analysis on performance and
compliance to Healthy Choice Items.
3.Develop Special Use Permit package with introduction and instructions on how to obtain a special use permit.

Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1. Replace ten gas vehicles with low emission technology vehicles.
2. Introduce fractional share Remote Motor Pool vehicles at two additional County facilities.
3. Continue developing a fuel-efficient and environmentally friendly fleet through the utilization of alternative fuel
technology and lower emission vehicles.
4. Take advantage of in-source opportunities in the Install Shop.
5. Update the fuel management system.

Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year. To
lessen the potential impact, Fleet Services is holding several positions vacant.


1. Replace compact gas vehicles due for replacement with low emission PZEV or Hybrid technology vehicles.
2. Increase the number of medium duty trucks using hybrid technology.
3. Continue developing a fuel efficient and environmentally friendly fleet through the utilization of alternative fuel
technology and lower emission vehicles.
4. Continue to exceed minimum CARB benchmarks for lowering emission standards for off road heavy equipment. Fleet
Services is currently compliant until January 2022.

The cost for retrofitting vehicles and equipment for adherence to new diesel emission standards could be substantial.
Early replacement of some diesel equipment will be considered in lieu of retrofitting if deemed economically prudent. Due
to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.
Currently, increased costs for acquiring hybrid trucks is partially off-set with State funds (VIP program). This opportunity
may not be available for future purchases.


1. Implement contractual and technology support for increased utilization of cloud services.
2. Refresh technology policies to address expanding technology frontiers.
3. Complete the project to update the County-wide technology strategic plan.

1. Increased consumerization of technology will continue to drive demand for mobile access to government services.
2. Increased adoption of mobile devices will drive new business solutions and the requisite infrastructure to support
management, security, and protection of data.
3. The number of retirements over the next three years is anticipated to be significantly higher and will result in loss of
significant County business knowledge and experience.


1)Further reduce Data Center energy costs through equipment retirement, further virtualization, and Data Center
redesign.
2)Upgrade/replace Data Center fire suppression systems.
3)Upgrade enterprise backup solution, moving from tape-based backups of servers, and off-site tape retention services,
to a disk-based backup solution with off-site or cloud-based disaster recovery replication.
4)Upgrade/replace the County’s Metadirectory identity management system.

Increased consumerization of technology will continue to drive demand for mobile access to government services.
2. Increased adoption of tablet devices and cloud-based solutions will drive new business solutions and the requisite
infrastructure to support management, security, and protection of citizen data.


1.Upgrade Filenet to latest version of IBM P8
2.Assist Sheriff’s Office with replacement of their CAD (Computer Aided Dispatch) and AFR (Automated Field Reporting)
systems.
3.Continue supporting the County’s web application portfolio.
4.Continue supporting and enhancing the County’s Mobile Application portfolio.

1.Increased consumerization of technology will continue to drive demand for mobile access to government services.
2.Increased adoption of tablet devices and cloud-based solutions will drive new business solutions and the requisite
infrastructure to support management, security, and protection of citizen data.


1. Implement and support the BRASS replacement with Performance Budgeting for the CEO
2. Continue migration and implementation support for new land tax system and county financial system upgrades
3. Complete the GIS geodatabase improvement project to leverage GIS tools to improve the accuracy of the GIS data
4. Complete significant PeopleSoft integration efforts with the new employee retirement system and the new financial
management system

Numerous large technology initiatives continue to introduce business and organization changes to several County
agencies and departments. IT Services continues to require to provide significant training to their workforce in order to
support these new technologies.


1.Continue the Nortel Replacement Project and replace all non-supported Nortel equipment with Cisco VoIP within our
voice and data network.
2.Increase the number of WLAN access points in various County facilities where required by our client
agency/departments and upgrade our current WLAN infrastructure to handle the increased demand for wireless
connectivity.
3.Upgrade our Microwave Network to increase bandwidth capabilities beyond 300 Megs.
4.Continue to increase our Public Safety Radio Network coverage and Interoperability.
5.Develop a Project Plan for the creation of a Ventura County Fiber Network

1.The legislative move to give Public Safety a national wireless license in the 700 MHz range will create an opportunity to
build a dedicated wireless data network with interoperability functionality nationwide. This has now been redefined as
FirstNet and Network Services is following the progress of FirstNet to determine how the County of Ventura can leverage
this opportunity to improve our wireless capabilities for Public Safety.
2.The County of Ventura has shown an ever increasing demand for bandwidth and access to the Internet. This will
eventually drive the County to higher speed Microwave and the need for development of a Fiber Network. We are
currently reviewing options for constructing a Fiber Data Network.
3.Information Security - National Cyber/security Initiative will likely become the standard by which all governmental
agencies IT Security activities are measured. It includes the following:
i.Intrusion prevention and detection systems
ii.Security classification of network data


Continue digitizing document records based on available funding.


Redesign and improve the process for receiving and responding to bid questions. Reduce the cost of printing plans and
specifications by receiving Board of Supervisor approval for electronic distribution. Develop a web based database for
consulting contracts with client accessibility. Complete the revision to the Waterworks Manual


A. Participate in 'Water Awareness' Month programs; sponsor the annual 'Water Awareness' poster contest; provide
water audits for our large water users, including large landscape, commercial, industrial and institutional customers;
provide Water Wise Gardening workshops.
B. Implement out-going phone message option to provide customers with account or system updates.
C. Compare water and sewer rates with other utilities in Ventura County for benchmarking purposes.
D. Annual review of water loss in each of the water systems to assure efficient operations of the water systems.


1) Automate the CAD System Status Management to improve deployment of emergency response units.
2) Upgrade to web based roster station staffing software.
3) Implement Learning Management Software.
4) Implement the Human Resource, Personnel and Training Database system.
5) Replace mobile computers in all apparatus.
6) Upgrade the Electronic Patient Care Record tablets.


1) Complete an interface between Accela Automation and the in-house FHRP program for better consistency in the
conditioning of projects.
2 ) Implement Accela Citizen Access to enable customers to apply for permits online and track application progress.
3) Implement the Fire Safety Inspection (FSI) program to provide periodic inspections of multi-family housing and existing
businesses to help reduce the number of fire incidents.
4) Conduct 15 CERT (Community Emergency Response Team) classes to provide training for an estimated 375 citizens.
5) Configure and Implement EDR (Electronic Document Review) in Accela Automation to better serve the public by
reviewing and accepting electronic documents.
6) Implement major upgrade to Accela Automation, going from version 7.3 to version 7.4
7) Implement and launch an Accela mobile platform for field based operations to give inspectors access to critical
information in the field.


1) Enhance the 9-1-1 Dispatch business continuity site to provide Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) system backup
capabilities.
2) Implement a "Rescue Under Force Protection" Active Shooter training program.
3) Implement the Buena Ventura Prescription Burn Project for fuels reduction to protect the incorporated and
unincorporated communities of Ventura and Santa Paula from wind-driven wildfires.
4) Implement the radio infrastructure upgrades to the final 4 locations of the 14 planned stand-alone backup radio
system sites.
5) Upgrade modems to 4G in first run apparatus to include Wi-Fi hotspot capabilities.


1) Begin construction of FS20 in Ojai, FS27 in Fillmore and FS35 in Newbury Park.
2) Complete remodels for FS25, FS26, FS30, FS55 and FS57.
3) Complete Emergency Generator and site work for FS36 and FS57.
4) Acquire land for the Regional Training Center.


1. Analysis of Core Services and Risk-Based Priority Ranking Methodologies: Complete the ongoing business analytics
exercise by which the District’s “Core Services” are clarified, bounded, and described, and by which the District’s
integrated, multi-benefit, Mission-critical projects and programs are aligned and optimized with Board approved policydecisions,
risk-based facility investment priorities and available structural funding resources.
2. ALERT Flood Warning System Operations: Continue Quality Control/Quality Assurance (QA/QC) work and system
enhancements required to ensure accurate, reliable and timely real-time rains and stream gauge data in support of
forecast models and emergency preparedness work. Begin the migration of the District’s network to the ALERT2 protocol
using the new equipment purchased with the FERP grant funds.
3. Capital Improvement Project Delivery: Coordinate the preparation and timely submittal of the District’s inputs into the
PWA FY 15-20 5-Year Capital Improvement Project Document process projecting appropriate programmed CIP work
effort through June 30, 2015, and for the remaining four year planning horizon ending June 30, 2020 across all zones,
countywide.
4. FEMA Community Rating System Program: Complete Year 4 of the FEMA-mandated 5-Year Recertification of the
Community Rating System (CRS) program for Unincorporated Ventura County. And initiate the multi-year CRS Re-
Application process required by FEMA in order for the Unincorporated Ventura County areas to remain in the CRS
program for the next five year period (2015-2020).
5. FEMA Cooperative Technical Partners (CTP) Program: Coordinate with FEMA regarding the integration of completed
Technical Study Data Notebooks (TSDN) and the Levee Analysis and Mapping Program (LAMP) process regarding a
preliminary Flood Insurance Study (FIS) mapping product for the Ventura River CTP component. Support ongoing
community outreach regarding the East Ojai Alluvial Fan Physical Map Revision (PMR) mapping deliverable with a
scheduled September 2014 effective-date.
6. Grants Program Administration: Aggressively pursue available Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization
(NGO) grant opportunities for funding assistance in support of the District’s mission, and to leverage timely completion of
District priority capital projects contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP.
7. Groundwater Programs: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities. Complete 2014 Groundwater Level/Quality
Report. Continue regional implementation of CASEGEM program. Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and
provide timely and effective processing of monitoring well and new water well permit submittal requests.
8. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment on and where appropriate,
condition proposed development projects. And provide timely and effective processing of encroachment and watercourse
permit submittal requests.


1. ALERT Flood Warning System Operations: Continue Quality Control/Quality Assurance (QA/QC) work and system
enhancements required to ensure accurate, reliable and timely real-time rains and stream gauge data in support of
forecast models and emergency preparedness work. Begin the migration of the District’s FWS network stations in Zone 1
to the ALERT2 protocol using the new equipment purchased with the FERP grant funds.
2. Annual Zone 1 Capital Improvement Project Delivery: Complete an estimated $0.330 Million in preliminary engineering
design work advancing the following capital improvement projects in the zone: Fresno Canyon Flood Mitigation Diversion
Project, Matilija Ecosystem Restoration Project (Preliminary Engineering Design, Santa Ana Bridge Replacement and
TAC Sediment Alternatives Study). And ongoing internal design engineering work on the Ventura River Levee (VR-1)
Rehabilitation. These projects may change based on higher priority needs (e.g. storm damage), operational factors
and/or the unanticipated availability and/or loss, of offsetting revenue.
3. CEQA and Environmental Regulatory Permitting Work: Initiate CEQA documentation for Zone 1 CIP and O&M
construction projects as required. Complete project mitigation and monitoring reports. And obtain USACE permit for O&M
facilities.
4. Countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities, the County
and the District regarding MS-4 Permit implementation activities, including required monitoring events and program
deployment. Submit seventeenth annual report to the LARWQCB as required by the NPDES Permit on behalf of Ventura
County’s eleven general purpose governments.
5. Grants Program Work: Aggressively pursue applicable Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization (NGO)
grant opportunities for funding assistance in support the District’s mission and to leverage timely completion of priority
projects in Zone 1 which are contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP
6. Groundwater Programs: Complete 2014 Groundwater Level/Quality Report. Coordinate implementation of CASEGEM
program in Zone 1. Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and process permits for monitoring wells and new
water wells in Zone 1, as required.
7. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment, and where required
condition proposed development projects, as well as issue encroachment and/or watercourse permits in Zone 1, as
required.
8. Matilija Dam Ecosystem Restoration Project: Continue Pre-construction Engineering and Design work in accordance
with existing USACE agreements, and discharge the District’s project completion obligations under the terms of the Board
approved Matilija Project Grant Agreements.
9. O&M Strategic Projects: Refine, upgrade and enhance District’s O&M MainStar work order based tracking system to
ensure full integration of work planning modules and databases with the Transportation Department’s systems, and
achieve functional compatibility with the Public Works Agency’s VCHRP labor-costing system upgrades. Advance the
completion of the following sustainable flood protection infrastructure initiatives for Zn 1 facilities: (a) annual evaluation of
the safety of District-owned dams in the zone, as part of the District’s dam-safety program, (b) sediment management
plan for District-owned debris basins, and (c) evaluation of innovative facility maintenance and repair techniques to better
align risk-based infrastructure priority project ranking with available O&M structural revenues.
10. Integrated Regional Water Management Planning and Implementation Grant Projects: Continue regional planning
collaboration and grant-funded project implementation work regarding any Proposition 84 IRWMP Planning and
Implementation Grant projects in and/or impacting Zone 1 in consultation with the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura
County.

During Fiscal Year 2009-10, the District completed Federally-mandated (i.e. 44 CFR 65.10) engineering evaluations of
eleven Provisionally Accredited Levees (PALs) located along defined reaches of the Calleguas Creek, Santa Clara and
Ventura Rivers. These levees total 17 miles in length, provide flood protection for approximately 20,000 residents living
on 6,336 parcels. The District estimates that nearly $600 Million in flood damages could occur should these levees fail to
provide adequate flood protection.
The District is currently engaged in preliminary design engineering work in support of levee retrofit and/or flood-protection
enhancement projects required to certify all of its levees in full-compliance with Federal Levee Certification requirements.
A planning-level estimate of the total costs required to complete necessary levee retrofit work is upwards of $130 Million.
Countywide, approximately $35 Million in levee rehab work has been or is in the process of being completed. As of July 1,
2014, countywide, upwards of $100 Million in levee rehab project work remains to be funded and completed.
Major levee rehabilitation and ultimate certification projects in Zone 1 include the Ventura River (VR-1) Levee in the City
of Ventura, the (VR-2) Levee in unincorporated Casitas Springs, and the (VR-3) Levee in unincorporated Live Oak Acres.
The District is working closely with the United States Army Corps of Engineers, as well as affected cities, residents and
property owners throughout Ventura County to marshal scarce Federal, State and local funding resources necessary to
complete this very important levee retrofit public safety and flood protection projects. Once all of the District’s levee
retrofit projects are completed, the District's levees will fully comply with applicable Federal Levee Certification
requirements found in 44 CFR 65.10.
At best, full completion of the District’s levee rehab projects will require a minimum of five years, and could take up to ten
years or longer, depending on final design plans, environmental considerations and project funding availability


1. Annual Maintenance Work: Continue to perform necessary maintenance and/or repair, construction activities required
to ensure the optimization of the flood-conveyance capacity and flood protection capability of WPD flood protection
facilities located in the Simi Sub-Zone.


A. Complete the design of the Moorpark DeSalter Project.
B. Finalize land purchase for the Moorpark DeSalter.
C. Complete the design for the Stockton Reservoir.
D. Maximize the production of local water to reduce the cost of imported water in the district.
E. Reduce electrical costs at District facilities by revising system operations.

Proposed rate increases for imported water and electricity may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of
our water systems and consequently on the water rates to our customers over the next few years.


A. Complete construction of the Reclaimed Water Distribution System Phase IV project.
B. Complete construction of the Moorpark Office Bldg and Remodel.
C. Increase the number of customers using recycled water.

Proposed rate increases for electricity and increased Regional Water Quality Control Board permit requirements and
costs may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of our sewer systems and consequently on the sewer
rates to our customers over the next few years.


A. Complete design and begin construction of the high pressure pipeline between
Hacienda Road and Dapplegray Road.

Proposed Rate increases for imported water and electricity and potential reduction in GMA allocations may have a
significant impact on the cost of the operations of our water systems and consequently on the rates to our customers over
the next three years.


A. Complete construction of the Balcom Canyon Turnout Project
B. Complete construction of the District 19 $5 million pipeline replacement projects.
C. Complete design and begin construction of Well 2 Treatment Facility
D. Maximize the production of local water to reduce the cost of imported water in the district.
E. Reduce electrical costs at District facilities by revising system operations.

Proposed Rate increases for imported water and electricity and potential reduction in GMA allocations may have a
significant impact on the cost of the operations of our water systems and consequently on the rates to our customers over
the next three years.


Complete the formation of the new waterworks district - District No. 38.

Proposed rate increases for imported water and electricity may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of
our water systems and consequently on the water rates to our customers over the next few years. A potential reduction in
GMA allocations may also influence on operational costs and water rates charged to customers.


Continue to monitor the county road and provide maintenance.


Complete a new contract for street sweeping. Continue to monitor and remediate encroaching trees and tree roots.


Complete a new contract for street sweeping. Continue to monitor street sweeping and street lighting.


Sewer Collection Improvement: Seek funding to complete Force Main replacement.

Proposed rate increases for electricity and increased Regional Water Quality Control Board permit requirements and
costs may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of our sewer systems and consequently on the sewer
rates to our customers over the next few years.


Sewer Collection System: Propose to clean the collection system.

Proposed rate increases for electricity and increased Regional Water Quality Control Board permit requirements and
costs may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of our sewer systems and consequently on the sewer
rates to our customers over the next few years.


 Conduct negotiations pertaining to Local Agency Management Program approval with LARWQCB staff.
 Continuing interaction with LARWQCB staff to facilitate OWTS application processing and water quality protection.
 Develop proposed AB 885 Policy-conforming amendments to the Ventura County Ordinance Code, as necessary.
 Continue electronic imaging of completed OWTS project files.

Implementation of the County response to the AB 885 Policy may result in increased costs and/or OWTS fee increases
associated with additional oversight responsibilities, such as new or increased OWTS performance monitoring and
recordkeeping

