Continue to work collaboratively with Human Resources, the County Administrator's Office, and other County departments to hire key positions within the department and to retain quality staff.

 Ensure implementation and utilization of the newest version of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5 (DSM 5), including training of all the department practitioners, converting Avatar (electronic health record and billing and claiming system), and ensuring all contract providers implement utilization of the DSM 5.
	Continue the process of providing quality training and maintaining good employee relations.

	Engage contract providers and community stakeholders to maintain communication and support the delivery of cost-effective and quality programs and services.

	Build on the recently completed strategic planning process; encourage the ongoing effectiveness of the Local Mental Health Board in supporting ADMH programmatic and budgetary efforts, as well as recommendations to the Board of Supervisors.

	Implement the long-term facilities plan, in accordance with the Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) Capital Facilities guidelines, with the goal of improving the service flow and confidentiality of Consumers attending Wellness Center activities.

	Implement the next steps in the MHSA Information Technology plan as set forth in the MHSA Plan, designed to support the needs of the organization and improve staff productivity, coordinated program planning and integrated service delivery.

 Continue to participate and provide leadership in the development of the County and community treatment continuum for AB 109 individuals related to public safety realignment.

	Continue to partner in the Adult Mental Health Court Program, monitoring clinical and fiscal outcomes.

	Participate with the Health Department, Partnership Health and County Medical Services Program (CMSP) on the transition to CMSP services in general and the implementation of the Low Income Health Plan (LIHP) through the Pathways to Health program.

	Continue to partner with Employment & Social Services in the implementation of services for Foster Children and Youth as required by the statewide Katie A. Law Suit Court Ruling.
 Determine the role ADMH will play in the transition to Healthcare Reform including: mental health services for the Seriously Mentally Ill/Seriously Emotionally Disturbed and those with mild to moderate mental health service needs; and substance use disorder services.

Begin the training and implementation process for motivational interviewing with the Adult Mental Health population.

	Implement outcome measures in the Children's Mental Health population: Youth Outcome Questionnaire Self-Report & Parent Report, Post Traumatic Stress Disorder-Reaction Index, Eyberg Child Behavior Inventory/Sutter-Eyberg Student Behavior Inventory and other specific treatment focus measurement tools (e.g. anxiety, depression, etc.).

	Conduct MHSA planning process to develop the next multiple year MHSA program and expenditure plan.

	Conduct a review of AB 1421/Laura's Law to determine county readiness.

 Continue the current process of training staff and implementing the evidence based practice, Trauma Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy.

Promote active collaboration with Primary Care and use of evidenced-based practice to improve the overall health of clients with chronic medical conditions and serious mental illnesses.

	Develop a multi-year financial outlook as informed by recent changes to State funding and operations (realignment) to help direct the budgetary (revenue, expenditure and audit) decisions and direction of the department.

 Continue to coordinate program planning and service delivery with budgeting and financial management.

 Participate in the consideration of consolidation of Health and Human Services departments to determine the fiscal and programmatic value/viability. 

	Establish, implement and provide continuous oversight utilizing standard internal audit and cost-controls through automated and manual benchmarking of efficiencies and compliance with billing/cost-reporting requirements and fraud, waste and abuse regulations.
	Create, develop, and implement automated financial reports for submiffing mandated reports including the Annual Mental Health and Alcohol and Drug Program Cost-Reports.

Develop and implement automated reporting system to track, monitor and report on Medi-Cal claim denials and disallowances.

Continue the implementation process for the Service Center.

 Expansion of Continuing Benefits Center (CBC) plan to include all continuing MediCal, CalFresh, and CalWORKs Cases.

	Continue conversion of cases in document imaging, focusing on closed cases.

	Strengthen professional development plan for staff, which will include a series of UCD trainings through Learning and Development Workgroup.
 

	Implement Affordable Care in partnership with the Health Department.

	Explore feasibility of other revenue sources/layoff aversion.

 Increase CalFresh participation through mobile outreach and community partnerships.

 Family Engagement Services for case planning development to increase reunification of child with the family.


	Redesign the department's website.

	Enhance the One-Stop social media network to include video references.

	Implement and maintain social media network for Child Welfare Services.

	Increase accessibility and flexibility for clients through uses of technology such as Benefits CalWIN, Call Center and Mobile Outreach.

Expand coverage to low-income adults. 

	Plan and prepare for Health Care Reform.

	Implement the optional Medicaid expansion as part of the Affordable Care Act.

 Successfully transition eligible county residents to Medi-Cal in January 2014.

	Operate the new Local Emergency Medical Services Agency.

	Execute a contract with an ambulance provider through a competitive bidding process.

	Assess top priority health risks in Yolo County. 

	Build evidence-based interventions to address high priority areas. 

	Develop a community garden adjacent to the Health building to support nutrition education, wellness and physical activity promotion for WIC participants, mental health clients and other neighborhood community members. 

	Lead and coordinate obesity prevention efforts across the county.

	Address accidental deaths and injuries in 15-24 year olds by providing youth high risk behavior prevention services.

Expand employee Worksite Wellness Program services.

	Expand community access to high quality home visitation programs by providing Public Health Nurse home visiting services to high risk women and children in coordination with other existing home visitation and child development efforts in the county. 

 Enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the California Children's Services Medical Therapy Program through delivery of support services to address social and emotional needs of handicapped children and their families. 

	Increase food security for low income families through coordination and collaboration with key partner agencies and by providing leadership in the development of the County Nutrition Action Plan.

	Continue existing Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI) Project Teams

	Develop two new CQI Project Teams

	Create Department Quality Improvement Plan

	Administer a department wide annual customer satisfaction survey
	Initiate process to achieve national public health accreditation

Improve project review process/customer satisfaction.

	Adopt a comprehensive update to the County Zoning Code to streamline and bring into compliance land use regulations with the Tactical Plan and General Plans. 

	Update the Housing Element and Clarksburg Community Plan to the General Plan. 

	Update the County Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance to reduce countywide flood insurance rates and ensure consistency with FEMA and DWR requirements.

 Update Clarksburg Area Plan to ensure consistency with the Delta Protection Plan. Tactical Plan 2A Complete planning for UC ag/food research park. 

Develop construction/maintenance programs with reduced funds available.

	Begin construction of the County Road (CR) 98 Safety Project including improvement of intersections at CR25, CR27, CR29 and both Willow and Dry Slough bridges.

	Complete bridge construction of Salt Creek CR29, and Buckeye Creek CR89, and final engineering/Right of Way purchase for Cottonwood Slough CR86a and Zamora CR12.

	Shift the balance of limited staff and road funding resources to improve safety and extend the longevity of existing roads with a greater emphasis on maintenance.


Integrate waste collection, recycling/hazardous materials.

	Secure new waste agreements and construct a BioGreen Digester to increase rates of recycling, and produce the resulting electricity and compressed natural gas for sale.

	Expand the residential and commercial waste and recycling collection programs.

	Increase capacity for agricultural liquid and solid waste processing, while continuing to increase level of waste importation to help reduce local operational costs.

 Increase operational cost efficiencies and waste importation, establish composting services and address new State fees and regulations.

Update/revise methane gas recovery and alternative energy production agreements.

Continued refinement of Fleet services to reduce costs and improve customer services.

	Work with departments to update the county's vehicle policies to more accurately identify direct responsibilities and develop future budget allocations that reflect the actual costs of services delivery through a Fleets Services Cost Plan.

	Continue to reduce fleet of under utilized vehicles and monitor vehicle purchases. * 

Re-evaluate staffing needs, technology and task prioritization.

 Continue revisiting the organizational structure for potential consolidation or Shared Services opportunities, address cross-training skill sets to foster succession planning.
	Seek new advances in technology to enhance agency coordination, public access and interfacing for greater transparency of departmental processes.

Assist the Auditor-Controller in third year procedures associated with the long-term financial plan.

	Develop and monitor a balanced 2013-14 budget that includes an enhanced revenue development function. 

 Implement caps to the County's contribution toward retiree health insurance premiums and develop alternative strategies to begin reducing the County's unfunded liability for retiree medical costs.

 Refine process for CDBG and Housing program grant applications to support County's 2030 General Plan and housing goals.

 Identify other grant sources for eligible housing initiatives, programs and goals. 

 Secure additional outside funding for evaluation and staff work related to State and Federal proposals to improve water supply and enhance habitat in the Delta.

	Avoid or minimize impacts of proposals to improve water supply and enhance habitat in Delta and further efforts to achieve Delta sustainability.

	Recommend a vendor and begin implementation of an upgraded or new fiscal management system that provides forecasting, integrated budgeting and accounting functionality and resource tracking. 

	Continue implementation of the three-year tactical plan. 

	Continue progress on performance measures for all departments including outreach to stakeholders and development of dashboard reporting. 

	Define and utilize a standard change management model.
	Continue progress on a robust capital improvement plan, including plans for the reuse of the Courthouse facility.

	Establish standard process for staff and external stakeholders to recommend and collaborate in the development of new ideas. 
	Encourage participation in professional organizations throughout the County. 
 Complete Workplace Civility program and training for all County employees.
Pilot a leadership competency development model with CAO staff.

	Begin to roll out Emergency Services structure serving the County and shared services partners.

 Continue to pursue shared services opportunities (i.e. animal services).

 Continue to work with community colleges to identify workforce development programs that match training with employers' needs. 

	Assist in delivering training and a communication campaign to encourage countywide collaboration.

 Continue to achieve Board-approved regional, State and Federal advocacy priorities, including securing funding for key projects and policy changes that result in cost savings.

	Study the potential for a consolidation/integration of Health and Human Service departments and/or functions in order to provide improved service to community.

	Continue partnerships with local colleges/universities to utilize students/ coursework to benefit County programs and assist in meeting coursework obligations.

	In coordination with Auditor-Controller, develop JPA oversight program for monitoring management and fiscal responsibility.

	Continue to work with aggregate and stakeholder partners to implement Cache Creek Area Plan.
Continue collaboration with Yolo County Housing and identify key partners in furthering affordable housing goals and meeting safety net housing, employment and service needs.

 Continue to support small community revitalization efforts through active business support, permit fast tracking, downtown revitalization programs and tourism. Tactical Plan 2H, 2I, 2K, 2L
 Promote food processing and other target industries through active participation in Food Central, Seed Central, Farm-to-School and other initiatives. Tactical Plan 2B
 Continue to actively promote County low-income housing rehabilitation and loan programs, and support adequate, quality and affordable housing.

	Implement active Airport and hangar development program and recruit new based aircraft. Tactical Plan 2D
Upgrade website to facilitate additional online services and develop plan to provide more services online and via web apps. Tactical Plan 1G

Continue economic development collaboration efforts along major county roadways. Tactical Plan 2G 

	Create Countywide Residential PACE program.

	Perform full economic feasibility analysis of a Countywide Community Choice Aggregation program funded by State Cap and Trade revenues.

	Involve all Chambers of Commerce and city staff in a business-oriented energy efficiency program.

	Promote Energy Benefits Yolo solar and energy efficiency purchasing program to residents.
	Support and/or develop agricultural system technologies and practices that do not have adverse effects on environmental goods and services, are accessible to and effective for farmers, and lead to improvements in food productivity.

 Complete the Regional Flood Management Plan.

	Begin certification program for high level fiscal and accounting positions and create development plans leading to certification. 

	Recommend a vendor and begin implementation of an upgraded or new HR information management system that provides paperless payroll and benefits administration, time and labor tracking and employee self-service functionality.

	Secure software and continue implementation of competency-based Human Resources management system. 

	Develop employee and community ethics violation reporting process.
	Implement new flexible and progressive Personnel Rules and Regulations that replace current outdated County Code provisions.

	Focus training on key areas of continuous learning, improvement, collaboration, and customer service. 

Develop and implement countywide employee satisfaction survey allowing for department specific indicators. 

 Continue to support small community revitalization efforts through active business support, permit fast tracking, downtown revitalization programs and tourism. 
 Promote food processing and other target industries through active participation in Food Central, Seed Central, Farm-to-School and other initiatives.
 Continue to actively promote County low-income housing rehabilitation and loan programs, and support adequate, quality and affordable housing.

	Implement active Airport and hangar development program and recruit new based aircraft. 
Upgrade website to facilitate additional online services and develop plan to provide more services online and via web apps.

Continue economic development collaboration efforts along major county roadways. 

	Create Countywide Residential PACE program.

	Perform full economic feasibility analysis of a Countywide Community Choice Aggregation program funded by State Cap and Trade revenues.

	Involve all Chambers of Commerce and city staff in a business-oriented energy efficiency program.

	Promote Energy Benefits Yolo solar and energy efficiency purchasing program to residents.
	Support and/or develop agricultural system technologies and practices that do not have adverse effects on environmental goods and services, are accessible to and effective for farmers, and lead to improvements in food productivity.

Continue to partner with the California Department of Food and Agriculture and the U.S. Department of Agriculture to secure full funding for High Risk Exclusion, protecting Yolo County from infestations of foreign invasive pests that are shipped through the mail and by common carriers. Coordinate with Sacramento Valley Counties to conduct canine team inspections of incoming shipments at the Postal Facility and UPS for exotic invasive pests. The canine team represents the most efficient and effective means to detect undisclosed shipments of plant material that may harbor these pests.
 Partner with the Department of Pesticide Regulation to complete the Agriculture Department's program efficiency evaluation.
 Maintain an effective end product testing and price verification program to assure a fair and equitable marketplace for all consumers and businesses in Yolo County by integrating our price verification database with our time-keeping program to eliminate duplicate manual data entry, and by continuing to refine the compliance-based inspection program.

	Continue implementation of the Farm to School Program. 

	Continue implementation of the Farmbudsman Program. 

	Work with the Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG) on the completion of the Aggregation Study.

 Work with County Counsel on the completion of the Ag Mitigation Study. 
 Research the possible creation of an Ag Economic Development Innovation Fund to defer up-front project fees for agricultural projects.

Review properties currently on Prop 8 and begin the process of restoring factored base year values as appropriate
 Continue to defend appeals to the best of our ability. We are required by law to be present at all appeal hearings and may present evidence to support our values. We rigorously defend our values and will continue to do so as long as we have the time and the funding.

 Continue to keep our webpage updated with the latest information as a key method of keeping the public informed of important information as well as changes going on in the office. We offer most of our forms online so the public has instant access. We encourage callers to review our webpage and respond with questions/comments. We also encourage our business filers to take advantage of electronic filing of property statements. * 

 Replace SIRE data storage system with in house server. The SIRE—Megabyte link has proven to be cumbersome and somewhat difficult; an in house server will allow us easier access to scanned documents and will increase the efficiency of the appraisal staff as they review/value properties. It will create efficiencies in preparing appraisals for appeals.

Implement continuous auditing plan.

	Conduct specific reviews/audits of high risk areas.

	Reinforce County policy on internal control and auditing.

	Evaluate proposals and recommend a course of action to the Board of Supervisors.

	Evaluate and recommend to the Board of Supervisors financing options for the upgraded financial system.

	Complete implementation planning for the system upgrade.

 Participate in designing a new integrated organization that is capable of delivering world class financial services and recommend a structure for the new organization to the Board of Supervisors.

	Participate in creating a plan to implement the new structure

	Complete assigned tasks in the implementation plan

 Identify ways to engage finance staff in support of operational decision making.

 Assist Human Resources with identifying and implementing strategies to improve County fiscal staff skills and abilities.

Adopt standard service level agreements for financial services

Publish and train County staff in the application and use of countywide cost guidelines and the associated cost calculation templates.

In conjunction with the County Administrator, evaluate County contracts and projects to ensure maximum potential cost recovery in accordance with adopted County cost recovery principles.

Publish Comprehensive Annual Financial Report by December 31, 2013.

	Re-establish GenLed users group to provide forum for training and communication.

	Implement budget and financial planning and capital asset policies. 

	Prepare analysis of financial environment and devise strategies to address financing gaps. 

Create solutions for other long-term structural issues.

	Evaluate proposals for banking services, negotiate and award the contract.

	Implement new/updated banking relationship.

	Implement changes to daily cash reconciliation process to improve efficiency.

	Collect over 97.5% of property taxes charged in 2013-14.

	Implement process to seize assets to collect delinquent unsecured taxes.

 Maintain existing staff knowledge at current levels to ensure that existing systems and collection procedures are continued after retirement of key employee.

Complete written documentation for all key processes.

	Formalize tracking and reporting of all delinquent revenue due County.
	Obtain commitment to follow up on delinquent amounts by responsible parties and assist as needed to ensure collections of delinquent accounts.

	Monitor commitments to collect past due amounts to ensure collection.

Conduct statewide field crop variety testing in tomatoes, small grains, alfalfa, dry beans and alfalfa production for integrated pest management, yield and quality.

	Conduct and implement integrated pest management studies to help minimize pesticide use in crop production.

	Provide continuing education classes for Pest Control Advisors for the safe use of pesticides.

	Promote the processing and marketing of locally raised organic, natural grass-fed and humanely treated meat products.
 Document ecosystem services provided by natural areas (i.e. crop pollinators, water quality protection, pest control by beneficial insects).

 Provide education and outreach on aquatic invasive species.

	Address invasive weed control in rangelands.

 Provide education and outreach on management practices to protect surface and ground water quality, including mitigating nitrate contamination in crop production.

Provide science-based information and projects to youth through 4-H and nutrition programs.

Improve access to nutritious foods in Yolo County.

Expand the Master Gardener, Nutrition Education and Youth Development programs to local underserved communities (i.e. West Sacramento, Winters, Esparto).

Establish a pilot program, in response to AB 1228, to compare election costs and voter turnout of an All Mail election to those of an election not conducted as an All Mail election.

 Purchase and implement a new electronic inventory control so as to better control and track the location and status of public and official records in house and at the Records and Archive Center

 Conduct the June 3, 2014 Statewide Direct Primary Election in compliance with all Federal and California Election Codes to ensure an accurate, timely, transparent and fair election accessible to all voters in Yolo County.

Prepare for any called local or special district elections.

Following 2012-2013 audit of Master Voter File, initiate new strategy and protocols to ensure the Elections Department achieves compliance with CA Elections Code as it pertains to the Master Voter File in terms of maintenance, storage and updates.

Comprehensive analysis of statutory rules and policies required to adopt or provide the agility to implement the Three-Year Tactical Plan and General Plan.
	Continued development of governance models supportive of shared services.
 Continued development of technologic litigation support resources and performance-based service delivery.

 Maximized use of in-house, non-tort litigation efficiencies. 	
	Assist in revision and training of Administrative Policies, i.e., ethics.
	Support County policies and continue to provide input on County-related fiscal or governance legislation.

Review revenue fee generation proposals for legal justification.

Establish tracking and review of systems development lifecycle for all internally developed applications.

	Develop a server virtualization infrastructure for a Yolo County "Private Cloud."

	Ensure that critical hardware is funded for timely replacement.

	Log all system downtime and review monthly performance documents.

	Create training opportunities so that staff is properly trained.
Maintain a 99.5% uptime for all network and core systems.

	Review IT customer satisfaction results monthly and respond to issues as appropriate.

	Finish standard IT requests within 72 hours.

	Maintain customer satisfaction results of "very good" or "excellent".

	Track completion time for all requests.

Create customer feedback systems for all divisions.

	Collaborate with other departments in order to facilitate solar and other renewable energy sources at locations throughout the county including the landfill.
	Continue to pursue alternative energy solutions that are feasible and practical for the County.

	Work closely with local utilities to continue to reduce consumption by, and expense to, the County.
	Keep base data layers up to date.
	Build internal GIS viewer for county departments.
Complete Cache Creek campground shower project.
	Complete concession ordinance.

	Implement a learning program and facility with the Office of Education at Grasslands Park.

	Complete the shade shelter and habitat restoration improvements to the Putah Creek park with grant funding.
Inventory and map parks facilities and trails to provide park and trails maps to the public.

Update concessionaire agreements and park habitat easements throughout the park system.
	Develop a deferred maintenance plan with costs for repairing/replacing deteriorating facility systems (i.e. parking lot asphalt, carpeting, interior and exterior paint) for inclusion in the Capital Improvement Plan (CIP).

 Identify facilities that would generate cost effective savings through energy reduction with the use of LED exterior lighting.

	Develop and implement a maintenance schedule plan that would lower our monthly fuel consumption by eliminating redundant trips through scheduled maintenance days for each facility.
 Expand use of existing work order system by creating a database to include all HVAC/emergency generators so equipment history and cost can be tracked to project replacement cost.
Develop a plan to expand and renovate the Monroe Jail.

	Integrate voicemail into email.

	Continue to upgrade network switches that are capable of utilizing VOIP.
Upgrade old phone switches.
Reprogram departmental auto attendants on new voicemail system.
Implement a countywide contract module.

	Maximize savings by ensuring full participation of online procurement system and use of larger pools of vendors.

	Bid goods and services contracts and countywide programs to drive down costs.

	Provide outreach to departments for procurement matters ensuring compliancy and best business practices.

	Create procurement manual for departments to streamline the learning curve on procurement.

Continue training and development of employees for better skill sets to maximize resources and increase savings. * 

	Provide transportation assistance for veterans to V.A. medical appointments.

	Assist veterans and their families with completing and filing applications.

	Provide support and outreach to newly returning veterans.
	Provide appropriate ceremonial support.

Library leaders, working with several staff teams including YoloReads and our pilot virtual program JobScout, will identify ways to enhance our customer experience in learning and enhancing skills in the areas of computer literacy, job hunting, career and occupational employment and development.
 Collaborate with others to expand tourism in unincorporated Yolo County: the Library provides hiking and traveler's guides, bike maps prepared by the City of Woodland, computer access and online resources, and is often a destination or travel stop for tourists.
 Teachings from the inclusion training attended by all Library staff will continue to be integrated into our daily interactions with one another. 
	Library will continue to lead Tactical Plan Collaboration Team.

 Nonprofit Leaders Alliance: the Library leadership will continue to convene organized conversations with county nonprofits and service providers to share resources, exchange information and provide integrated solutions to community needs beginning July 2013 with a goal of a series of four conversations through 2014.

	First 5 Yolo Collaboration: the Library will continue work with First 5 Yolo and other community collaborators to enhance family support in underserved rural and urban parts of the county where there is no established family resource center.

	Yolo Library Friends group will become an incorporated 501(c)3 and begin fund raising for new branch library to replace current building that is deteriorating.

	Hold Town Hall meetings in Yolo to discuss interim library service.

	Expand an information technology architecture: the Library will bring fiber to AFT Community Library in West Sacramento.
	Library archivist will assist Gibson House staff and volunteers with collection maintenance and preservation issues.

	Expand partnerships with Health Department (WIC) and DESS (211 and CalFresh)

	Integrate 211 Yolo services with County efforts: 211 Yolo will explore possibility of operating call center with existing YECA dispatch infrastructure beginning June 2013.
Prepare children ages 0-5 for school readiness, offer K-12 students a supportive environment for homework completion and supplemental study.

	Promote life readiness skills and supportive services to reach rural literacy needs.
	Promote community memory by collecting, preserving, curating and providing access to content created by Yolo County residents.

	Work with the farming community to support literacy among adult farmworkers through the YoloReads program. 

 Winters Joint Unified School District—continue to work with our library partner as they provide student interns to cover open library hours each weekday morning and all day on Fridays to maximize our ability to remain open as a full service branch to both the public and the school.

	Set SMART goals—Specific, Measureable, Attainable, Relevant, Timely—that reflect our County and Library strategic directions and resonate with their priorities of exemplary customer service. With reduced funding likely to continue, this provides critical leadership opportunities for staff teams to examine the work we do.
	The diminishing Library Fund Balance creates a need for creative thinking in our spending and conservative approaches to the work ahead and the need for some ongoing transparent intentionality and clarity.

	Archives preservation plan: The Archives plays a pivotal role in Yolo County History. A preservation assessment was conducted by noted Preservationist Barclay Ogden in 2010 which provided the framework for a larger analysis of the collection, existing resources, and a plan to increase access through digitization and enhanced public hours, community tours and promotion. Planning implementation will begin immediately following the budget process for 2012-13.

	Coalition of County historical agencies: Archives will continue to work with the historical agency alliance to network, share resources, define collection and programming strengths and collaborate on promotion and development.

 Identify all "like type" cases such as full pay, partial pay, non-pay monitor and special enforcement. Individual child support teams will focus on like cases to provide the most beneficial and productive customer services to either maintain payments coming in or improve payments on cases that are not meeting their court-ordered obligations. This initiative will result in improving collections, being more strategic in our legal actions, identifying cases that require modifications to court orders and strengthening relationships with customers.
 Enhance	relationships with customers to improve collections	and communication, eliciting new case related information. Each child support case manager will contact customers in their caseloads to introduce themselves as their caseworker. They will work with their customers to provide any assistance needed to ensure payments continue or get the parents back on track to meet their court ordered obligations.
 Increase outbound dialing projects to improve collections on delinquent cases. The outbound dialing campaign calls target delinquent Yolo County child support obligors. The resulting contact to our office will result in increased child support collections and new case information. The message delivered to delinquent parties reminds them of the various actions that can take place if they fail to pay their child support obligations.
 Initiate a case review process to clean up erroneous data to improve automated outcomes. Cleaning up erroneous data in our automated system will improve the automated processes of locating people, income and assets to further child support collections and payments to families.

Implement new restorative justice programs, more effective rehabilitative services (AB 109) and closer collaboration among all criminal justice partners.

	Enhance DA Fraud Unit-Real Estate Fraud, Elder Protection & Identity Theft.

	Promote Neighborhood Court, an innovative restorative justice program.

	Expand Mental Health Court.

 Develop a method to Drag & Drop documents into LAWSuite in the desired order.

Create a Timeline based on reporting criteria within LAWSuite.

Continue to improve upon digitally recovery of all evidence ranging from fraud, child molestation to homicides and prepare to present during trials.

	Develop additional projects for Multi-Cultural Community Council & Training.

	Promote District Attorney-sponsored Citizens Academy.
	Implement Neighborhood Court.

Expand Diversity Forums.

Fully and efficiently integrate risk/needs assessment information into court reports for adults.

The department will continue to work with the Court and other justice partners to ensure that probation reports provide better information in the most critical cases and decision points, while more efficiently providing only essential information in less complicated matters.

	Develop and fully implement a collaboratively developed system of graduated sanctions and incentives for probationers that maximally supports behavior change.

The department will continue to work with the Court and other justice partners to develop an agreed upon policy of set responses to violations of probation and/or incentives for positive behavior change in order to ensure a sanction of appropriate severity can be imposed in all violations of probation in a timely manner.

	Enhance collaboration with partner agencies and community stakeholders to provide better and more comprehensive correctional treatment services and cost-effective public safety solutions. 

The department will continue to support deliberate, collaborative and data-driven planning processes to guide program development, resource allocation and enhanced cooperation between agencies to provide the most effective public safety practices possible. 

 Develop and enhance technology solutions to increase efficiency and provide more relevant reporting that supports outcome evaluation.

With assistance from Information Technology, Probation will use the existing analysis of its Law Suite (case management) application to assess cost of full functionality (to include tracking case processing indicators; integration with risk/needs assessment software; and automation of reporting features) versus selecting an off-the-shelf system to fill these needs.

 Through training, supervision, and other management practices, ensure attorneys and staff understand and adhere to their professional and ethical responsibilities to pursue with knowledge and skill whatever lawful and ethical measures are required to vindicate a client's cause.
Develop ways to implement holistic defense practices.
	Actively participate in activities such as the AB 109 Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) executive committee, AB 109 related workgroups, the California Risk Assessment Pilot Project (CalRAPP), the Criminal Justice Cabinet, the Blue Ribbon Commission, the Disproportionate Minority Contact grant, the Quality Assurance (QA) Committee, the Mental Health Court steering committee, the Day Reporting Center steering committee, and various meetings designed to garner grant funding for the County.

	Develop internal feedback loops to identify and address issues as they arise.

	Support employee activities.
 Educate the community about the purpose and function of the defense system. Develop and maintain relationships with community organizations and other stakeholders to assist in improving defense services.
 Support intern programs by hosting law student, social worker, undergraduate, high school and paralegal interns as well as volunteer attorneys.

Provide for proper healthcare by arranging for doctor appointments, monitoring medical treatment, advocating for necessary treatment and voicing the wishes of the conservatee.

	Arrange for proper nutrition.

	Arrange for appropriate clothing, as needed.

	Provide for housing that is appropriate and least restrictive.

	Arrange for reasonable safety, comfort, social services, recreation and family contact.
	Locate and marshal assets, assuring they are adequately protected against loss.

	Prepare an inventory of the assets for the Court.

	Apply for and maintain benefits that the Conservatee is entitled.

	Make a budget and pay all legitimate bills for the Conservatee.

	Invest the Conservatee's assets and income in safe investments that will meet his/her needs and meet Court requirements. 
Prepare a final report and accounting Conservatorship terminates.
of the estate at the time the
	Remain accountable to the Court on all expenditures, income, assets and property.
Prepare a final report and accounting Conservatorship terminates of the estate at the time the Conservatorship terminates.

 Continue to expand community education and outreach programs through town hall meetings, neighborhood watch, crime prevention and identity theft to bridge law enforcement with community members.

 Develop short-term and long-term strategic plans and a vision for the Sheriff's Office.

 Restore positions that were previously lost in prior fiscal years.

Replace aging safety equipment that previous budgets had not allowed.

 Continue to work with General Services on planning of the Detention Facility Expansion.

Explore the use of future AB 900 funds for expansion of the jail.

 Continue to expand and enhance programs that were initiated with AB109 funds to provide the tools necessary for inmates to satisfactorily re-enter the community. * 

 Continue to reduce the animal population with preventative spays and neuters.

	Work with Operations Pet Snip out of Gainesville Florida to transfer the Big Fix Rig to Yolo County so that mobile spay and neuter services can be provided.
	Work with Cities regarding shared services to ensure all costs are captured.

Coordinate with UC Davis Vet Med Teaching Hospital to develop new animal shelter and veterinarian services.

