	Co-locate administrative personnel and service teams.

	Create framework for Service Centers.
	Engage and support staff through change. (Tactical Plan 8H)

	Establish "no wrong door" approach.

	Increase mental health participation rates for minority populations. (Tactical Plan 4A)

	Enhance and sustain home visiting services available to high risk families. (Tactical Plan 4D)

	Increase outreach and education. (Tactical Plan 4J)
Increase community-based services to keep children/families close to home.

	Implement performance measures and quality improvement. (Tactical Plan 8C)


	Establish Housing First model as our vision for the future. (Tactical Plan 4L)

	Implement community-wide coordinated entry system. (Tactical Plan 3A)

	Create multi-disciplinary Homeless Team.

	Continue CalWORKs Housing Program for homeless families.

	Align unemployment efforts with industry demand. (Tactical Plan 2C)

	Partner with the County Office of Education and non-profits. (Tactical Plan 4H, 4I)
Increase participation rates for eligibility programs. (Tactical Plan 4G)

 Meet with community non-profits and other community partners to develop collaborative services. (Tactical Plan 4H, 4I)
Finalize, implement, and monitor Community Health Improvement Plan

Collective impact framework
Streamline and improve project review process/customer satisfaction by completing "one-stop" permit center with Environmental Health Division. (Tactical Plan 8J)

	Implement Fire Code review services as part of the "one-stop" shop program. (Tactical Plan 8J)

	Improve Community Rating System for FEMA's Flood requirements.

	Improve and reduce reliance on contract services for inspections/plan review

	Complete revision of the Agricultural Mitigation Ordinance to allow greater flexibility, and adopt an Ag Buffer Areas plan to designate permanent ag easements/buffers between cities and towns. (Tactical Plan 6E)

	Update Climate Action Plan to incorporate new strategies and research in reducing future green house gas emissions.

	Update the Solar Facilities Ordinance and the Inclusionary Housing In-Lieu Fee Ordinance.

	Complete the Dunnigan Specific Plan, pending submittal of a jobs/housing plan. (Tactical Plan 2E)

	Complete second phase (40 units) of the Mercy Housing Esparto Family Apartments.

	Work with the Old Sugar Mill property owner to rezone the site and expand uses. (Tactical Plan 2E)

	Complete the update of the Clarksburg Area Plan to ensure consistency with the Delta Protection Plan. (Tactical Plan 2E) 
	Complete planning for UC ag/food research park.

	Optimize staff resources given projected reductions in state gas tax revenue, to improve safety and extend the longevity of existing roads with a greater emphasis on maintenance. (Tactical Plan 8F)

	Construct CR 99 Rehabilitation project, from Woodland to CR 19A; CR 27 Rehabilitation project, from CR 98 to CR 99; and left-turn lanes on CR 31 at CR95 to improve road safety.

	Construct federally funded bridge maintenance work on 7 bridges.

	Obtain federal funding authorization for reconstruction of bridge on CR86A over Cottonwood Slough and replace deficient bridge structure.

	Obtain rights of way needed to construct bridge replacement on CR 12 over Zamora Creek.

	Conclude bridge type selection process in coordination with community groups and Caltrans to address deficient CR 40 bridge over Cache Creek (Rumsey Bridge).

	Integrate waste collection and recycling, hazardous materials disposal and recycling.

	Secure organic waste agreements and begin operation of the new Organics and Construction and Demolition Debris Processing Facility at landfill to reduce disposal and increase recycling. (Tactical Plan 7G)

	Continue to expand residential and commercial waste and recycling collection programs. (Tactical Plan 7G)

	Increase capacity for agricultural liquid and solid waste processing, while continuing to increase waste importation to help reduce local operational costs.

	Increase operational cost efficiencies and address new local, State and Federal fees and regulations.
	Update/revise methane gas recovery and alternative energy production agreements. (Tactical Plan 7H)

	Assist current and potential manufacturers and processors using recycled materials to utilize the benefits of the new Yolo Recycling Market Development Zone. (Tactical Plan 7G)
Pursue adding staff and capabilities to improve customer service and vehicle security.

	Improve data review and entry to increase value and interface with other programs.

	Promote environmentally preferable vehicle and equipment purchases.

	Recommend updates to vehicle age directives. 

	Re-evaluate staffing needs, technology and task prioritization.

	Continue revisiting the organizational structure for potential consolidation or shared services opportunities, address cross-training skill sets to foster succession planning. (Tactical Plan 8A)

	Seek new advances in technology to enhance agency coordination, public access and interfacing for greater transparency of departmental processes.

	Continue integration of Environmental Health Services towards the goal of creating a centralized customer service center (one-stop-shop) for permiffing, development projects, and related regulatory activities. (Tactical Plan 8J)

	Conduct industry outreach to evaluate customer satisfaction. (Tactical Plan 8E)

	Restore dedicated staffing for code enforcement complaint response. (Tactical Plan 2H)
	Training plans, policies and procedures to be developed to assure permit, regulatory and development services staff are committed to ensuring an efficient, cost effective, fair and transparent process for both the applicant and the general public. (Tactical Plan 2I)

	Comprehensive program cost and fee study to be completed assuring fair and reasonable fee structure time. (Tactical Plan 2I)

	Seek opportunities for additional consolidation or shared services opportunities.
Conduct outreach to stakeholders regarding development of a retail food placarding (grading) program.

	Complete an update to the Yolo County Code for septic systems in compliance with new statewide standards. (Tactical Plan 7E)

	Complete updates to the Yolo County Code for well construction, water quality and septic system requirements. (Tactical Plan 7E)


Continue involvement in regional rail relocation efforts. (Tactical Plan 2E)

	Update Airport Layout Plan to include public input.

	Complete and implement Fiscal Impact & Tax Transfer Analysis model for use in development discussion with cities. (Tactical Plan 8A)

	Assist with addressing Community Service Area and District issues. (Tactical Plan 2H)

	Assist in expanding broadband access countywide. (Tactical Plan 1G)
	Develop plan to assist Adult Day Health Center with program facility needs.

	Enhance Homeless Coordinator position, develop mechanism to receive donations and facilitate multi-department discussion on performance measures for homeless service providers. (Tactical Plan 4L)

	Support YoloArts in the development of a Public Art Master Plan. (Tactical Plan 2L)

	Support implementation of Health & Human Services Agency.
	Further promote and maintain YoloAlert emergency notification system.

	Implement emergency fund (drought relief and emergency response).

	Develop options for North Davis Meadows to connect to safe, secure, sustainable water supply. (Tactical Plan 2G, 2H)

	Facilitate detention facilities expansion projects. (Tactical Plan 5F)

	Complete continuity of operations planning and assess city financial systems for recovery capabilities.

	Conduct flood preparedness outreach to improve National Flood Insurance Program rating.

	Assist in development of Airport Emergency Plan.

	Continue work toward Emergency Management Accreditation.
Continue expansion of Joint Emergency Management System.

	Increase transportation access to justice campus for clients through installation of bus stop.

	Engage providers and stakeholder in development of a preferred method for delivery of services to address family violence.

	Seek National Flood Insurance Program relief for agricultural legacy communities. (Tactical Plan 2E, 6D)
	Continue emergency flood planning efforts. (Tactical Plan 7G)

	Identify and address drought impacts.

	Review, comment and monitor development of Habitat Conversation Plan/Natural Community Conversation Plan.

	Participate in and support the implementation of groundwater legislation.

	Develop and implement Ag mitigation ordinance and oversee ag development fund.

	Participate in implementation of the Lower Sacramento-Delta North Corridor Management Framework plan obligations.
	Pursue Community Choice Aggregation options. (Tactical Plan 7G)

	Continue work related to the Delta. (Tactical Plan 6D, 7E)

	Update Cache Creek Regional Management Plan and Parkway Plan. (Tactical Plan 7C)

	Identify locations for Off-Highway Vehicle park.

	Obtain State and Federal permits for Cache Creek Area Plan.
Complete implementation of the 2012-2015 Tactical Plan.

	Complete development of 2016-2019 Strategic Plan, i.e. key initiatives, measures of success, enhanced outreach (promotion of new Mission Statement and Goals), dashboard, etc.

	Develop prioritization process for syncing Strategic Plan with the budget and leadership evaluation process.

	Reexamine creation of a revenue development program. (Tactical Plan 8A)

	Implement and manage human resources legislative mandates, i.e. sick leave and Affordable Care Act for extra help.

	Continue to support countywide Talent Development initiative. (Tactical Plan 1B)

	Continue implementation of Long Term Financial Plan (InforSystem implementation and long-term financial forecasting). (Tactical Plan 8E, 8F)

	Support development of Shared Services JPA. (Tactical Plan 1B)

	Meet and confer on Personal Rules & Regulations.

	Strengthen feedback avenues for employees and allied partners to provide critical and/or sensitive information.

	Coordinate and implement Capital Improvement Plan. (Tactical Plan 8B)

	Complete Parks study and develop long term solutions. (Tactical Plan 7B, 7C)

	Enhance/formalize Risk Management systems.

	Transfer budget function to the Department of Financial Services.

	Support completion of the regional transportation CIP and associated financing.

	Identify legislative recommendations to create, reward or amplify collaboration efforts and related policy development.

	Further develop Rural Initiatives Program.

Continue to partner with the California Department of Food and Agriculture, Sacramento Valley Counties and the U.S. Department of Agriculture to continue full funding for High Risk Exclusion, protecting Yolo County from infestations of foreign invasive pests that are shipped through the mail and by common carriers. Coordinate with Sacramento Valley Counties to conduct canine team inspections of incoming shipments at the Postal Facility and UPS for exotic invasive pests.

 Maintain an effective consumer protection program by completing all mandated inspections, conducting end product testing and price verification inspections to assure a fair and equitable marketplace for all consumers and businesses in Yolo County.
Evaluate the Farm to School Program to determine future program goals and funding

needs. (Tactical Plan 6B)

	Evaluate the Farmbudsman Program to determine the feasibility of continued funding. (Tactical Plan 6A)

	Continue participation in the Countywide Talent Development Initiative to develop staff skills and to prepare for future department retirements. (Tactical Plan 8B)

	Continue the agricultural marketing program to promote agricultural tourism and direct marketing and to implement agricultural General Plan action items. (Tactical Plan 6G)

Analyze existing work cycles to more efficiently utilize combined staff resources throughout the year. (Tactical Plan 1C)

	Continue to integrate department-specific software packages in both offices to improve access to customer information. (Tactical Plan 1G)

	Explore and test options to effectively deploy and utilize mobile technology when staff is performing daily job duties in the field. (Tactical Plan 1H)
	Work with the Department of Finance Services to develop a cross training program for staff to better address and improve customer education on the relationship of the assessment of their property and the taxes seen on the tax statement. (Tactical Plan 3B)

	Further develop business relationship with ParcelQuest (an outside vendor) to consolidate and produce future parcel maps at zero cost to the County. (Tactical Plan 3A)
	Continue work started with Human Resources to complete Job Classification Study to standardize job descriptions and pay scales department wide. (Tactical Plan 8B)

	Foster a team vision with the end goal of enhancing the overall work product by promoting all training opportunities available at every staffing level. (Tactical Plan 8H)


	Identify opportunities for improved efficiency and effectiveness in handling routine legal matters (e.g., subpoenas, Public Records Act requests). (Tactical Plan 8B)

	Support Board governance efforts, strategic planning and implementation of the Tactical Plan in coordination with the Board of Supervisors, County Administrator and other departments.
	Support staff professional development through participation in professional organizations and increased training and education opportunities. (Tactical Plan 1C, 1E)

	Continue to handle County litigation and administrative proceedings in a cost-effective manner, relying mainly on "in-house" resources. (Tactical Plan 8I)
	Decrease review time for all routine legal documents, including contracts and resolutions. (Tactical Plan 1A)

	Identify opportunities to improve contract template language to address increasingly common issues such as "click through" software license agreements.

	In collaboration with Purchasing, update and streamline processing of contracts for routine and/or low-cost services. (Tactical Plan 3A)
	Continue support for department reorganizations and other internal efforts to improve service delivery. (Tactical Plan 8F)

	Participate in employee training programs and provide appropriate support for other efforts on both a department and countywide level. (Tactical Plan 1E)

Complete countywide risk assessment. (Tactical Plan 8C)

	Complete oversight program with respect to county affiliated entities.

	Ensure adequate controls and best practices are in place in the new financial and budget systems.

	Implement continuous auditing plan based on assessed level of risk. (Tactical Plan 8E)
	Complete implementation of Infor financial system.

	Redesign business processes to incorporate best practices. (Tactical Plan 8B)

	Provide countywide support for smooth transition to new financial system.
	Design and implement new budget system.

	Redesign budget processes to incorporate best practices. (Tactical Plan 8B)

	Provide countywide support for smooth transition to new budget system.
	Request proposals for banking services and select new bank.

	Streamline financing and debt management procedures. (Tactical Plan 8B)
	Formalize tracking and reporting of all receivables due to the County.

	Complete a revenue database to identify the most important revenue sources.

	Develop a revenue forecast model.

	Provide analytical support to County Administrator in revenue sharing and economic development effort. (Tactical Plan 8A)
	Implement purchasing performance measurements tiers to better reflect priorities and best practices. (Tactical Plan 8D1)

	Implement new Infor procurement/contract system.


	Continue to move systems to the new "Private Cloud" server system. (Tactical Plan 1F)

	Ensure that critical hardware is funded for timely replacement. (Tactical Plan 1H)

	Log all system downtime and review monthly performance documents. (Tactical Plan 1H)

 Create opportunities for staff to be properly trained. (Tactical Plan 8B)

	Maintain a 99.5% uptime for all network and core systems. (Tactical Plan 1F)

	Assist with the implementation of the new Financial and Human Resource Capital Management systems. (Tactical Plan 1I, 1J)

	Upgrade all web-based and COTS (if desired by vendor / customer) to SQL 2008 or SQL 2012. (Tactical Plan 1H)

	Upgrade all ITTD-developed web applications to utilize HTLM 5 code (browser independent). (Tactical Plan 1H)

	Develop and implement the Probation Case Management System (CMS) (Tactical Plan 1G)

	Install several new network security systems. (Tactical Plan 1G, 1H)

	Install new high speed network connection to Sheriff/Probation campus. (Tactical Plan 1F)

	Install additional Internet connection for redundancy and capacity. (Tactical Plan 1F)

	Install new network equipment in the Bauer building, Landfill and Public Defender building. (Tactical Plan 1H)
	Review Information Technology's customer satisfaction results monthly and respond to issues as appropriate. (Tactical Plan 1A, 8D, 8G)

	Finish standard Information Technology requests within	72 hours.

(Tactical Plan 8D, 8G)

	Maintain customer satisfaction results of "very good" or	"excellent".

(Tactical Plan 1A, 8D, 8G)

	Track completion time for all requests. (Tactical Plan 1A, 8D, 8G)

	Create customer feedback systems for all divisions. (Tactical Plan 1A, 8D, 8G)
Keep critical base data layers up to date.

	Build internal GIS viewer for county departments such as Planning, Public Works & Environmental Services, Employment and Social Services, Parks, Natural Resources, and Office of Emergency Services. (Tactical Plan 1F)

	Purchase software to update GIS test and development environments. (Tactical Plan 1F)

	Automate routine editing and analysis tasks to be more efficient. (Tactical Plan 1A)

	Provide a platform for collaboration by introducing web-based tools for selfservice data discovery, map creation, analysis and rapid application development. (Tactical Plan 1G)
	Update outdated contract between County and the Gibson House Museum. (Tactical Plan 7C)

	Prepare a concessions ordinance for Yolo County Parks. (Tactical Plan 7B)

	Develop Parks locator and amenities application for the public. (Tactical Plan 1G)

	Complete a comprehensive fee and usage study for the Parks system. (Tactical Plan 7)

	Replace irrigation pump engine to tier 4 at Cache Creek Campground to comply with Air Resource Board standards. (Tactical Plan 7G,H)
	Develop a deferred maintenance plan with costs for repairing/replacing deteriorating facility systems (i.e. parking lot asphalt, carpeting, interior and exterior paint) for inclusion in Capital Improvement Plan. (Tactical Plan 8B)

	Explore retrofit/upgrades to existing facilities. (Tactical Plan 8B)

	Explore modernization of irrigations control systems throughout County to reduce water waste/consumption. (Tactical Plan 8B)

	Complete and implement facilities space plan recommendations. (Tactical Plan 8B)

	Update all County lease agreements. (Tactical Plan 8B)
Continue to upgrade data network switches that are capable of utilizing Voice Over IP. (Tactical Plan 1F)

	Upgrade and/or decommission old phone switches. (Tactical Plan 1F)

	Partner with City of Woodland and Yolo Emergency Communications Agency to provide better connectivity to the Sheriff and Probation campus. (Tactical Plan 1F, 3B)

	Replace and implement Telecom billing and work order system. (Tactical Plan 1H)

	Replace/upgrade telecommunications end equipment. (Tactical Plan 1F)
	Provide transportation assistance for veterans to V.A. medical appointments. (Tactical Plan 4F)

	Assist veterans and their families with completing and filing applications. (Tactical Plan 4F)

	Provide support and outreach to newly returning veterans. (Tactical Plan 4F)

	Provide appropriate ceremonial support. (Tactical Plan 4F)

	Implement succession planning process. (Tactical Plan 1C)

	Prepare children ages 0-5 for school readiness, offer K-12 students a supportive environment for homework completion and supplemental study.

	Buddy Reading: Pair up children in grades K-3 with high school student from River City High School Interact Club for weekly reading sessions. (Tactical Plan 4G)

	Provide outreach and education for low income residents in collaboration with Yolo County Housing.

	Provide resources and support to families who have a first time family member attending college. (Tactical Plan 4D)

	Provide literacy tutoring at two Day Reporting Centers for AB109 population—a collaboration with DA, Sheriff, Probation and Yolo County Office of Education, plus 10 presentations on community resources.

	Promote community memory by continuing to collect and preserve content created by Yolo County residents, increasing public access through digitization of photographs, audiovisual materials and finding aids.

	Engage community in coordinated learning, discussion and volunteer service with Books-to-Action grant focused on literacy and reducing barriers to education in Yolo County, especially among females.

	Work with First5 Yolo on Parent Education, teaching parents how to provide support for children so they can be ready to start school.
	Provide job readiness workshops and resources, including JobScout and other learning materials. (Tactical Plan 2C)

	Identify ways to enhance our customer experience in learning and strengthening skills in the areas of computer literacy, job hunting, career and occupational employment and development by having Library leaders work with several staff teams, including YoloReads Literacy Services.

	Develop Virtual One-Stop Job Center resources. (Tactical Plan 2C)

	Strengthen enhanced workforce using talent management, including participative leadership, peer-to-peer mentoring and training opportunities, effective decision-making practices, valued inclusion and the seffing of SMART goals to continue to build upon complementary strengths, talents and skills, developing a high performance team that excels in furthering the mission of the library and the county as a whole.
	Nonprofit Leaders Alliance: Continue to convene organized conversations and trainings with county nonprofits and service providers to share resources, exchange information and provide integrated solutions to community through a series of four collaborative meetings. (Tactical Plan 3B)

	Offer Youth Development Institute training countywide, featuring eight agencies and 40 county staff to be trained

	Support Friends of the Yolo Library at Yolo as they continue fundraising for new branch library to replace current building.

	Collaborate with Yolo County Office of Education, schools and Head Start on grade level reading, Early Literacy and parent education.

	Virtual Services Librarian to assess needs and to deploy new technology for the public

	Winters Joint Unified School District—continue to strengthen collaboration with our library partner as they provide student interns plus funding for a Library Clerk to cover open library hours each weekday morning and all day on Fridays to maximize our ability to remain open as a full service branch to both the public and the school.

	Assist in the implementation of the Broadband Strategic Plan adopted by the Board of Supervisors to provide stronger broadband support to rural communities.

	Collaborate with community partners such as RISE, Inc. and the Early Academic Outreach Program to create a network of programs and services that empower the youth of Yolo to attain higher education.

	Sublet CSS office space to DESS thereby reducing lease costs. (Tactical Plan 3F)

	Eliminate paper child support case files-image and upload to the child support automation system (CSE) all necessary paper documents and destroy case files.

	Implement a legal paperless solution that interfaces with CSE, creating an electronic litigation file for child support attorneys and staff working at the Yolo Superior Court. (Tactical Plan 1F)

	Examine and improve internal processes in an effort to decrease the time from opening a child support case to establishing an order for child support. (Tactical Plan 8B)
	Develop and implement a more comprehensive child support outreach and education program. The purpose of the outreach is to educate local families on the available free and low cost child support services and to open more child support cases for Yolo County families. Additional outreach to local service agencies and County departments will be essential in developing new collaborative relationships. Furthermore, employers are a key partner in the collection of child support, as over 70% of child support is paid by income withholding order. (Tactical Plan 4F)

	Engage both parents in the establishment and enforcement of child support and increase the number of stipulated orders. Research shows that when both parents are involved in the establishment of child support orders, payment and support of children is more likely. (Tactical Plan 4D)

	Implement new restorative justice programs, more effective rehabilitative services (AB 109) and closer collaboration among all criminal justice partners. (Tactical Plan 5D)

	Enhance DA Fraud Unit-Real Estate Fraud, Elder Protection & Identity Theft.

	Promote Neighborhood Court, an innovative restorative justice program. (Tactical Plan 5D, 5K)

	Expand Mental Health Court. (Tactical Plan 5B)
	Integrate with the Court and Law Enforcement through the Court's new access portal.

	Continue to improve upon digital recovery of all evidence, ranging from fraud and child molestation to homicides, and prepare to present during trials. (Tactical Plan 5I, 5J)
	Develop additional projects for Multi-Cultural Community Council & Training. (Tactical Plan 5G)

	Further promote District Attorney-sponsored Citizens Academy.

	Continue to expand Neighborhood Court. (Tactical Plan 5D, 5K)

	Continue to expand Diversity forums.

	Enhance collaboration with partner agencies and community stakeholders to provide better and more comprehensive correctional treatment services and cost-effective public safety solutions. (Tactical Plan 5A, 5F)

The department will work with the Courts and the Yolo County Health and Human Services Agency to enhance adult mental health court services and provide additional in-custody, out-of-custody and out-of-home juvenile treatment services.

	Begin research projects to determine adult supervision recidivism rates and the affect of implementing a new assessment tool. (Tactical Plan 5H)

The department is working with a university to establish independent multiyear research of select Probation activities. This research will help the Department identify the affect on the criminal justice system due to the change in assessment tools. It will also look at adult supervision recidivism rates of those participating in certain adult programs and identify opportunities for program improvement.
 Develop and enhance technology solutions to increase efficiency and provide more relevant reporting that supports outcome evaluation. (Tactical Plan 5I)

The Department will implement a new probation case management system within this fiscal year to increase efficiency and improve the reporting capabilities.

	Through training, supervision and other management practices, ensure attorneys and staff understand and adhere to their professional and ethical responsibilities to pursue with knowledge and skill whatever lawful and ethical measures are required to vindicate a client's cause. Embed tenants of California Attorney Guidelines of Civility and Professionalism into everyday interactions. (Tactical Plan 5E1, 5G1)
	Develop and implement holistic defense practices that achieve client-centered advocacy. Conclude collaboration with The Center for Holistic Defense and implement appropriate evidence-based changes. (Tactical Plan 1B3, 5E2, 5E4)

	Continue to expand training beyond professional mandates. (Tactical Plan 5G1)

	Maintain and expand the Record Mitigation Clinic to ensure that rehabilitated offenders and Proposition 47 affected defendants have access to quality, post-conviction legal services to obtain the relief to which they are legally entitled, thereby supporting their successful re-entry into the community. (Tactical Plan 5E4)

	Utilize multidisciplinary model to leverage expertise of social workers to develop and implement discharge plans for adult-sentenced inmates with special focus on the mentally ill and create proposed disposition plans for pretrial adult clients that encourage sentences that focus on rehabilitation versus incarceration beyond that necessary to successfully intervene in noncompliant behavior. (Tactical Plan 5E2)

	Pair social workers directly with delinquent youth at high risk for incarceration and/or out-of-home placement to determine sources of instability and develop goals that address barriers to success and promote positive change. (Tactical Plan 5E2)
	Recruit and direct social worker intern in mezzo level activities to identify gaps and support cultural and institutional changes that meet minors' needs in the community. (Tactical Plan 5E2)

	Continue collaboration with Department of Employment and Social Services to identify and serve offenders eligible for benefits such as Medi-Cal and CalFresh. (Tactical Plan 4A2, 4F4)
 Continue to invest in on-going collaborations including Community Corrections Partnership executive committee and workgroups, Criminal Records Access Management, Justice Reinvestment Initiative, Employee Council, Talent Development Initiative, Veterans Stand Down, and Strategic Planning Working Group. Continue to strive to develop consensus surrounding a protocol to address the needs of the realigned Proposition 47 offenders. (Tactical Plan 5H1, 5H4, 5L1)
Collaboratively pursue grant opportunities including the immediately upcoming Residential Substance Abuse Treatment and Supervised Population Workforce Training (AB 2060) grants. (Tactical Plan 5H2, 5H4)
 Support employee activities; recognize collaboration as a county value; recognize high performers; seek and value feedback; overcome constraints of operating in a dated office building. (Tactical Plan 3D1, 8H2)
	Focus on leadership skill development that clarifies expectations, aligns tactics and supports professional training opportunities inside and outside the County. Actively participate in the Talent Development Initiative to augment training opportunities for employees. (Tactical Plan 5G1)

	Complete scan-on-demand and paperless integration/upgrade project with DA's Office, IT and vendor to serve as foundation for e-discovery; enhance technology in the workplace in order to augment, enhance and services. (Tactical Plan 5J1, 5J2)
 Educate the community about the purpose and function of the public defense system by developing and maintaining stakeholder relationships and collaborations. (Tactical Plan 5K2)
 Support intern programs by hosting volunteer attorneys, law students, graduate students, social worker and paralegal interns, and undergraduate and high school interns. (Tactical Plan 5K3)
Develop a public education campaign to increase awareness of legal rights and related topics. (Tactical Plan 5K1)

	Provide for proper healthcare by arranging for doctor appointments, monitoring medical treatment, advocating for necessary treatment and voicing the wishes of the conservatee. (Tactical Plan 4A-4D)

	Arrange for proper nutrition. (Tactical Plan 4C, 4D)

	Arrange for appropriate clothing, as needed. (Tactical Plan 4B)

	Provide for housing that is appropriate and least restrictive. (Tactical Plan 4B)
Arrange for reasonable safety, comfort, social services, recreation and family contact. (Tactical Plan 4D)
	Locate and marshal assets, assuring they are adequately protected against loss. (Tactical Plan 8C)

	Prepare an inventory of the assets for the Court. (Tactical Plan 8C)

	Apply for and maintain benefits for which Conservatees are entitled. (Tactical Plan 4F)

	Make a budget and pay all legitimate bills for the Conservatee. (Tactical Plan 8C)

	Invest the Conservatee's assets and income in safe investments that will meet his/her needs and meet Court requirements. (Tactical Plan 8F, 8I)
Remain accountable to the Court on all expenditures, income, assets and property. (Tactical Plan 8C)

Prepare a final report and accounting of the estate at the time the Conservatorship terminates. (Tactical Plan 8C)

	Continue to expand community education and outreach programs on crime prevention and identity theft through town hall meetings and neighborhood watch programs to bridge law enforcement with community members.

	Develop short-term and long-term strategic plans and a vision for the Sheriff's Office.

	Restore positions that were lost in prior fiscal years. (Tactical Plan 5F)

	Replace aging safety equipment.

	Develop a Compliance Sergeant position to maintain policy and procedures with the inclusion of the legal services function.
	Continue to work with County Administrator's Office on planning for the Detention Facility Remodel/Expansion.

	Explore the use of future SB 863 funds to see if the expansion of the jail can continue.

	Continue to expand and enhance programs that were initiated with AB109 funds to provide the tools necessary for inmates to satisfactorily re-enter the community. (Tactical Plan 5D, 5F)
	Continue to reduce the animal population with preventative spays and neuters.

	Coordinate with UC Davis Vet Med Teaching Hospital to develop new animal shelter and veterinarian services.

