To complete the Sheriff Project.
 To move the Tri-County Juvenile
Rehabilitation facility to the RFP stage.
 To officially initiate the SB863 Jail expansion
project.
 Begin more detailed department level audit
of ID cards.
 Increase training on security card creation
and development.
 Coordinate with County Counsel on
implementing a centralized contact review
process again.
 New purchasing manual.
 Complete our development of creating
written policies and procedures on our
common tasks and processes.
 Enhance our follow up on AR to improve
collections.
 Coordinate with B&G to develop long term
plan to bring all county facilities in
compliance with the California ADA
requirements.
Will host the 2016 Golden West Regional
Flyin & Airshow on October 15, 2016
 Identify new revenues to maintain selfsufficiency
 Identify areas on the airport for solar farm
activities as a new revenue source and
potential energy savings for the airport and
its operators; OPUD and the County will be
constructing projects in this fiscal year in
non-aviation properties of the airport
proposed in FY 2016-2017
 Continue developing a series of visual
enhancement projects to clean up the
airport properties
 Maintain hangar occupancy at 100 percent
 Research new grant programs to continue
the Airport Capital Improvement Programs
 Continue to implement security procedures
to prepare for federal requirements
applying to general aviation airports
 Create a new airport logo, new marketing
brochure, and continue design ideas as
revenues allow
 Continue to review and determine revenue
for the implementation of airport
surveillance camera systems and gate
access control systems

 The Airport Maintenance Coordinator
position was transitioned to Administrative
Services - Buildings & Grounds in FY 2011-
2012. Costs continue to be shared for this
position between B&G and the Airport at 50
percent each. This action benefits the
Airport with both budget and labor
allocations. It will also result in greater
backup maintenance assistance when
needed across all locations.
 The FY 2011-2012 budget package included
an A-87 charge of $41,983 as opposed to
the FY 2010-11 budget with an A-87 charge
of $113,911. The airport received some
assistance from the Administrative Services
budget for FY 2010-2011 in the amount of
$50,000 to bring the Airport’s portion down
to $63,911. In 2012-2013, the airport had
an A-87 credit of $54,605, with FY 2013-
2014 back with a charge at $35,104, and
2014-2015 at $8,782. FY 2015-2016 is
charged at $25,184. Bouncing up and down
in this expense category makes it difficult
for the airport to budget each year.
 The Airport leases property to the County
Public Works Road Department, the
Sheriff’s Shooting Range, and County
Animal Control at rates that are significantly
lower than the market rate. According to
the Revenue Use Policy, rental of land to, or
use of land by, the County for nonaeronautical
purposes at less than fair
market value rent is considered a subsidy of
local government and is a prohibited use of
airport revenue. The current rental rates
paid by the County for these facilities are at
.021 cents per square foot. The Airport’s
current lease rate for similar ground
property is .07 cents per square foot.
 Reclamation District 784 and levee
assessment fees continue to be a concern.
It should be noted, the Airport can only recover a small portion of the fees charged
from Lessees as the fees relate to the entire
property of the airport. There are a total of
3 acres of buildings with 75 acres of airfield
developed with 10 acres of road; for a total
of 13.39 percent or 88 of the 657.2 acres of
the airport developed. The remaining
properties are open space or airport safety
areas and thus RD 784 costs must be borne
by the Airport. RD 784 billed the Airport in
June 2014 for the past 2 years in the
amount of $53,543 covering FY 2012-2013
($34,048) and FY 2013-2014 ($19,495), and
again in December 2014 another $20,155
for FY 2014-2015. For FY 2015-2016 and
going forward, the fees are expected to be
consistent and easier to maintain budget.
These fees have resulted in a significant
drain on the Airport’s cash flow and will
continue to result in a tight balance of
revenue versus expenditures for the
Airport’s budgeted activities.
 The Olivehurst Public Utility District fire
assessment fees are approximately $4,594
annually. Unlike the RD 784 and the levee
fees that are based on the entire airport
developed areas, including runways and
taxiways, the majority of the OPUD and
light district fees are recovered from the
lease tenants utilizing the property.
 The security requirements for general
aviation airports as a result of the 9-11
incident continue to be discussed by the
Federal Aviation Administration. The
airport has completed 90 percent of the
fencing requirement. A new grant will be
requested to continue the security projects.
Remaining plans include fence completion
and installation of surveillance cameras at
key points. Funding for additional gate
systems and cameras will be pursued during
this fiscal year, pending the priorities set for
the Airport Improvement Program.
 During the construction of the new airport
pollution control facility at the main hangar
entry area, considerable soil contamination
was discovered both during a tank removal
process and preparation of the pad for the
control facility. A total of 410 tons of soil
are currently scheduled to be removed due
to a contamination of the pesticide
toxaphene. The airport continues to work
with the County hazmat team in proper
control of the contaminated soil area and
removal plans. The original estimated cost
to remove the soil was $142,000. The soil is
being managed on site and a plan will be
determined on how to phase out the
removal of the contaminated material.
 Completion of the updated Airport Master
Plan was accomplished in October 2008.
With the plan finalized, the airport will
continue to work on the next phase of
projects.
 The Airport has a future planned grant
application that would allow the Airport to
purchase 45 acres of a 90-acre parcel
adjoining the airport property to the south.
This acquisition would provide
‘encroachment protection’ to the airport
resulting from residential development and
will provide the ability to extend the
runway at a future date. New FAA
legislation has increased the potential
federal share to 95 percent. With the
state’s match, the Airport’s share of this
project is reduced to 2.5 percent. The
remaining 45 acres will be available to the
owner to market to new business. A
navigation easement will be developed for
this area to limit height and the types of
projects that can be developed in
compliance with the Airport’s land use plan.
The lot split has already been completed.
 The Master Plan preparation has
determined the need to consider
purchasing two additional 45-acre parcels
just east of the 90-acre parcel (above) that
will be in the path of the proposed 1,000 ft
main runway extension approach. These
funds are being reserved from the prior
year land sales to accomplish any grant match requirement for this purchase. This
project has been added to the Airport’s
Capital Improvement Plan for grant
consideration after the initial 90 acres are
purchased.
 The Airport will continue to maintain a close
review of the airport’s cash flow and make
every effort to develop new airport revenue
streams to maintain self-sufficiency.
Develop implementation plan for
necessary ADA improvements to all
County facilities resulting from CASp
Consultant’s analysis from the previous
year.
 Complete upgrade AC units for MDF
room at Packard facility (started
2015/16).
 Install new automatic door at Child
Welfare Services lobby.
 Install new monitors in HHSD lobby.
 Replace 2nd aged condenser water
pump in basement boiler room,
Courthouse.
 Assist in remodeling of new Yuba Street
Sheriff facility.
 Install drinking fountain in the Child
Welfare Services lobby.
 Develop comprehensive tree
maintenance plan to ensure safety of
public and employees.
 Participate/support development of 
eminent threat procedures in all county
facilities.
 Continue to study carpet replacement,
Government Center.
 Continue to support our customers and
complete work orders in a timely
manner.
 Try to focus more attention on
preventative and planned maintenance
rather than reactive maintenance.
 Develop long term plan to bring all
county facilities in compliance with the
California ADA requirements.
The Custodial Services Division’s biggest
challenge is to continue to provide acceptable
services with our limited staffing levels. We
have fewer positions from previous years but
support more space than ever before. Having
said that, it will continue to be the objective of
the custodial staff to provide the best possible
housekeeping services to the County with the
staffing levels we are allocated. Through a
teamwork approach working with one another
we can achieve a great deal. Our main
objective is to keep all County facilities looking
new, presentable, sanitary, safe, and to
preserve our structures from wear and tear in
the best way we can.

 We request consideration of our
request for additional custodial staff.
 Begin an assessment of whether we
should charge Office of Ed for Custodial
Services
Sheriff Tenant Improvement
In late 2015/16 the County had to
terminate its General Contractor on this
project. Our focus for the new fiscal year is
to resolve the open issues with the Surety
guaranteeing the GC’s work and to see the
project through to completion. We
currently anticipate construction to be
completed in late summer / early fall 2016.
 Tri-County Juvenile Hall
For the coming fiscal year, our goal is to
facilitate the development and release of an
RFQ to select the top Design / Build firms,
short list them, conduct a design
competition, and to award the work to the
top selected firm. We then anticipate
beginning the development process of
design and construction.
 Jail Expansion
The jail expansion will have fewer State
review ‘hurdles’ to get through, so we
anticipate establishing the project in August
and beginning the selection process of a
design/build firm shortly thereafter.
 ADA Evaluation
2016/17 will begin with the County
conducting an analysis of the ADA reviews
recently completed this past year, and
developing a plan as to how we will address
the many requirements given our limited
resources. We also anticipate presenting
the findings to the Board.

We have no anticipated policy issues.
We are anticipating how the adoption of SB762
will affect us; this was new legislation where we
were able to add Yuba County to a list of large
counties (Alameda, Los Angeles, Riverside, San
Bernardino, San Diego, Solano, and Yuba) to
allow us to procure construction using best
value instead of strictly lowest cost. Its complex
and there are strings, but we’re hoping to avoid
past challenges.
Maintain airport field lighting, vegetation
control and paved surfaces in order to
assure a safe operational environment for
the flying public
 Conduct regular T-hangar inspections and
conduct an annual review of all tenant files
 All other goals listed under the airport’s
main budget unit also apply

The State budget has not placed any hold on
State Division of Aeronautics annual funding to
airports. However, these funds will not be used
until there is the assurance of receipt.
Pursuing revenue sources that would
benefit the Department and the County,
while focusing on maintaining expenditures
at a minimum.
 Pursue a grant opportunity through CDFA
for a noxious weed detection program in
the mountainous areas of the county.
 Coordinate with Sutter and Nevada county
weights and measures officials to identify all
the specifications needed before the open
bidding process takes place to replace the
shared Heavy Capacity Truck.
 Work with all Federal State and Local
emergency agencies and departments to
best position Yuba County Agriculture to
become eligible for all drought relief that
will become available through the various
programs as the ongoing devastating
drought continues.
 Maintain an active role with the Technology
Advisory Committee (TAC) and the
California Commissioner and Sealers
Association (CACASA) in the development of
the CALPEATS pesticide inspection program.
 Continue to incorporate the new evolving
statewide permit system (CalAgPermits).
This will require working with the
development company, Department of
Pesticide Regulation, industry, growers,
Yuba County I.T. as well as other counties.
 Provide training resources to staff as we
continue implementation of the
CalAgPermits program to encourage “online
reporting” with the regulated industry
and growers.
 Work with Yuba Sutter Farm Bureau, Farm
Services Agency, and Resource
Conservation District on agricultural related
issues that have the potential to affect Yuba
County with drought effects being the
primary issue of concern.
 Make all necessary adjustments to the
department workload to assure as many
Agricultural Phytosanitary exports take
place as possible, to help keep Yuba County
exporters competitive worldwide.
 Assure all our Licensed Biologists maintain
their qualifications as a United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) ACO
exporter accreditation.
 Continue working through CACASA to
negotiate increased funding through the
unclaimed gas tax distribution and the
Pesticide Mill Assessment.
 Administer the remaining Federal Forestry
Reserve Payment (HR 2389) Title III funds to
implement programs approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
 Continue working with area growers to
address agriculturally related water quality
issues and to represent Yuba County on the
Sacramento River Water Quality and the
Butte-Sutter-Yuba Sub-watershed
Coalitions.
 Serve as a resource to Board of Supervisors
and the Planning Department during the
updating of the County’s policies as per the
General Plan, County Use Permits (CUP) and
participate in various committees as
requested by the Board or County
Administrator.
 Secure additional funding through the Yuba
Sutter WMA, CDFA and private sources for
Hydrilla eradication project as well as
compete for statewide supplemental
funding for same.
Walnut theft in Yuba County continues to
be a problem to walnut growers and
processors. The department in conjunction
with YS Farm Bureau, walnut industry and
the Yuba County Sheriff will review the
current “Walnut Theft Ordinance” to see if
any amendments are needed.
 The Department continues to provide
resources for facilitation of the Fish and
Game Advisory Commission. Should the
department continue in this capacity,
funding resources should be considered.
 The Agricultural Commissioner is working
with the Planning Department on providing
land use recommendations adjacent to
agriculture operations. Potential
agricultural buffers may be an issue that will
need to be addressed by the Board of
Supervisors.
 Provide training and resources for new
biologist who will start working in late
spring for the department.
 The “Fire Safe Coordinator” agreement will
end June 30th, 2015. The Board of
Supervisors will need to make a decision as
to whether “county funds” should be used
to extend the program for fiscal year
2016/17 or allow the “Fire Safe
Coordinator” position to end.
 USDA Wildlife Services Specialist (County
Trapper) provides for non-domestic animal
damage control including education and
outreach. It is recommended the Board of
Supervisors consider this program’s priority
during the budget process.
Provide for Junior Pheasant Hunt in late
October/ early November pending state
decision and funding
 Utilize YCWA grant funds for Frank Allen
Fishing Event
 Fair Booth promoting Yuba County Fish and
Game Commission and Yuba County Water
Agency
 Continue Boat Safety Day at Bullard’s Bar
 Continue participation in the annual River
Cleanup Day
Complete Fish and Game Advisory
Commission bylaw process with Board of
Supervisors approval
 Expand activities pending additional funding

 Seek Brown Act training for Fish and Game
Commissioners
Recruit and fill a new Real Property
Appraiser III position effective July
2016. This position will, if approved,
replace a previous Appraiser III position
that had been lost to budget cuts in
2009.
 Continue to examine and adjust the
assessed values of approximately 5,500
properties currently assessed under the
provisions of Proposition 8.
 Fairly and accurately assess all taxable
properties in the county.
 Produce a quality assessment roll at the
most economical cost.
 Provide information and access to the
public.

Real estate values are expected to increase
through 2016. Assessor staff will be pressed to
timely reassess approximately 5,500 properties
that have had their assessments temporarily
reduced under the provisions of Proposition 8.
In this year’s budget we are requesting one
additional appraiser position. If granted,
overtime charges and extra-help costs will be
discontinued.
Filling the appraiser position will relieve our
auditor-appraiser of her real property workload,
allowing her to focus fulltime on business
property assessments. We would then be
positioned to re-establish the non-mandatory
audit program that was suspended in 2011; and
as recommended by the State Board of
Equalization in their 2015 survey of our office
procedures, we would be able to conduct field
checks on businesses where owners do not
comply with annual filing requirements of the
Business Property Statements. Additionally, we
anticipate that with the new position we will be
able to complete the assessment of all property
without the need for a thirty-day roll extension.
As staff restores assessments that were
temporarily reduced and as we begin
reinstatement of the non-mandatory audit
program, General Fund revenues will increase.
It is in the County’s best financial interest to
adequately fund the assessor to maximize
revenue to the General Fund.
The major objective of the Auditor-Controller’s
Office for 2016-17 is the implementation of an
improved payroll and timekeeping system. This
projects stands to benefit all departments
County-wide by reducing the time spent
processing payroll.

The Auditor-Controller’s Office continues to
work to propose and adopt official policies and
procedures to standardize accounting practices
throughout the County.
Consider refinement of countywide policies
related to financial management and
administration.
 Oversee final completion of the new
Sheriff’s Facility.
 Oversee construction of new Tri-County
Juvenile Rehabilitation Facility.
 Oversee County Jail expansion .
 Continue to invest in technology to allow
for greater efficiencies.
 Continue to consider policies and action
that address homelessness in Yuba County
and within the region.
 Promote the Economic Development
Strategic Plan created by the Board of
Supervisors and the Economic Development
Advisory Committee.

 Monitor and address budget issues related
to health insurance and pension costs
increases.
 Monitor enforcement of marijuana
cultivation ordinance.
 Continue to advocate for repayment of inlieu
property taxes owed the County by the
State of California.
 Advocate for funding for local road
maintenance.
 Monitor legislation and advocate for fewer
state mandates that result in a reduction of
services to county residents.
Continue meeting the various needs of
customers in the current economic
environment to ensure that families served by
the Yuba County Department of Child Support
Services meet the financial and medical needs
of their children.
Continue to improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of program performance so that
the children and families served by the
department benefit.
Continue to operate as cost effectively as
possible despite increased costs.
The foundation of performance improvement
efforts continues to be Early Intervention. The
objective of the Early Intervention focus is to increase collections through increased
customer contact, outreach, and education
early in the life of a case. The desire is that this
will increase the collection of support with
consistent and reliable payments and prevent
and reduce arrears while enhancing customer
service by engaging the customer early in the
child support process. Welcome appointments
and multiple phone calls throughout the
process are initiated by the department to
inform the customer of the next steps and
processes. The staff is directed to be a proactive
participant on assigned cases.
Pending Issues/Policy Considerations
FY 2016-2017
YCDCSS has seen a decrease in the number of
cases due to a change in State policy that
excludes Medical Needy Only (MNO) cases from
being referred from Health and Human
Services. Consequently, the department needs
to perform outreach to those customers as well
as the Non IV-D caseload to maintain our
caseload counts and collections.
Collections of support remain a constant
challenge across the state. As the economy
improves slightly, collections improve similarly.
Cost Effectiveness compares the total amount
of distributed collections to the total amount of
expenditures for the fiscal year, expressed as a
dollar amount. With reduced collections and
increased expenses annually, this performance
measure has been a challenge. In order to
improve Cost Effectiveness the department has
attempted to reduced expenses resulting in
unspent allocation. Additional reductions to
spending could jeopardize the amount of State
and Federal funding that could be received in
the future.
This budget is essentially a status quo budget
request; the final state allocation letter will not
be received until the governor signs the budget.
YCDCSS expects to receive a level of funding
similar to the flat level that we have received in
prior years. Although the allocation remains
constant, increased costs have an effect over
time of reducing funding for the program. The
Department has relied upon attrition for cost
savings in order to absorb increases in the past.
While we anticipate being able to continue to
provide essential services this fiscal year, future
changes may be required. FY 15/16 allocations
are being used to prepare this budget. Below is
how the department proposes to use the
allocated funds.
Implement document imaging retrieval on
County website for database of Board
minutes, resolutions, ordinances, and
agendas
• Provide training for departments on agenda
and committee submittal requirements
• Facilitate a Brown Act and Public Records
Act training for Boards, Commissions, and
Committees
• Develop informational handout for Board
appointed representatives regarding
general roles and responsibilities
• Continue updating office and agenda
procedures due to changes or upgrade in
system
• Continue ascertaining opportunities to
streamline operations for costs and time
savings

Migration to the new agenda management
program was completed; the system is still not
stable with ongoing concerns and unresolved
issues. Funding for a reliable program is
needed.
Complete cross training of all staff members in
the major components of the different division
functions of the Clerk/Recorder/Registrar of
Voters divisions.
Continue ongoing staff and managerial training
to comply with changing legislation in order to
maintain the high level of service and
operations to the citizens of Yuba County.
Implement election day registration and
other legislative changes.
 Evaluate the feasibility of producing
language specific election materials for
mandate languages.
 Evaluate prospective polling sites for
compliance with accessibility requirements.
Implementation of the VoteCal system will
trigger procedural changes to include
election day registration.
 Possible changes to voting system approval
processes may impact the county by making
updates to existing systems or new systems
available. Current election equipment and
systems are aging but there are no viable
options to update or replace components
since 2007 when changes to the voting
system recertification process severely
restricted the approval process and use
procedures.
 A significant increase in the number of
statewide initiatives qualifying for the
November 2016 ballot may have significant
impacts to costs and processes. It is
anticipated as many as 21 initiatives may
qualify for the November 2016 ballot.
Facilitate business process updates to
provide more web services to our
customers. A whole host of web based
services are envisioned across the CDSA
Departments. These include enabling the
public to find out more information about a
particular property’s zoning or past building
permits, applying for a building permit,
scheduling an inspection on a building
permit, and so on. This will give the public
the option to use the web to do business
with us instead of having to do business in
person.
 Work on short and long term funding
solutions for Public Works to resolve the
fuel tax funding shortfalls.
 Continue to reshape the management
structure of CDSA to optimize resources and
maximize efficiencies.

CDSA contains nearly all of the County’s land
use regulatory departments in one Agency. This
is a purposeful arrangement to ensure better
coordination of land use related issues. Each of
the Agency’s departments is tasked with various
regulations outside the County’s control, such
as the building code, CEQA, state map act, food
code, etc. that the County is required to
conform to and/or regulate to. The Agency
attempts to take these various state and federal
regulations and implement them through
County ordinances that is consistent with and
conform to the Board’s adopted vision and
strategic priorities. The comprehensive update
of the County’s land use regulations contained
in the Development Code is a great example of
trying to balance local direction with state and
federal regulatory constraints through the
update of the County’s land use ordinances.
The Planning Department is responsible for
maintenance and implementation of the Yuba
County General Plan and Specific Plans. These
plans and their goals and guidelines are the
constitution for all development within the
County and are applied to all issues concerning
economic development, historic preservation, public health & safety, housing, preservation of
natural resources, and overall quality of life for
our residents.
With the recent completion of the Development
Code Update and Zoning Map, the Planning
Department intends to continuously monitor
the implementation to these documents,
documenting any issues and making
recommendations to the Board for any required
amendments.
Other goals and objectives include:
 Continue to evaluate and improve internal
processes to increase efficiency.
 Continue coordination with the Yuba
County Economic Development Corporation
to attract businesses to our area and assist
with the permitting process.
 Continue to provide additional internal and
external training for staff.

We are experiencing an increase in building
permit and current planning development
applications. In addition to completing the
projects listed above, there are several action
items in the 2030 General Plan that Planning
will need to begin implementing. The Board has
also identified several strategic priorities that
will directly involve Planning. Therefore, one of
the biggest challenges facing the Planning
Department in 2016-2017 will be adequate
staffing for current and future demands. Due to
the cyclical nature of development activity, we
will be exploring the use of limited term, extra
help, interns, and/or CalWORKs to augment
staffing needs.
Provide continued quality customer service
to the general public as well as the
development community
 Provide continuing education to employees
as mandated by the State law and prepare
for Title 24 Code changes
 Pursue re-prioritization of cases to unsure
that core public nuisance caseload is
addressed
 Pursue streamlining of permit and
inspection processes to improve efficiencies
and customer service
 Prepare new ordinances and/or
amendments to address
homelessness/camping
With the retirement of the long tenured
Chief Building Official in FY 15/16, the
building services functions are being
evaluated to ensure opportunities for
improvement are not missed during this
transitional period.
Complete review of all CDBG Loans for
compliance with loan terms.
 Enforce terms of loans that are out of
compliance, and try to find workable
solutions, including restructuring and
assumptions, but with the understanding
that some cases resolution may require
foreclosure and resale of the property.
Due to the elimination of the Housing Division,
the CDBG program is currently being
administered by CDSA Finance and Admin
Division through an extra help employee with a
background in banking, title, and escrow.
HUD continues to make changes to the CDBG
program, many of which have been retroactive
and resulting in additional administrative work.
The County will have an on-going responsibility
to manage the loans already issued.
Administrative responsibilities for reporting and
loan administration may exceed funds from
HUD that are eligible to cover these costs.
Therefore CDSA is evaluating past loan
management practices as well as the programs
that are available under the CDBG program to
determine which activities are most beneficial
to Yuba County and the most economical way
to administer existing loans and reporting
requirements.
Complete closeout of the program and remit
remaining funds to Housing and Community
Development. The program was created by the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act and
was implemented to combat the negative
effects of the recession on the housing market.
The deadline has passed to start rehabilitation
on additional homes, so funds received from
sale of the final homes will need to be remitted.
Continue to define and assist businesses in
Yuba County that are required to comply
with programs administered by the
Environmental Health Department.
 Provide assistance to underground storage
tank (UST) facilities and maintain inspection
activities for UST facilities.
 Continue to implement AB2286
requirements to transfer inspection and
enforcement data to the California
Environmental Reporting System (CERS).
 Implement electronic posting of food
inspections to the Yuba County website.
 Improve the review process for land use
projects that have a potential to create
future expansion problems in the septic and
well use areas.
 Electronically upload all septic applications,
as-builts, and permits to the Environmental
Health database to improve efficiency in
providing this information to the public.
 Prepare to implement, no later than May
13, 2018, the SWRCB approved Local
Agency Management Plan (LAMP) for the
siting, design, operation, maintenance and
monitoring of OWTSs as required by AB885.
 AB885 requires establishment of a local
ordinance for the siting, design, operation
and maintenance of OWTSs. In addition
this legislation also requires annual
reporting of new systems, repairs, system
failures, and associated drinking wells.
Policies and procedures will need to be
developed and implemented to meet this
new reporting requirement.
 The Environmental Health Department and
the Public Health Department share
numerous public health and safety
programs. Development of a Memorandum
of Understanding (MOU) with the Public
Health Department to establish clear lines
of communication and delineate specific
responsibilities will ensure efficient and
consistent administration of these
programs.
 The Environmental Health Department
continues to manage the challenge of static
or shrinking grant funding with increasing
overhead costs. The Department is
committed to seeking available revenue to
cover unfunded mandates.
Construct Olivehurst Avenue complete
streets project between 7th Ave and
McGowan Parkway.
 Construct extension of Goldfields Parkway
from the Orchards Subdivision to N. Beale
Road.
 Construct N. Beale Road complete streets
project between Lindhurst Ave and
Hammonton-Smartsville Road.
 Continue additional phases of Hammonton-
Smartsville Road shoulder widening safety
projects.
 Construct bridge replacement of Scales
Road Bridge at Slate Creek.
 Begin construction of bridge replacement
on New York House Road at Dry Creek.
 Rehabilitate covered bridge on Alleghany
Road at Oregon Creek.

 We continue to have an approximate 1/3
decline in gas tax revenues, creating a
revenue shortfall not seen in recent
decades. The budget as proposed relies
heavily on “one-time” revenues, which is
not sustainable. Ultimately, a gas tax fix or
alternative funding source is needed to
adequately fund Public Works. The gas tax
decline is attributable to the following
factors: gas taxes have not kept pace with
inflation: gas prices have declined; cars
utilize less gas with increased efficiencies;
and the number of electric vehicles has
increased over time. We will need to
continue to explore options for generating
new transportation revenues, both
statewide and locally.
Streamline processing of LLAs and COCs to
improve efficiency and expedite project
approvals for applicants.
Currently the majority of the CSAs have very
small assessments and are grossly underfunded
for adequate maintenance to be performed.
We are embarking on a process to review all
assessment levels against the cost to provide
needed services. Staff will then pursue
Proposition 218 processes for those CSAs that
are underfunded to see if property owners are
willing to increase their assessments to receive
higher levels of service.
We will continue efforts addressing local
drainage problem areas, however, we do not
anticipate capital funding for storm drain
improvements over the coming fiscal year. We
will also continue with floodplain management
efforts at a high enough level to maintain a CRS
rating of 6, continuing to save property owners
money on flood insurance.
Our primary goal over the next several years
will be to increase storm water quality
protection efforts to successfully implement
and adhere to the requirements of the State’s
new Phase II Small MS4 General Permit. The
requirements of the new General Permit are
onerous and failure to comply can bring large
fines. Our attention this coming year will be
focused on the General Permit requirements.
Some of the more important components
include:
 Establishing an Enforcement Response Plan;
 Conducting a public survey to gauge public
awareness and effectiveness of education
activities;
 Developing and distributing education
materials for construction site operators;
 Conducting staff training;
 Conducting water quality sampling at
priority outfall areas;
 Conducting facility assessments;
 Inspecting the storm drain system;
 Assessing operations and maintenance
activities;
 Inventorying and inspecting all structural
post-construction Best Management
Practices; and
 Implementing Hydromodification measures
into drainage designs.
Going forward, the workload associated with
the General Permit compliance will require
continued financial support. This workload will
require maintaining the water resources
engineer position, with some supplemental
consultant services.

Continue implementing the much more
stringent Phase II Small MS4 General Permit,
and the terms of this unfunded mandate.
Continue to work toward resolution of the fuel
tax funding shortfall, which has exacerbated the
funding shortfall associated with drainage
facilities.

Pursue grant funding opportunities for
further improvements to County parks.
 Further forge the collaboration with the
Tsi-Akim tribe to expand educational
opportunities regarding local cultural
heritage.
 Evaluate camp reservation vendors so that
patrons can perform online reservations
and credit card payments, which should
increase use of the campground and
associated revenues.
 Pursue an affordable solution to connect
Hammon Grove to Sycamore ranch via
portable floating walkway across Dry Creek.

Strive to make Sycamore Ranch self-supporting
by increasing revenues (through increased
patronage) and decreasing maintenance costs.
Public Works is working with Caltrans on a
future improvement project that includes the
addition of a turn pocket at the Sycamore
Ranch entrance, as well as a dedicated bike and
pedestrian path attached to a new Highway 20
Bridge that crosses Dry Creek, thereby
connecting Sycamore Ranch and Hammon
Grove. Caltrans project is many years away,
however the scope of the project is being
established in the near term.
PUBLIC SAFETY AND HEALTH
 Continue to support and participate with
the Health Officer in developing countywide
health initiative programs and complete the
accreditation process.
 Work to achieve stable public road funding
options and examine current and potential
funding sources.
 Oversee successful completion of the new
Sheriff’s Facility.
 Oversee and continue to coordinate the
new three county Joint Powers Authority
for Juvenile Hall and construction of the
new facility.
 Continue to work with our team to
remediate areas of public nuisance and the
dumping of waste in our public waterways.
 Continue to lead the countywide and
regional efforts on providing solutions for
homelessness by working with non-profits,
faith based communities and local
governments.
RESPONSIBLE GROWTH
 Further our efforts to find funding and
construct affordable housing.
 Work closely with Community Development
& Services Agency, the Board and
Legislative Affairs Coordinator to monitor
and support efforts to provide a sustainable
level of funding for local road repair and
enhancements.
ORGANIZATIONAL EXCELLENCE
 Re-evaluate financial policies relating to
reserves and capital funds and introduce a
new reserve for economic uncertainties.
 Review and revise existing administrative
policies.
 As our organization does year after year,
continue a theme of departments
collaborating with each other on numerous
initiatives and enhancing services to our
communities.
 Complete and deliver a workforce planning
report to the Board of Supervisors
department heads, management team and
represented employees that will assist in
guiding efforts for employee development,
recruitment and retention.
 Continue providing our development and
well-being programs for our employees
(Yuba County Academy, Employee
Wellness, restart of the Supervisors
Development Program and Executive
Leadership Program).
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
 Finalize the Economic Development
Strategic plan created by the Board of
Supervisors, Economic Development
Advisory Committee and the County
Leadership Team.
 Work to complete the airport runway
project grant and implement
improvements.
 Continue to invest in our infrastructure for
readiness of economic development as
residential growth continues.
 Continue efforts to host representatives
and business leaders from the Sacramento
Region to discuss economic development
activities.

 Continuing to monitor transportation
funding efforts by the State of California
and examine local options.
 Staff allocations for the County
Administrator’s Office continue to remain
lower than late 1990’s staffing levels. Due
to lack of funding it is anticipated that no
additional staff will be added to the office.
Core staff consists of the County
Administrator and Deputy County
Administrator. The professional services
budget that allows the County
Administrator to undertake special studies
and analysis as required is woefully
inadequate. The lack of available funding
continues to impact the ability of the
Board’s key policy office to plan for the
organization, address community needs,
and undertake new initiatives.
FOSTER BUSINESS RETENTION AND
GROWTH
Infrastructure Enhancement
 Collaborate with local agencies to address
infrastructure needs for business expansion
and growth, as well as addressing aging
infrastructure issues
 Investigate infrastructure financing models
 Seek external infrastructure financing
sources
Business Incentives
 Promote business incentives for new and
existing businesses
Industry Diversification
 Create and attract new businesses that
support or augment the agriculture industry
 Partner with Beale Air Force Base to develop
and grow technology-based industries
 Continue regional and local partnerships
with agencies promoting economic
development
 Enhance tourism efforts
 Exploit our natural resources while
promoting environmental stewardship and
sustainability
Outreach
 Host events that recognize achievements of
local businesses and assist them in meeting
their needs
 Monitor and develop local and regional
economic data for existing and potential
businesses
 Highlight business retention efforts and
success stories through local and regional
media
 Create language barrier solutions for non-
English speaking business owners
Workforce Development
 Identify workforce needs
 Inventory workforce training and education
availabilities
 Support new business attraction and existing
business expansion
DEVELOP AN AWARD-WINNING BUSINESS
CLIMATE
Efficiencies
 Investigate the value of lead-tracking
software to better document and control
business attraction, retention, and expansion
efforts and opportunities
 Investigate contracting with a site selection
specialist to analyze the county and provide
suggestions that would assist us in becoming
more competitive in our business attraction
efforts
 Investigate further the possible annexation
of unincorporated Yuba County with existing
cities
 Allow maximum flexibility with County
regulations to encourage business growth
 Develop Business Liaison protocol to assist
businesses through their expansion or
development processes
Beautification
 Enhance signage at major county entryways
and highway corridors
 Continue blight removal
 Encourage and support more public art
CHAMPION MARKETING AND PROMOTION
Branding
 Develop a Yuba County brand that promotes
our natural resources, customer service, a
business friendly climate and public/private
partnerships
Marketing and promotion
 Develop first class marketing material to
promote Yuba County
 Expand regional, statewide, and nationwide
marketing efforts
 Develop a plan for outreach to industries of
interest that enhance and diversify the
county’s economic base
Supporting a robust business retention and
attraction program is critical to the current
and future health and financial success of
Yuba County residents and businesses
 Manufacturing jobs and related businesses
will require the commitment of new and
improved water, sewer, drainage, and
related infrastructure in the areas of the
Yuba County Airport Industrial Park and
other identified planning areas, including the
Rancho Road Corridor and Employment
Village
 YSEDC will continue to identify grant funding
for Yuba County projects promoting jobs and
providing business attraction and expansion
opportunities
 The Yuba County Water Agency’s successful
application for full operation of the Colgate
hydro-electric facility may provide future
opportunities for business incentives
Provide additional updated emergency
plans to Disaster Council and forward to
Board of Supervisors for final approval.
? Work with Yuba County Public Health to
incorporate health related plans as annexes
to the County EOP.
? Develop and provide on-going training for
EOC staff.
? Work with municipalities and districts to
further coordinate emergency management
planning.
? Work with EOC Management team
members to complete advanced EOC
training and work towards credentialing in
their assigned position per the NIMS
Training Plan.
? As a member of the YSHMRT Administrative
Group, work with the Members to help
insure the team’s long term success.
? Review and update all county emergency
plans.
? Continue the professional development of
OES staff.
? Develop secondary dispatch center / call
center.
? Hold functional exercise for EOC
Management staff
? Develop flood safety plans for the four
reclamation districts.
Conduct quarterly regional communication
drills.
? Hold table top exercises for the five SEMS
functions.

For the FY 2016/17 budget year, the emergency
service’s base and requested budget reflects an
overall increase in the total allocation due to an
increase in the number of current grants being
administered, as well as increased salary and
benefits and on-going contract costs.
Emergency services has no increase to its
general fund allocation, having absorbed all
increased costs with additional budget cuts and
one time funds from a grant through the
California Department of Water Resources. It is
likely OES will be unable to absorb increased
costs for the FY 2017/18 unless unforeseen
revenues are recognized.
Every member of the County Counsel’s
Office will strive to continue providing
competent and timely legal services to the
Board of Supervisors, County Departments,
Commissions, County Boards and Special
Districts of Yuba County.
 The child protection caseload is an absolute
priority of the office. The addition of an
attorney to handle part of that caseload will
allow better case preparation and more day
to day contact with the social workers and
greater “client satisfaction” within HHSD.
 Enforcement of County Code violations
related to marijuana cultivation has proven
to be somewhat burdensome to the Board
of Supervisors in terms of time and effort
spent in abatement and cost accounting
hearings. It is a goal of County Counsel’s
Office to work with Code Enforcement and
the Board to try to streamline the
administrative process and make it more
efficient. The office also plans on working
closely with Code Enforcement and the CAO
to try to resolve some of the County’s
burgeoning homeless issues.
Significant goals for FY 15/16 include:
 Continuing the comprehensive training
to two new prosecutors who have
recently completed their first year of
service in the office.
 Complete an update of the Office Policy
and Procedures manual.
 Create a new web presence for the
office.
 Participate in a bi-county law
enforcement policy review and protocol
development regarding the anticipated
use of body cameras.

 The potential voter approval of the
Governor’s “Public Safety and
Rehabilitation Act of 2016,” which
would significantly impact felony
sentencing outcomes and the early
release of State’s Prison inmates.
 The transition of the Yuba County
Superior Court from the current
integrated SunGard data management
system to an independent system will
present data transfer challenges to this
Office, the Sheriff’s Office, and the
Probation Department.
 The current case management system is
functionally competent but outdated
and no longer effectively supported by
the vendor. A new system needs to be
reviewed and an acquisition plan
developed.
Increase provider participation in the
obesity prevention partnership.
 Target 3 outdoor non-recreational public
areas to adopt a comprehensive tobacco
free policy, which includes Electronic
Nicotine Delivery Device products.
 Encourage future gaming resort in
Wheatland to adopt a 100% tobacco/smoke
free gaming policy.
 Initiate a Community Health Assessment
and prepare the Community Health
Improvement Plan.
 Transition Vital Statistics to meet the
additional 2,000 births expected with the
opening of the new wing at Rideout
Memorial Hospital.
 Implement “Help Me Grow” in cooperation
with First 5 Yuba.
 Implement an evidence based home visiting
program for the MCAH program.
 Improve the existing data collection and
quality improvement processes.

 Pending tobacco legislation would define
and regulate e-cigarettes and other
vaporized liquids as tobacco products and
subjects them to the STAKE Act and other
tobacco governing rules.
 Whole Person Care Pilot projects will be
implemented in the coming year. If
successful, these pilot programs will expand
state wide, changing the way health care is
delivered to special populations including
California Children’s Care.
Administration and Finance
Work with County Departments on:
 Packard Facility Painting Project.
 Expansion of new workstations.
 Installation of a water fountain in CWS
lobby.
 Complete implementation of the
Catapult Emergency Management
System and facilitate emergency drills.
 WIN-CAMS Timekeeping/Payroll
Tracking Project.
Adult Services
 Continue implementing the IHSS
requirements of the FLSA as they are
disseminated into the next fiscal year.
Implement Safety Organized Practice
model. The model promotes safety by
working with families and victims of
neglect or abuse to focus on plans for
safety.
 Adult Services will begin electronically
scanning client and service provider
files. This will reduce and eventually
eliminate the need to store bulky paper
files for several years. It will also allow
for information to be accessible in a
more efficient manner.
Child Welfare Services
 Implement a Wraparound Program to
transition children from group homes
into foster family homes.
 Increase the number of county licensed
foster homes through recruitment and
outreach.
 Continue to implement and monitor
strategies outlined in the County
System Improvement Plan. This will
entail continually assessing business
practices, services, and systemic factors
to improve outcomes for the children
and families of Yuba County.
 Establish a Continuous Quality
Improvement (CQI) process to evaluate
processes and measure performance
based upon established state and
federal outcome measures.
 Implement new Resource Family
Approval (RFA) mandates.
Employment Services
 Continue to increase our Work
Participation Rate through training,
innovation, and incentives that are
currently being successfully utilized in
other counties.
 Strengthen and improve our Housing
Support Program (HSP) to provide
permanent housing to homeless
CalWORKs families. Expand existing
partnership with Salvation Army to
increase the number of individuals
served and strengthen collaboration
with the Continuum of Care.
 Conduct community outreach to
identify homeless individuals and
connect them with programs
administered by Health and Human
Services. In addition, provide services
to individuals at an offsite location.
 Hire additional staff to concentrate on
developing and overseeing homeless
initiatives.
 Continue expanding the Subsidized
Employment (ESE) program which
launched in February 2014.
Public Assistance
 Assist customers with new and existing
technology available including online
applications via the C4Yourself system.
Promote and provide customer
assistance with the forthcoming C-IV
mobile app, allowing for interactive
case management and remote
document upload.
 Enhance staff program knowledge by
conducting weekly meetings to provide
updates and changes to the various
programs administered by eligibility
staff.
 Continue to work toward improving and
expanding public interaction by
providing outreach in the community.
 Conduct community outreach to
identify homeless individuals and
connect them with programs
administered by Health and Human
Services. In addition, provide services
to individuals at an offsite location.
 Continue to improve the lobby
experience for customers by enhancing
the current dynamic digital signage and
implementing new automation for
scheduled appointments.
Adult Services
 Potential MSSP program increase. State
Budget includes potential increased
funding to support the growing number
of eligible recipients if passed into law.
Child Welfare Services
 The Child Welfare Services (CWS) local
trends show an increase in caseloads.
This translates into increased court
reports, home visits and services to
families.
 New state and federal mandates for
CWS. These include:
 New Continuous Quality
Improvement (CQI) process
 Resource Family Approval
(RFA), which is designed to
increase the stability of foster
homes, relative and non-related
caregivers for improved out of
home placement and expedited
permanency when needed.
 Close Federal and State monitoring of
periodic visits to foster homes by Social
Workers.
Employment
 AB 1742 repeals the 48 months clock
and returns it to 60 months. It would
instead provide that a parent or
caretaker relative shall not be eligible
for CalWORKs when the adult has
received aid for a cumulative total of 60
months. This bill would increase the
amount of exempted disability-based
unearned income and other earned
income
Public Assistance
 Senate Bill 75, Full Scope Medi-Cal for
All Children, provides full coverage
medical benefits to minors that were
previously eligible to restricted benefits
only.
 The change reporting requirement for
certain CalFresh households will be
transitioned to Semi-Annual Reporting
(SAR).
 Telephonic signatures are proposed for
the CalFresh program. This allows
applications, interviews, and all forms
to be completed entirely over the
telephone, increasing access and
enrollment for the CalFresh program.
Complete migration from locally stored
electronic records to web-based storage
within Vet-Pro database management
system.
 Continue outreach to veterans and their
family members by expanding the Veteran
Service Satellite Office in the Yuba City VA
Clinic from 2 to 5 days a week and to establish a Satellite office within the local
community college.
 Process overall VA Claim/Case
Management.
 Advise on ways to obtain Maximum
benefits.
 Review Service Medical Records / VA Claim
Folder.
 Identify & help correct errors in past VA
decisions.
 Advise Veterans on All Available Benefits;
Federal, State, County, Service
Organizations.
 Administer College Fee Waiver Program.

 CalVet’s recent update to the state
subvention manual mandated use of Vet-
Pro to produce all VA claim forms and
document all results by scanning VA
decisions and claim documents into this
system. The Vet-Pro system has been in
use to produce VA claim forms since
January 2012. The new requirement is to
scan all documents related to a claim into
Vet-Pro starting July 2016. This new
mandate will increase Veteran Service
Office workload.
 Increased clients from Beale AFB. Current
outreach efforts to Beale AFB have
generated a large increase (6 to 10 per
week). These new clients require a review
of their service medical records prior to
filing a VA claim.
 The cost of doing business has steadily
grown and workload demands are
consistently increasing.
Adult Services will continue implementing
the IHSS requirements of the FLSA as they
are disseminated into the next fiscal year.
 Adult Services will begin electronically
maintaining service provider files to reduce
and eventually eliminate the need to store
bulky paper files for several years and
improve the accessibility of records.

 The MSSP program is preparing for a
possible increase from its 52 recipients as
the State Budget includes a potential return
to previous funding levels that could
support the growing number of eligible
recipients, if passed into law.
The majority of the projects and objectives that
HROS focused on last year are ongoing, solely
based on the nature of the programs. We’re
implementing and maintaining best practices
and strive to be business partners with the
departments we serve.
Labor & Employee Relations
The County’s contracts with the Yuba County
Employees Association (YCEA) and the Deputy
District Attorney Association (DDAA) both
expire in June 2017. Our ongoing goal is to
continue to have productive contract
negotiations with these groups while preserving
the financial strength and fiscal responsibility of
the County.
Recruitment & Selection
We will focus on revising our Merit Resolution
based on the Title 2 Revisions, with guidance
from CalHR.
We will work with Occumed to streamline our
post-offer medical review process.
We will continue to focus on the responsible
use of social networking sites such as LinkedIn
and Facebook for recruitment purposes.
Training & Organizational Development
Using the results of the attrition data and
organizational assessment performed in the
15/16 Fiscal Year, we will work with the
Organizational Excellence Committee to focus
on succession planning and other action items
outlined in the assessment.
Employee Benefits & Affordable Care Act
Compliance
Although the Cadillac Tax was delayed until
2020, it continues to be a serious cause for
concern and our department is focusing on
education and mitigation efforts.
With 1095 forms being given to employees and
routed electronically to the IRS in June 2016,
the next Affordable Care Act (ACA) compliance
hurdle employers face is managing subsidy
notifications and appeals. Because subsidies,
also referred to as Advanced Premium Tax
Credits, are the trigger for penalties, our
department will need to be prepared to handle
any notifications the Exchanges send.
Compliance with the ACA will continue to be
one of our top priorities this fiscal year.
Risk Management Programs
We will be creating a schedule for departmental
Risk & Loss Prevention Assessments to
determine where we may be able to improve
the program either through risk transfer, policy
development, training, or engineering controls.
With a focus on departments with adverse loss
development, we plan to review losses with
departments and discuss trends that have been
identified from historical data.
Our department has done some research on
successful loss prevention efforts for law
enforcement and plans to work with the
Sheriff’s Department on piloting or
implementing some of the concepts that have
been successful for other jurisdictions in
lowering their loss experience.
We continue to look at creative and cost
effective ways to insure upcoming capital
improvement projects.
HRIS Implementation
We will continue with the phased
implementation of CAMS this fiscal year. With
some of the critical reporting deadlines for
compliance with Affordable Care Act behind us,
we will be able to focus on the next phases of
our CAMS implementation. We are currently
using some redundant processes to audit
calculations and reports in the new system and
eagerly anticipate being able to eliminate many
of the duplicate processes this fiscal year.
As we complete phases of CAMS project, we
will need to develop and deliver countywide
departmental training and written procedures
on the use of the program and the related
work-flow processes.
Metrics
We will continue to build strong metrics on data
housed in CAMS which will allow us to be more
proactive in assessing countywide trends and
benchmarks for the programs we manage.
The IT Department needs to continue
expanding to meet the increasing needs for
automation across the county.
Specific initiatives and projects follow.
Cloud Services
 Complete secure connection to
Microsoft Government Cloud
 Migrate email services to Government
Cloud
 Implement cloud-based storage for
data back-ups
 Evaluate the possibility of cloud-based
disaster recovery
Modernize legacy systems
 Evaluate updated Public Safety and
Public Administration systems
 Work on upgrading county web
presence and content management
Look for cost reductions
 Evaluate Virtual Desktop Infrastructure
(VDI) for broad use across the county
Improve Security and Compliance
 Re-start a security awareness program

While the county is actively protecting all
critical data and has contingency plans in place
for Data Center loss, there is currently no
Countywide Disaster Recovery or Business
Resumption plan. We plan to continue
evaluating the needs, alternatives, and costs for
such a plan in the upcoming year.
Complete inventory of the collection
 Continue digitalization of the California
Room historical archives to improve access
and searching capabilities of the
information.
 Prepare for the annual Summer Reading
Program (Read for the Win!)
 Continue to offer preschool programs
 Introduce ‘E-cards’ at the Library
 Update library webpage for a more ‘user
friendly’ experience
 QuestionPoint a 24/7chat forum for
reference related questions

The Library is currently operating at historically
low funding and staffing levels while also
operating in a transitional environment where access to information is transitioning from
physical materials to digital. When
opportunities arise to increase funding, the
County needs to be strategic with its
investments in the Library to ensure they are in
line with this transforming environment.
Adult Supervision
 Expand resources available at the Day
Reporting Center. Hire an Intervention
Counselor to provide Evidence Based
Programs at the Day Reporting Center and
assist with re-entry plans for high risk
offenders.
 Create new caseload for high-risk offenders.
This will reduce the size of each existing
high-risk caseload and allow for closer
supervision.
Adult Court
 Maintain extremely high quality of Court
reports generated by the Adult Court unit.
Continue to have an experienced probation
officer present in Court for all major
sentencing and provide added assistance to
the Court, as needed.
Maintain frequent communication with the
presiding Judge and the felony sentencing
Judge to ensure we are meeting the needs
of the Court and sharing information
regarding any changes, trends, or new
developments.
 Educate the Court on the advantages of
utilizing the programs at the Day Reporting
Center.
 Proposition 36 (Section 1210.1 PC)
 Continue to intensely supervise the clients
on probation pursuant to Section 1210.1 of
the Penal Code, to better provide them with
guidance and referrals to programs that will
assist with their success.
 Continue to utilize motivational
interviewing techniques in our meetings
with the clients on probation, pursuant to
Section 1210.1 of the Penal Code, to
successfully motivate them to follow
through with positive choices in their
lifestyles.
 Seek funding for residential treatment and
clean and sober living programs.
 Continue bi-weekly meetings with Yuba
County Probation Department drug
counselors.
 Continue weekly meetings with the Yuba
County 1210.1 Penal Code Probation team.
Drug Court
 Continue to secure extra funding from
Comprehensive Drug Court Implementation
grant funding for the existing Adult Drug
Court program.
 The continued expansion of the Friends of
Drug Court program through acquisition of
greater resources, so to better assist Drug
Court clients.
 Our goal is to continue to work closely with
Drug Court clients and provide services and
motivation to focus on their continued
recovery. The Drug Court team has a desire
to see a Dependency Court developed to
serve participants in the Drug Court
program with children that could be
involved with Child Protective Services.
 Adult Case Planning will be at the forefront
this upcoming year.
Collaborate with Child Welfare Services to
implement Continuum of Care Reform/AB
403.
 Collaborate with Child Welfare to
implement Wraparound services.
 Complete the Commercially Sexually
Exploited Children (CSEC) Memorandum of
Understanding with local agencies.
 Create an outpatient Drug and Alcohol
program with current Drug and Alcohol
Counselor.
 Create a voluntary Intervention/Prevention
Caseload.
Create a Family Transition Plan for youth
returning home after a Maxine Singer Youth
Guidance Center commitment.
 Increase collaboration/networking with
other local agencies to address the needs of
the community.
 Complete Probation’s portion of the Yuba
County Children’s Wellness and Child Abuse
Prevention Council Report Card.

 The reduction of Federal Title IV-E money.
 The Public Safety & Rehabilitation Act of
2016.
 Continuum of Care Reform/AB403.
 Confidentiality of Juvenile Records/AB899.
 Juvenile Record Sealing/AB989.
Employ a full time Intervention
Counselor to complete case plans and
work with stakeholders in developing
exit plans for youth leaving Juvenile Hall
and Camp Singer after a commitment
program.
 Enhance evidence based programming
for youth based on case plans.
 Enhance the Positive Behavioral
Interventions and Supports program
(PBIS) in the juvenile hall school to all
aspects of the institutions.
 Final implementation of policy,
procedures, and staffing to address the
Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA)
standards.
 Continue to develop the new Juvenile
Hall.
 Replace the insulation in Camp Singer
gym.
 Address the installation of additional
security cameras in juvenile hall

Implementation of pending Solitary
Confinement changes.
Priority will be to complete a strategic plan
as well as a business plan for Victim Services
in Yuba County.
 Explore grant possibilities, falling in line
with the counties goal to not be dependent
on “one time monies,” that allow for the
development of sustainable programs.
 Create a Violent Crime response team
incorporating Casa De Esperanza, Sutter
County Victim Witness and Yuba County
Victim Services to respond 24 hours a day/
7 days a week.
 Continue to strengthen the relationship
with Sutter County Victim Witness,
identifying existing resources each county
possesses, developing Operational
agreements to share resources and begin to
develop services that both Yuba and Sutter
County residents can access.
 Conduct quarterly briefings with all local
law enforcement to further ensure victims’
rights and identify gaps/problems
surrounding Victimization in Yuba County.
 Provide 12 community presentations
throughout Yuba County addressing
services unique to Yuba County and offered
at Victim Services.
 Work with the county Website redesign
team to update the Victim Services
webpage and add resources for victims to
access online.
 Begin application and feasibility study for
the establishment of a Child Advocacy
Center in Yuba County to have a “one stop
shop” for all child advocacy and treatment
needs.
 Upgrade and replace existing Forensic
Interview Center Equipment.
52 Week Batterer’s Program
This legislative mandated program for adult
offenders is not historically offered by staff
working concurrently in a victim witness setting.
However, as domestic violence perpetrators are
among the highest recidivists, offering this
program affords the Probation Department the
ability to provide education that can be an
agent of change, with supervision of the
perpetrator in a controlled group setting.
Services to victims of domestic violence and children witnessing the violence are served by
the Victim Witness Program.
Program Goals:
 To continue to develop an evidence
base curriculum that serves the needs
of the perpetrator in breaking the cycle
of violence.
 To protect the victim from further
harm.
 To identify child witnesses of domestic
violence and provide early intervention.
Identify additional probation staff to be trained
to become 52 Week Batterer’s Program
facilitators. This will help alleviate stress placed
on the program due to high client demand.
Secure funding through
federal/state/local resources
 Utilize affordable training
opportunities to enhance staff skill
level
 Maintain partnerships with
community organizations and
businesses
 Participate in care conferences and
complete quarterly encounters,
ensuring proper maintenance and
wellbeing of Conservatees
 Eliminate barriers to least restrictive
placement for Conservatees
 Adhere to Yuba County Strategic Plan
 Work with Multidisciplinary Team for
outreach and agency collaboration
 Attend training to meet PA/PG/PC
requirements
Develop new strategies for the use of
crime analysis.
 Complete construction on the new
Sheriff’s Department facility.
 Complete our radio communications
project.
 Work in partnership with local fire
departments and the District Attorney’s
Office to train new arson investigators.
 Expand our online reporting system to
improve its efficiency.
 Participated in the development of a
regional officer involved shooting
investigative team.
 Continue providing in-house training
which meets the POST compliant
objectives wherever possible.
CA POST training for all peace officers is
up-to-date.
 Continue to work with the Patrol and
Detective Units to develop and improve
the crime analysis unit to provide even
more timely and pertinent information
on crime trends and patterns.
 Continue with upgrading all
Department computer-related
equipment for the move from Windows
XP to Windows 7.
 Expand SWAP and AOWP programs to
encompass additional public agency
and non-profit participation so that
additional court-ordered work hours
and inmates can be involved in the
program.
 Continue training program for two
additional Forensic Recovery Evidence
Device (FRED) deputies, as well as
providing training for cell phone
evidence recovery.
 For the Crime Analysis Unit to continue
working closely with the Administration
and Operations Staff to develop as
much information and statistical data as
possible, which will help identify the
criminal element and possible methods
of operation.
 Complete training of additional forensic
evidence officers.
 Upgrade and reconfigure the FRED for
storage, allowing the technology unit 24
terabytes of storage capacity.
Prepare for a busier season with the higher
water flows.
 Present a water safety class at the OPUD
public pool opening.
 Provide water safety to the lakes and rivers
in Yuba County.
 Continue to provide water safety courses to
the public.
 Continue the training of staff to improve
technical skills.
 Participate in the national event program
“Operation Dry Water” that focuses on
boating under the influence.
 Continue the women’s boating education
classes.
Continue the safe, humane, secure, and
efficient operation of the county jail.
Continue to maximize revenues through the
rental of excess bed space.
Prepare prisoners- mentally and physically- for
successful reintegration into the community.
Zero escapes and in-custody deaths.
Continue to work with ICE for criminal alien
processing and deportation.
Maintain facility and various systems to insure
reliability, security, and efficiency.
Continue high standard of training for the
division via roll call training, monthly training
and off site training. Consider individual
officer’s training recommendation when
developing training plans.
Assess facility systems such as graphic panels
and the heating and air conditioning system, with consideration of developing a long-range
plan that addresses system upgrades.
Continue the upgrade of the facilities camera
and communication systems, which began in
2014.
Continue the development of the Correctional
Reserve program through recruiting, hiring, and
training.
Develop a space plan for the office space in the
courthouse that will be vacated by the pending
sheriff’s office move.
Develop a team to assist in the beginning
phases of building the new medical, mental
health and programming structure.
Continue to develop instructional programming
for the Jail’s television/video system that aids in
the education and development of the inmate /
detainee population.
Assess the vehicle fleet of the transportation
unit and, if necessary, develop a plan for
transitioning to the replacement vehicles.
Work with the Probation Department to
monitor the performance of the County’s Pre-
Trial Release Program.

Yuba County continues to face economic
struggles. The department will continue to
monitor and develop its alternative sentencing
and rehabilitative programs to prevent jail
overcrowding. Simultaneously, the department
is continuing to work with the Yuba County
Probation Department in operating a Pre-Trial
Release Program.
The Pre-Trial Release Program seeks to release
defendants, who meet certain criteria, prior to
trial. The program uses a system of scientific
data and a risk assessment tool to identify those
defendants who will most likely complete
program requirements, appear in court, and not
re-offend while awaiting their court
appearance.
In terms of facility improvements, the
department has begun a renovation of the jail’s
exercise yard located on the facilities roof.
Equipment has been added to the yard and new
fencing and walls are planned for 2016.
The facility will soon be in need of replacing the
graphic panels that house the controls the
deputies use to operate the facilities doors. The
current system is dated and the facility will look
to upgrade to a more modern design.
There will be continued focus on aesthetic
improvements to the facility also. Painting and
resurfacing of walls, ceilings, and floors is ongoing.
The civil unit will strive to maintain excellent
service to the public while minimizing the
turnaround service time for civil actions.

The long-time Sergeant who oversees the Civil
Unit will be retiring and due to the complex
nature of the division, there will be an effort to
ensure the successor is well trained in the
management of civil operations.
In addition, all members of the unit with direct
involvement in civil services will attend new or
updated training in civil processes.
Continue training ACS staff on animal
disaster rescue procedures.
Continue to hold periodic rabies clinics in
various areas of the County.
 Continue expansion of Animal Shelter
programs that benefit the health and wellbeing
of the animals.
 Upgrade the “get-acquainted outdoor area”
so people and animals have a place to bond.
 Examine additional roles for volunteers and
determine best guidelines.
 Examine ideas for front office security
upgrades, including a barrier for front office
staff and security cameras.
 Examine ways to expand the secure parking
lot for ACS vehicles.
 Examine ways to add more space for
horses, goats, and other animals.
 Add storage for feed and equipment.
 Review potential of vehicle mounted
computers or tablets and software which
would allow calls for service to be viewed as
well as the ability to input call disposition
from the field.
 Upgrade hand-held radios.
 Upgrade mobile radios as vehicles are
replaced.
 Review potential of additional officer and
kennel technician positions.

 ACS non-emergency and emergency calls
for service remain high. Staff to call ratio is
high.
 Shelter space/animal intake remains
extremely high and often requires creative
space management.
 The growth potential of Wheatland,
Marysville, and the County (and the animal
ownership related to that growth) is of
future concern.
 ACS dispatching of calls for service and the
post-call narratives and reports are not as
efficient as they could be and will require
advanced software, radio, and possibly
personnel to upgrade.
 The ACS software program(s) will require
enhanced County IT infrastructure if in-car
technology is planned.
 Office radios need upgrades.
 The use of Sheriff’s Work Alternative
Program participants is not as efficient as
the former YCSO Jail Trustee program and
requires more staff hours to ensure
adequate staffing.
 Office phone system needs upgrading.
 Update internal ACS manual.
