Our goals are to provide a work environment
that enables innovation and efficiency, provides
a well maintained vehicle fleet, assures a safe
and clean workplace and well cared for
facilities, and to continue to enhance our
administrative practices.
Specific projects on the horizon for the coming
year include:
 Establishment and construction of the
Tri-County Juvenile Rehabilitation
Facility,
 Transitioning of the development of a
Sheriff Office facility into the next
stages of bidding and construction,
 A thorough revision of the County’s
Purchasing and Contract Policy Manual
 Reevaluation of our building security
systems and infrastructure
 Greater purchasing ‘outreach’ to local
businesses to maximize our spend with
local merchants
Identify new revenues to maintain selfsufficiency
 Identify areas on the airport for solar farm
activities as a new revenue source and
potential energy savings for the airport and
its operators
 Continue developing a series of visual
enhancement projects to clean up the
airport properties
 Maintain hangar occupancy at 100 percent
 Research new grant programs to continue
the Airport Capital Improvement Programs
 Continue to implement security procedures
to prepare for federal requirements
applying to general aviation airports
 Create a new airport logo, new marketing
brochure, and continue design ideas as
revenues allow
 Continue to review and determine revenue
for the implementation of airport
surveillance camera systems and gate
access control systemsIn preparing the budget for FY 2011-2012,
the additional budget reductions resulted in
the General Fund participation being
eliminated in Industrial Development Fund
101-1400, with which the Administrative
Technician position was previously split 35%
Industrial and 65% Airport. This resulted in
reducing the position to 50 percent. The
position is being brought back to full time in
FY 2012-2013 with the additional 50
percent being funded from the Enterprise
Zone State Tax Credit Program. The 50
percent from the Enterprise Zone State Tax
Credit Program application fees revenue
will continue in FY 2013-2014.
 The Airport Maintenance Coordinator
position was transitioned to Administrative
Services - Buildings & Grounds in FY 2011-
2012. Costs continue to be shared for this
position between B&G and the Airport at 50
percent each. This action benefits the
Airport with both budget and labor
allocations. It will also result in greater
backup maintenance assistance when
needed across all locations.
 The FY 2011-2012 budget package included
an A-87 charge of $41,983 as opposed to
the FY 2010-11 budget with an A-87 charge
of $113,911. The airport received some
assistance from the Administrative Services
budget for FY 2010-2011 in the amount of
$50,000 to bring the Airport’s portion down
to $63,911. In this 2012-2013 budget
proposal, the airport had a significant
credit. Bouncing up and down in this
expense category makes it difficult for the
airport to budget each year. FY 2013-2014
budget instructions did not have an A-87
estimate for the Airport and could impact
the submitted budget once those estimates
are known.The Airport leases property to the County
Public Works Road Department, the
Sheriff’s Shooting Range, and County
Animal Control at rates that are significantly
lower than the market rate. According to
the Revenue Use Policy, rental of land to, or
use of land by, the County for nonaeronautical
purposes at less than fair
market value rent is considered a subsidy of
local government and is a prohibited use of
airport revenue. The current rental rates
paid by the County for these facilities are
less than .02 cents per square foot. The
Airport’s current lease rate for similar
ground property is .065 cents per square
foot.
o In fiscal year 2011-12, a new
agreement was drafted between
the Airport and the Sheriff to
compensate for land taken and
utilized by the Airport as a result of
the recent taxiway and apron
construction projects. This
agreement also resulted in a 40%
reduction of the Sheriff’s rent.
 For FY 2010-2011, Reclamation District
assessments were billed to the airport at a
total of $33,746 which reflects fees similar
to FY 2008-2009 on which the airport still
owes a balance of approximately $25,000. A
payment plan has been created to pay
these fees. During FY 2008-2009,
Reclamation District 784 assessments were
initially determined to be $52,836 and was
later reduced to $33,639, still a substantial
amount for the Airport to absorb and the
end balance of the Enterprise Fund 130 at
June 30, 2010, reflected that. The new
levee fees of approximately $9,000 going
forward will significantly assist the airport in
meeting those fees annually. It should be
noted, the Airport can only recover a small
portion of the fees charged from our
Lessees as the fees relate to the entire
property of the airport. There are a total of
3 acres of buildings with 75 acres of airfield
developed with 10 acres of road; for a total
of 13.39 percent or 88 of the 657.2 acres of
the airport developed. The remaining
properties are open space or airport safety
areas and thus RD costs must be borne by
the Airport.
 The Olivehurst Public Utility District fire
assessment fees for FY 2011-2012 were
$4,594 and a similar fee is expected for FY
2012-2013. Unlike the RD 784 and the
levee fees that are based on the entire
airport developed areas, including runways
and taxiways, the majority of the OPUD and
light district fees are recovered from the
lease tenants utilizing the property.
 The security requirements for general
aviation airports as a result of the 9-11
incident continue to be discussed by the
Federal Aviation Administration. The
airport has completed 90 percent of the
fencing requirement. A new grant will be
requested to continue the security projects.
Remaining plans include fence completion
and installation of surveillance cameras at
key points. Funding for additional gate
systems and cameras will be pursued during
this fiscal year, pending the priorities set for
the Airport Improvement Program.
 During the construction of the new airport
pollution control facility at the main hangar
entry area, considerable soil contamination
was discovered both during a tank removal
process and preparation of the pad for the
control facility. A total of 410 tons of soil
are currently scheduled to be removed due
to a contamination of the pesticide
toxephene. The airport continues to work
closely with the County hazmat team in
proper control of the contaminated soil
area and removal plans. The current
estimated cost to remove the soil is$142,000. The soil is currently being
managed on site and a plan will be
determined on how to phase out the
removal of the entire contaminated
material.
 Completion of the updated Airport Master
Plan was accomplished in October 2008.
With the plan finalized, the airport will
continue to work on the next phase of
projects. A permit will be filed with the
Corps of Engineers during FY 2013-2014 to
get started with the realignment of the
drainage channel that is currently
obstructing any further development
opportunities. It is expected to take a
minimum of 12 months for the permit
process to be completed.
 The Airport has a pending grant application
submitted to the Federal Aviation
Administration that would allow the Airport
to purchase 45 acres of a 90-acre parcel
adjoining the airport property to the south.
This acquisition would provide
‘encroachment protection’ to the airport
resulting from residential development and
will provide the ability to extend the
runway at a future date. New FAA
legislation has increased the potential
federal share to 95 percent. With the
state’s match, the Airport’s share of this
project is reduced to 2.5 percent. The
remaining 45 acres will be available to the
owner to market to new business. A
navigation easement will be developed for
this area to limit height and the types of
projects that can be developed in
compliance with the Airport’s land use plan.
The lot split has already been completed.
 The Master Plan preparation has
determined the need to consider
purchasing two additional 45-acre parcels
just east of the 90-acre parcel (above) that
will be in the path of the proposed 1,000 ft
main runway extension approach. These
funds are being reserved from the prior
year land sales to accomplish any grant
match requirement for this purchase. This
project has been added to the Airport’s
Capital Improvement Plan for grant
consideration after the initial 90 acres are
purchased.
 The Airport will continue to maintain a close
review of the airport’s cash flow and make
every effort to develop new airport revenue
streams to maintain self-sufficiency.
Continue to support our customers and
complete work orders in a timely manner.
 Try to focus more attention on preventative
and planned maintenance rather than
“putting out fires.”
 Repair roofs on Airport Flight Services
Building and control tower.
 Re-landscape front Library planter beds.
 Replace main water storage tank at Camp
Singer facility.
 Repair Animal Care Services parking lot.
 Enlarge and Improve awnings over several
entrances at Packard Avenue facility.
 Re-pour sidewalk and pedestrian approach
at Child Welfare Services entrance.
 Install new UPS in HHSD MDF room
 Repair water damage at Camp Singer due to
failed water storage tank.
 Complete painting project at Juvenile Hall
facility.
 Complete repairs on Packard Avenue facility
roof at main expansion joint.
 Develop comprehensive tree maintenance
plan to ensure safety of public and
employees.
The Custodial Services Division’s biggest
challenge is to continue to provide acceptable
services with the reduced staffing levels we are
continuing to deal with. We are down four
positions from previous years but support more
office space than ever before. Without more resources our facilities will deteriorate in
appearance and our ability to ensure sanitary
conditions will decline. Having said that, it will
continue to be the objective of the custodial
staff to provide the best possible housekeeping
services to the county with the staffing levels
we are given, and to maintain a teamwork
approach towards one another. Our main
objective is to keep all county facilities looking
new, presentable, sanitary, and safe, and to
preserve our structures from wear and tear the
best as we can. As the year progresses, we will be considering
proposals to augment staff resources for FY
2015-2016.
County staff will need to determine the use of
the funds or the closeout of the grant if no
further activity is proposed.
Due to a number of changes in the Community
Development Block Grant, it is unclear if the
County will continue to use the grant as
originally proposed.

New grant; no activity proposed in FY 2014-
2015; activity pending program changes
Due to a number of changes in the Community
Development Block Grant, it is unclear if the
County will continue to use the grant as
originally proposed.
Maintain airport field lighting, vegetation
control, and paved surfaces in order to
assure a safe operational environment for
the flying public
 Update the administration’s computer
systems to current standards
 Conduct regular T-hangar inspections and
conduct an annual review of all tenant files
to include implementation of a new hangar
rental agreement.
 All other goals listed under the airport’s
main budget unit also apply

The State budget has not placed any hold on
State Division of Aeronautics annual funding to
airports; however, these funds will not be used
until there is the assurance of receipt.
Pursuing revenue sources that would
benefit the Department and the County,
while focusing on maintaining expenditures
at a minimum.
 Coordinate with Sutter and Nevada county
weights and measures officials to identify all
the specifications needed before the open
bidding process takes place to replace the
shared Heavy Capacity Truck.
 Work with all Federal State and Local
emergency agencies and departments to
best position Yuba County Agriculture to
become eligible for all drought relief that
will become available through the various
programs as the ongoing divesting drought
continues.
 Maintain an active role with the Technology
Advisory Committee (TAC) and the
California Commissioner and Sealers
Association (CACASA) in the development of
the CALPEATS pesticide inspection program.
 Continue to incorporate the new evolving
statewide permit system (CalAgPermits).
This will require working with the
development company, Department of
Pesticide Regulation, industry, growers,
Yuba County I.T. as well as other counties.
Provide training resources to staff as we
continue implementation of the
CalAgPermits program to encourage “online
reporting” with the regulated industry
and growers.
 Work with Yuba Sutter Farm Bureau, Farm
Services Agency, and Resource
Conservation District on agricultural related
issues that have the potential to affect Yuba
County. Drought effects being the primary
issue of concern.
 Make all necessary adjustments to the
department workload to assure as many
Agricultural Phytosanitary exports take
place, to help keep Yuba County exporters
be competitive world wide.
 Assure all our Licensed Biologists maintain
through federal exam, their qualifications as
a United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) ACO exporter accreditation.
 Continue working through CACASA to
negotiate increased funding through the
unclaimed gas tax distribution and the
Pesticide Mill Assessment as well as federal
funding for priority pest detection
programs.
 Administer the remaining Federal Forestry
Reserve Payment (HR 2389) Title III funds to
implement programs approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
 Continue working with area growers to
address agriculturally related water quality
issues and to represent Yuba County on the
Sacramento River Water Quality and the
Butte-Sutter-Yuba Sub-watershed Coalitions
 Serve as a resource to Board of Supervisors
and the Planning Department during the
updating of the County’s policies as per the
General Plan and participate in various
committees as requested by the Board or
County Administrator.
 Secure additional funding through the Yuba
Sutter WMA and private sources for Hydrilla
eradication project as well as compete for
statewide supplemental funding for same.
 Incorporate Yuba County/UPS delivery
center inspection program to include
trained canine inspection to detect illegal
plant shipments.
Walnut theft in Yuba County continues to
be a problem to Walnut growers and
processors. The department in conjunction
with YS Farm Bureau, walnut industry will
seek to bring forward a “Walnut Theft
Ordinance” for consideration by the Board
of Supervisors.
 The Department continues to provide
resources for facilitation of the Fish and
Game Advisory Commission. Should the
department continue in this capacity,
funding resources should be considered.
 The Agricultural Commissioner is working
with the Planning Department on providing
land use recommendations adjacent to
agriculture operations. Potential
agricultural buffers may be an issue that will
need to be addressed by the Board of
Supervisors.
 USDA Wildlife Services Specialist (County
Trapper) provides for non-domestic animal
damage control including education and
outreach. This program has been on verge
of termination due to budget constraints. It
is recommended that the Board of
Supervisors consider this program’s priority
during the budget process.
Provide for junior pheasant hunt in late
October/early November pending state
decision and funding.
 Utilize YCWA grant funds for Frank Allen
Fishing Event.
 Fair booth promoting Yuba County Fish
and Game Commission and Yuba
County Water Agency. Continue boat safety day at Bullard’s
Bar.
 Continue participation in the annual
River Clean-Up Day.
 Expand activities pending additional
funding.
The Commission will review the current
bylaws for appropriateness and report
to the Board of Supervisors for
direction.
Recruit and fill the Chief Deputy Assessor
position effective September 2014. This
position has been vacant and unfunded
since early 2010/11.
 Recruit and fill one Assessment Assistant
position which was eliminated in 2010/11.
 Continue to examine and adjust the
assessed values of approximately 8,000
properties currently assessed under
Proposition 8.
 Fairly and accurately assess all taxable
properties in the county.
 Produce a quality assessment roll at the
most economical cost.
 Provide information and access to the
public.
With the market value of real estate escalating
in 2013, assessor staff will be pressed to timely
adjust approximately 8,000 properties that have
had their assessments temporarily reduced
since 2006. It is imperative that the assessor
have adequate staffing and budgeting resources
to accomplish this major objective. As
assessments increase, General Fund revenues
also increase. It is in the County’s best financial
interest to appropriately fund the assessor to
maximize revenue to the General Fund.
At the time of writing this narrative, we are
estimating a 20% - 30% increase in assessed
value that can be recaptured on the majority of
properties which had been temporarily reduced
under the provisions of Proposition 8.
Experience gained from the last economic
recovery, which occurred in the late 1990’s,
taught us to expect a substantial increase in the
number of assessment appeals likely to be filed
as assessments begin to be recaptured. Staff
can quickly become overwhelmed defending
assessment appeals.
The Assessor desires to formulate a plan by
partnering with the County Administrative
Officer to negate any extra workload associated
with an increase in assessment appeal activity.
Consideration should include measures such as
authorizing overtime, extra-help, and hiring
additional appraisal staff in 2014 and 2015.
The Office of the Auditor-Controller plans to
dedicate additional resources to the
financial reporting function, with the end
goal of continuing to improve the utility and
timeliness of financial information.
 The Office will also focus on providing
training to departmental accounting staff to
ensure adequate understanding of
accounting principles and uniform
application of County policies and
procedures.
 The Office also sees the need to revise and
improve existing County policies and
procedures related to accounting, and also
implement new policies to address areas
not currently covered by existing policies.
 The Office of the Auditor-Controller would
like to increase training opportunities for
County accounting staff on accounting
principles and the use of County accounting
software.
 The resources in the Office of the Auditor-
Controller are sufficient to maintain the
current minimal service levels. Efforts to
improve on the minimal levels of service
currently provided, will require an injection
of additional resources.
Update General Fund Fiscal Policies for
Reserves, Contingencies, Capital and Cash
Flow
 Infrastructure development and efficiency
of infrastructure and services
 Enhance agricultural, art, and cultural
opportunities
 Best practices for technology efficiencies
and innovation
 Review staffing needs to develop
organizational efficiencies
 Partnerships for nature science programs at
Sycamore Ranch Park
 Consider funding options for construction
of the Sheriff's facility.
 Approve an agreement and oversee
construction of a new Tri-County Juvenile
Hall facility.
 Provide further due diligence and
consideration of a Phase II Off-Site solar
project.
 Reduce the County’s reliance on one-time
funding for the purposes of balancing the
budget.
 Receive reports from staff on elements of
the County’s strategic priorities, including
Public Safety and Health, Economic
Development, Responsible Growth and
Organizational Excellence.
YCDCSS is striving to maintain and improve
upon goals set by the State DCSS. Federal FY
Performance Goals are:
Distributed Collections - $6,936,815
Pct of Current Child Support Collected – 67.7%
Pct of Cases w/Arrearage Collection – 64.5%
Pct of Cases w/Paternity Established – 100%
Pct of Cases w/a Child Support Order – 90.3%
Cost Effectiveness - $2.25
In addition to the goals above, YCDCSS is
focusing on customer service and outreach.
Yuba County does not currently have a birthing
hospital, but may with the future construction
happening. So YCDCSS is currently working with
Sutter County DCSS to perform joint outreach at
the hospital in Sutter County and provide
information and resources to them regarding
the Paternity Opportunity Program (POP). This
program allows for paternity to be established
for unmarried parents while they are still in the
hospital by signing a voluntary Declaration of
Paternity. Unmarried parents who sign the
Declaration form help their child(ren) gain the
same rights and privileges of a child born within
a marriage such as financial support, access to
medical records, medical benefits and the
support of both parents.
The foundation of performance improvement
efforts continues to be Early Intervention. The
objective of the Early Intervention focus is to
increase collections through increased
customer contact, outreach, and education
early in the life of a case. The desire is that this
will increase the collection of support with
consistent and reliable payments and prevent
and reduce arrears while enhancing customer
service by engaging the customer early in the
child support process. Welcome appointments
and multiple phone calls throughout the
process are initiated by the department to
inform the customer of the next steps and
processes. The staff is directed to be a proactive
participant on assigned cases.
YCDCSS has seen a decrease in the number of
cases due to a change in State policy that
excludes Medical Needy Only (MNO) cases from
being referred from Health and Human
Services. Consequently, the department needs
to perform outreach to those customers as well
as the Non IV-D caseload to maintain our
caseload counts and collections.
Collections of support remain a constant
challenge across the state. As the economy
struggles and as unemployment benefits stop
so do child support collections.
Cost Effectiveness compares the total amount
of distributed collections to the total amount of
expenditures for the fiscal year, expressed as a
dollar amount. With reduced collections and
increased expenses annually, this performance
measure has been a challenge. In order to
improve Cost Effectiveness, the department has
attempted to reduce expenses resulting in
unspent allocation. Additional reductions to
spending could jeopardize the amount of State
and Federal funding that could be received in
the future. The Department must spend all of
the funding that is received in order to maintain
this level of funding.
This budget is essentially a status quo budget
request; the final state allocation letter will not
be received until the governor signs the budget.
YCDCSS expects to receive a level of funding
similar to the flat level that we have received in
prior years. Although the allocation remains
constant, increased costs have an effect over
time of reducing funding for the program. The
Department has relied upon attrition for cost
savings in order to absorb increases in the past.
While we anticipate being able to continue to
provide essential services this fiscal year, future
changes may be required. FY 13/14 allocations
are being used to prepare this budget. Below is
how the department proposes to use the
allocated funds.
Complete migration to LSX agenda
management system that will provide a
comprehensive paperless agenda which
may be accessed by tablet or computer
 Implement document imaging retrieval on
County website for database of Board
minutes, resolutions, ordinances, and
agendas
 Provide training for departments on agenda
and committee submittal requirements
 Help facilitate a Brown Act and Public
Records Act training for Boards,
Commissions, and Committees
 Develop informational handout for Board
appointed representatives regarding
general roles and responsibilities
 Investigate live web streaming of Board of
Supervisors meetings
 Update office and agenda procedures due
to changes or upgrade in system
 Ascertain ways to streamline operations for
costs and time savings
Continue to meet the needs of our
constituents in a positive and productive
manner while meeting the many mandates
associated with the integrity and storage of
land and personal records and data.
Continue staff and manager training due to
new and changing legislation resulting in
changes in department services, operations
and procedures.
Successful implementation of Statewide
Voter Database.
 Legislative changes impacting election
processes and procedures.
Continue management of the Library
 Expand the NSP by including replacement
of substandard homes and homes that
have been demolished.
Due to recent drought conditions elevating
statewide concerns about groundwater,
staff will be monitoring this issue closely
on a countywide basis as well as for Gold
Village.
Planning anticipates the completion of the
following major projects:
 Development Code Update
 Resource Efficiency Plan
 Magnolia Ranch Specific Plan
 Recology Green Rail Project
 We are experiencing an increase in building
permit and development applications. In
addition to completing the projects listed
above, there are several other action items
in the 2030 General Plan that Planning will need to begin implementing. The Board has
also identified several strategic priorities
that will directly involve Planning.
Therefore, one of the biggest challenges
facing the Planning Department in 2014-
2015, will be adequate staffing for current
and future demands.
Planning anticipates the completion of the
following major projects:
 Development Code Update
 Resource Efficiency Plan
 Magnolia Ranch Specific Plan
 Recology Green Rail Project
 We are experiencing an increase in building
permit and development applications. In
addition to completing the projects listed
above, there are several other action items
in the 2030 General Plan that Planning will  need to begin implementing. The Board has
also identified several strategic priorities
that will directly involve Planning.
Therefore, one of the biggest challenges
facing the Planning Department in 2014-
2015, will be adequate staffing for current
and future demands.
Provide continued quality customer service
to the general public as well as the
development community.
 Provide continuing education to employees
as mandated by State law.
 Provide training to Permit Technician in
order to obtain certification as required.
 Continue internal policy updates.
 Provide support to Olivehurst Avenue
Underground Utility District project.
 Increase staffing level to improve program
effectiveness.
 Re-prioritize case load to reduce officer
workload.
Pending Issues/Policy Considerations
FY 2014-2015
 Consider adding a Building Inspector to
support Code Enforcement substandard
housing complaints.
 Explore expanded support to fund code
enforcement activities by departments that
are served by Code Enforcement to meet
current demand of program workload and
to reduce backlog of cases.
We are continuing our review of all tenants
files to assure compliance with HUD
regulations and making adjustments where
needed. We plan to continue to apply for
funding for the FSS position as well as
additional grants such as CSBG grants to
provide additional services for our clients.
HUD has based our administrative budget
on the number of leased-up units per
month and therefore, we are working
towards a 97% lease-up rate.
 In addition, as federal funding for housing
programs is reduced it will affect our ability
to provide services.
 In addition, the Housing Program Manager
position is vacant. Therefore determining
the best approach to providing services to
Yuba County’s low income residents will be
a significant issue in the coming fiscal year.
Complete closeout paperwork for grant and
disencumber unused funds.
 Determine whether to apply for future
Home program funding.
 Evaluate options for repayment of the Cal
HFA HELP loan for the Ross Ranch
development.
 The Cal HFA Help loan in the amount of
$500,000 is due to the state on May 23,
2016. CDSA has been looking at options for
repayment of this loan since the Ross Ranch
project was not developed, due to a
combination of market conditions and lack
of sewer infrastructure available to the site.
 Continue to administer CSBG program
 Release Request for Proposals for
subcontracting services to low-income
households, enter into contracts with
successful applicants
 Currently, the Housing Program Manager
position is vacant. Therefore determining
the best approach to providing services to
Yuba County’s low income residents will be
a significant issue in the coming fiscal year.
 Evaluate Yuba County’s role in
administering Sutter County’s CSBG
program.
 Currently, the Housing Program Manager
position is vacant. Therefore, we are
evaluating whether Yuba County should
continue to administer this program on
behalf of Sutter County or if there are other
options that should be considered.
Continue on prior successes of the program,
which includes a total of 38 homes that
have been rehabilitated and resold to
income eligible families since 2009.
 Purchase, rehabilitate, and resell as many as
15 homes in fiscal year 2014-2015.
 Bring on additional limited term project
management staff to meet the deadlines
associated with the expanded program.
 Buy non-foreclosure/willing seller vacant
lots with prior substandard homes or
currently substandard homes to tear down,
and replace with new homes.

Continue to define businesses in Yuba
County that are required to comply with
programs administered by the Certified
Unified Program Agency.
 Certify two new employees as ICC UST
inspectors and AST inspectors.
 Provide assistance to underground storage
tank (UST) facilities and increase inspection
activities for UST facilities pursuant to the
approved Rural UST Leak Prevention
Program Grant.
 Implement AB 2286 requirements to
transfer inspection and enforcement data
to the state system.
 Implement electronic posting of food
inspections to the Yuba County website.
 Improve the review process for land use
projects that have a potential to create
future expansion problems in the septic and
well use areas.
 Implement a grey water ordinance.
 AB885 requires establishment of a local
ordinance for the installation and
maintenance of on-site liquid waste
disposal systems and policy and procedures
for ongoing program implementation. This
issue has been in various forms of progress
over the past decade, and it appears that
implementation may need to occur in FY
2014-15.
Construct Feather River Boulevard
Interchange.
 Powerline Road improvements between
14th Ave and 9th Ave.
 Begin constructing Olivehurst Ave complete
streets project between 7th Ave and
McGowan Parkway.
 Begin constructing N. Beale complete
streets project between Lindhurst Ave and
Hammonton-Smartsville Road. Continue additional phases of Hammonton-
Smartsville Road shoulder widening safety
projects.
 Replace bridge on Spring Valley Road at
Browns Valley Irrigation Ditch.
 Determine ultimate configuration of N.
Beale Road intersections utilizing input from
public participation.
 Difficulty funding road improvements
considering increasing costs with
diminishing revenues over time (i.e. gas
taxes not keeping pace with inflation and
cars utilizing less gas with increased
efficiencies and number of electric vehicles
over time).
 Explore various proposals and options for
generating new transportation revenues,
both statewide and locally.
 Increasing costs associated with adhering to
the new Phase II Small MS4 General Permit
(see discussion under Drainage Budget).
Streamline processing of LLAs and COCs to
improve efficiency
 Expedite project approvals for applicants.
 This budget includes the addition of one
new employee to manage the County’s
storm water quality program required
under the new Phase II Small MS4 General
Permit (see discussion under Drainage
Budget).
Continue efforts addressing local drainage
problem areas, however, we do not
anticipate funding for storm drain
improvements over the next two fiscal
years. Continue with floodplain
management efforts at a high enough level
to maintain a CRS rating of 6, continuing to
save property owners money on flood
insurance.
 Our primary goal over the next several
years will be to increase storm water quality
protection efforts to successfully implement
and adhere to the requirements of the
State’s new Phase II Small MS4 General
Permit. The requirements of the new
General Permit are onerous and failure to
comply can bring large fines. Going
forward, the workload associated with the
General Permit compliance will require one
additional full time employee along with
some supplemental consultant costs.
 Pursue funding options for a hydraulic study
to provide floodplain elevations for the D-
10 area and updating the FEMA floodplain
maps accordingly. Present revised South
Yuba Drainage zone of benefit and
associated drainage impact fee to the Board
of Supervisors for consideration.
Implement the much more stringent Phase
II Small MS4 General Permit and increase
staffing level to accommodate such (will be
proposed in the Surveyor budget since this
budget does not include personnel). Going
forward, determine how to fund the
additional employee and supplemental
consulting costs required as a result of the
new General Permit.
 The proposed budget includes a sizeable
decrease in YCWA funding. The ability of
YCWA to fund drainage activities at a level similar to FY 13/14 is contingent on water
sales, the results of which are unknown at
this time. YCWA has indicated that if
adequate water sales are achieved, we will
likely receive funding at FY 13/14 levels. If
this is the case, we will amend the budget
at that time to reflect the additional
revenues. If adequate water sales are not
achieved, Public Works will not receive the
additional funding and vital water quality
functions will have to remain cut from the
budget.
 Continue fulfilling State requirements for
post closure maintenance of former County
owned or operated landfills.
 Process updated Pledge or Revenue
Agreement with CalRecycle for post-closure
maintenance of the Ponderosa Landfill.
Work with the Public Health Officer to
implement reporting of key health issues
and demographics to the Board of
Supervisors.
 Complete presentation of and carry out
Board direction for the building of a new
Sheriff’s facility.
 Assist in coordinating development of a
new Tri-County Juvenile Hall.
 Monitor and provide updates related to
prison realignment.
 Continue to work with local fire agencies
and districts to complete the shared
services study.
Continue to seek out opportunities and
further collaboration on improvements to
infrastructure.
 Work closely with Community Development
& Services Agency to complete projects
such as the Development Code update and
enhancement of our regional parks.
 Explore further emergency service
enhancements for our growing population.
Through the newly formed Technology
Department, examine technological
efficiencies that enhance our organization’s
overall effectiveness and service to the
public.
 By working with departments, fully examine
current day staffing levels and determine
solutions to meet workload demands.
 Continue providing our development
programs for our employees (Yuba County
Academy and Executive Leadership
Program).
Coordinate with school districts, special
districts, and cities to further our economy.
 Coordinate a report to the Board that
describes the County’s state of our
workforce readiness.
 Specifically engage the agricultural
communities to determine areas in which
we can partner with them to enhance
opportunities.
 Continuing to monitor and manage the ever
changing scope of public service is always a
challenge. The impact of new state or
federal laws, new programs, regulations or
a changing economy will cause
organizational impacts and most likely
change. The County Administrator will
work closely with department heads and
the Board to address these issues.
 The County Administrator is also
recommending the Legislative Affairs
Coordinator / Public Information Officer be
reassigned to his original duties in the
County Administrator’s Office. The absence
has caused a significant impact to existing
staff in the monitoring of legislation,
increasing public awareness, developing,
and delivering news about the County and
leading countywide communication
training.
 Finally, the fiscal implications for rising
health care and pension costs will be an
issue that has to be closely monitored and
managed. Creative solutions are needed by
the state, local government and its
employees if public service at any level is
sustainable.
Improve and continue focused business
attraction, retention and expansion
programs and activities that increase
employment levels and sales tax revenues,
and decrease unemployment numbers
 Strengthen strategic partnerships with key
stakeholder organizations including the
Yuba-Sutter EDC, UpState California EDC,
SACTO, Small Business Development Center
(SBDC), Chamber of Commerce, 1-Stop
Centers, Yuba College, etc.
 Leverage committee activities and
workshops to maximize business feedback
to the Board of Supervisors, including the
Economic Development Advisory
Committee and the Yuba County Alliance
for Development (YuCAD)
 Coordinate Business Perspectives 2014
luncheon and promote the selection of the
business “Champion of Yuba County”
 Update and publish collateral material
including the 2014 Economic Profile and
tourism guides to encourage business
development and visitors
 Coordinate effective methods to “tell the
story,” including the creation of a 2014
“Champion of Yuba County” business video
documentary and highway billboard, and
create complementary advertising material
to promote Yuba County year-round
 Utilize media relations, social media, and
direct contact to promote an understanding
of Yuba County’s strengths and relative
business advantages
 Provide the community and Board of
Supervisors with regular economic
development announcements and updates
including public presentations, the Yuba
County E-Note, Economic Profile, reports
and memos
 Take coursework as required to maintain
professional accreditation with the
International Economic Development
Council (IEDC’s CEcd certification)
 Maintain positive relationships and strong
partnerships with County departments,
businesses, developers, residents, and
community organizations
 Identify grants, partnerships and methods
to decrease marketing and program costs
and to increase efficiency
 Promote the business benefits and retain
the Yuba-Sutter Enterprise Zone
 Maintain and improve the economic
development website located at
www.chooseyuba.com
 Continue to report and present economic
development metrics that are measurable,
sustainable, and accountable
 Adhere to and actively promote the
County’s Strategic Plan
Economic Development is identified in the
Yuba County Strategic Plan, adopted August
18, 2009, as one of four identified strategic
priorities and directs staff to encourage a
business friendly environment and promote
policies to improve existing programs
 Supporting a robust business retention and
attraction program is critical to the current
and future health and financial success of
the County
 Manufacturing jobs and related businesses
will require the commitment of new and
improved water, sewer, drainage and
related infrastructure in the areas of the
Yuba County Airport Industrial Park and
other identified planning areas, including
the Rancho Road Corridor and Employment
Village
 The elimination of redevelopment
programs and enterprise zones in California
has limited some business incentives in
Yuba County while creating new state tax
credit programs that staff will monitor and
promote as appropriate
 Staff continues to monitor and make
recommendations regarding the use of
Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG) funding for local business lending as
coordinated through the state’s Housing
and Community Development Department
where it potentially places General Fund
dollars at risk
 Staff will continue to partner with the Yuba-
Sutter EDC to identify grant funding for
Yuba County projects promoting jobs and
providing business attraction and expansion
opportunities
 The Yuba County Water Agency’s successful
application for full operation of the Colgate
hydro-electric facility may provide future
opportunities for business incentives
Complete revision of the Countywide
Emergency Operations Plan to meet CPG
101 v.2 guidance and seek final approval by
the BOS.
 Work with municipalities to further
coordinate emergency management
planning.
 Work with EOC Management team
members to complete advanced EOC
training and work towards credentialing in
their assigned position per the NIMS
Training Plan.
 Update the Operational Area
Interoperability Communications Plan.
 As a member of the YSHMRT Administrative
Group, work with the Members to help
insure the team’s long term success.
 Hold countywide slow rise flood exercise.
 Fill vacant Emergency Operations Planner
position.
 Coordinate with reclamation districts in
providing them with communications
equipment and completing projects.
 Apply for and receive additional DWR
funding to equip a secondary county
dispatch center in coordination with the
YCSO.
 For the FY 2014/15 budget year the
emergency services base and requested
budget reflect an overall increase, however
emergency services has no increase to its
general fund allocation. The increase in the
overall budget is due to the receipt of
multiple grants that overlap the fiscal year,
an increase in the cost of the County
emergency notification system and the Cal
Fire Consolidated Dispatch contract. OES is
attempting to absorb the increased costs of
the Consolidated Dispatch Contract with Cal
Fire, however, OES has not received the
new contract for FY 2014/15 as of this date
leaving the cost unknown.
Every member of the County Counsel’s
Office will strive to continue providing
superior legal services to the Board of
Supervisors, Commissions, County Boards,
County Departments and Special Districts
of Yuba County.
 The establishment of a Yuba Resolution
Book which will contain all adopted
Resolutions of Yuba County from 2013
forward.
 One of the issues that County Counsel has
identified as being important is the
involvement of counsel early on in the
employee discipline process. To that end
we will be working with Human Resources
and the various departments on issues of
training and collaboration to bring a more
integrated approach to the process.
 The dependency (Child Protection)
caseload is a major function of the County
Counsel’s Office. The dedication of more
than a full time attorney position to that
caseload, has brought stability to the
dependency caseload and a good deal of
“customer satisfaction” from the Health
and Human Services Department.
 In January 2014, a new attorney joined the
County Counsel legal team. Getting her
trained in all aspects of the office’s
function will be one of our goals this year.
 The ongoing maintenance and amendment
of the ordinance code in both a hard copy
format and in an electronic form.
The establishment of an internship
program with area law schools, thereby
providing public law office experience to
law students while receiving in turn the
services of second or third year law
students free of charge.
 Continue to partner with the District
Attorney’s Office to provide assistance to
the District Attorney and to allow County
Counsel’s attorneys to gain jury trial
experience.
The major internal goal for FY 14/15 will be
reviewing and modifying case disposition
policies in light of the new felony
sentencing practices under Realignment.
 Secondary goals will be to refresh the
training of the prosecution and
investigative staff in the areas of informant
management, Brady discovery procedures
and processes, and Wheeler jury selection
criteria.
 An additional goal will be to review and
update, as resources permit, the office
web presence.
 The major external goals will be to
convene a Yuba County law enforcement
summit of command staff to review
informant management practices, Brady
discovery obligations and procedures, and
officer involved critical incident
procedures.
 The continued impact of Realignment –
related legislation from the State
legislature, including additional changes to
the felony sentencing structure and the
possibility of a sentencing commission.
 The potential for instituting a pre-trial
release program to provide more jail
capacity for offenders sentenced to local
prison under Realignment.
 Further revising case filing standards in the
event of further staffing reductions to
maintain a workable case review and
caseload ratio. The CY 2013 ratio of reports
reviewed per prosecutor was 442:1; the
recommended ratio is 300:1. The case per
prosecutor ratio was 296:1; the
recommended standard is 200:1.
Finalize APS investigations within 90 days.
 Collaborate with Peach Tree Clinic to
promote a continuity of care for those we
serve.
 Successfully implement FLSA for overtime
for IHSS providers. Continue to streamline the Adoption
process - provide more training for social
workers.
 Submit the CFSR Systems Improvement Plan
to the state.
 Implement a Wraparound program.
 Reduce the number of foster youth placed
in Group Homes to 10.
 Release an RFP for Differential Response.
 Finalize a community-wide Drug Exposed
Infant Protocol.
 Complete an MOU between Child Welfare
Services and the Yuba County Schools to
share foster children academic information
to improve academic success. Complete development and
implementation of the Family Stabilization
program, which will provide intensive case
management and services to clients that
meet the criteria set forth in AB 74.
 Implementation of the State's Standardized
Assessment Tool.
 Increase referrals and participation in
substance use counseling by increasing
awareness and detection.
 Continue to actively engage participants to
meet the Federal Work Participation Rates
(WPR). Transition approximately 12,000 continuing
Medi-Cal recipients to Affordable Care Act
programs by the end of the year 2014.
 Provide outreach to the community on
Health Care Coverage and CalFresh.
 Maintain full staffing levels to keep up with
the increase in customer contacts and
applications.
 Continue to partner with the hospital and
clinics in processing Medi-Cal applications.
 Continue to explore ways to reduce front
lobby traffic.
 Enroll Citizens in all available Horizontal
coverage.
The Health and Human Services budget is
projected to be largely status quo and overall
funding is expected to increase. The
Department anticipates sufficient support for
Child Welfare Services based on Realignment
Revenue projections. This is especially
promising in contrast to the uncertainty of past
budget years. Medi-Cal caseloads are
estimated to increase by approximately 10.2
percent in FY 2014/2015 largely due to the
implementation of federal health care reform
and a shift of children from the Healthy Families
Program to Medi-Cal. The expansion includes
individuals who were eligible for Medi-Cal prior
to the effective date of the Affordable Care Act
(ACA), but who were not already enrolled and
those who are newly eligible under the ACA.
Health Care Reform will continue to bring
dramatic changes to the way business is
conducted. Under ACA mandates, Eligibility
Technicians will be required to offer additional
programs that clients may be eligible to such as
CalFresh and CalWORKs. The CalFresh
caseloads are estimated to grow by 5.1 percent
in FY 2014/2015. The need for customer
contact, application processing and movement
between public assistance programs is also
expected to rise.
Assembly Bill 85 created a Child Poverty and
Family Supplemental Support Subaccount which
will fund a five percent CalWORKs maximum
grant increase effective March 1, 2014. The
overall CalWORKs caseload is projected to
decrease in 2014-15 by approximately 3.8
percent however; Employment Services will be
encountering significant programmatic changes.
The Employment Services Team continues a
phased-in implementation to re-engage
participants associated with changes enacted in
previous years by Senate Bill 1041.
Additionally, the following significant
Employment Services initiatives must be
executed in the coming year:
 Efforts to create a Subsidized Employment
program began in January 2014. The initial
response from clients and employers has
been positive. Focus on further
implementation and strengthening of the
program will continue.
 The State Department of Social Services will
be issuing a standardized appraisal tool for
county use statewide. The implementation
will require automation changes and staff
training. Each Welfare to Work appraisal
appointment is expected to increase by one additional hour. The new appraisal
component necessitates a revision to the
procedures for processing applications and
Welfare to Work appraisals. Additional
Eligibility Technicians will be needed to
process CalWORKs applications within
mandated timeframes and allow Social
Workers to devote more time to completing
the complex and time consuming Welfare
to Work appraisal process.
 A new Family Stabilization component is
estimated to require an additional 2.5 hours
of monthly case management per case.
Initial data projects that 7.5 percent of the
total employment services caseload will
meet the new Family Stabilization criteria.
The Health & Human Services Department will
continue working diligently to provide excellent
customer service while meeting mandated
program requirements in an efficient and
fiscally responsible manner.
Begin the process of Public Health
Accreditation since it is widely expected
that Accreditation status will be a strong
indicator of receiving Federal grant funding
in the future.
 Implement a Yuba County Employee
wellness program to encourage healthier
lifestyles.
 Enhance partnership with Peach Tree Clinic
and other community clinics, hospital, and
medical providers by making Public Health
an available networking resource.
 Public Health will annually present to the
Board of Supervisors the status of areas of
Public Health concerns, the programs or
services in place to address the concerns
and recommendations to improve the
overall health of Yuba County.
 CHDP staff to provide audimetric training to
community medical providers.
The 1991 Health Realignment was implemented
to provide indigent health care and public
health services. Yuba as a small rural county
elected to provide indigent health care through
the CMSP Program.
California has opted through the Affordable
Care Act to expand Medi-Cal eligibility for
childless (medically indigent) adults. 2011
Realignment legislation redirects Health
realignment for indigent health care (CMSP)
from the counties to the state by withholding
$300 million in FY 2013/14 to cover the state
cost for the expanded Medi-Cal.
For FY 2014/15 the proposed transfer is $900
million and $1.3 billion in FY 2015/16. The
transfer of $900 million would take all of the
indigent health funds and a majority of the
Public Health funds.
SB 1262/Correa creates a regulatory structure
for medical marijuana dispensaries and
cultivation sites and designates county health
departments as the enforcement agency to
enforce CA Department of Public Health’s
licensing program at the local level. Public
Health does not have the expertise in marijuana
enforcement (conduct inspections, secure
samples, photographs or other evidence from
the facility), does not have enforcement staffing
(issue citations) or the funding to manage such
a program.
Implement the Missing in America Project
(MIAP). The purpose of MIAP is to identify,
locate, and intern the unclaimed remains of
veterans and veteran’s dependents.
 Process overall VA Claim/Case Management
 Advise on ways to obtain Maximum
benefits
 Review Service Medical Records / VA Claim
Folder
 Identify & help correct errors in past VA
decisions
 Advise Veterans on All Available Benefits;
Federal, State, County, Service
Organizations
 Administer College Fee Waiver Program
The Budget Act of 2013 included a one-time
increase of $3 million to fund new services in
County Veterans Service Offices (CVSO). The
continuations of these funds are necessary to
provide staffing to assist our local veterans to
access their benefits.
To continue to monitor the timely and
accurate invoicing of reimbursement to the
county for the Administrative services and
the Provider health insurance costs.
Continue monitoring of this budget unit’s
cash flow and expenditure line item
appropriations. 
Statewide the IHSS County sharing ratio has
been changed to an overall Maintenance of
Effort (MOE) that encapsulates each
County’s share of: IHSS Administration,
Public Authority, and Provider salaries and
benefits. Due to this change the 109 Public
Authority budget will no longer have a
County General Fund contribution.
 The Governor’s budget proposes to prohibit
IHSS providers from working more than 40
hours per week.
 The above proposal would require new
administrative activities, creating a Provider
Backup System, training for providers,
modifications to the statewide computer
system and training for county staff.
The Public Employees Pension Reform Act of
2013 (PEPRA) will continue to affect the way
HROS does business in the 2014-2015 fiscal
year. Provisions of the Act will be implemented
over the next few years. As the legislation is
amended, we will continue to maintain our
compliance with its provisions as they relate to
Yuba County.
The Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act (ACA) went into effect on
January 1, 2014. As with PEPRA,
provisions of the ACA will be
implemented over time. We need to
reasonably control the costs associated
with the ACA while maintaining our
flexibility to respond to its provisions.HROS needs to maintain the long-term
relationship we have developed with
our labor associations and our
workforce in order to maintain a highly
trained and productive workforce. We
will uphold the County’s commitment
to Equal Employment Opportunity and
help promote a positive work
environment that makes Yuba County
the Employer of Choice. a. Performance: We have created on
on-line performance evaluation form
that is fill-able with drop down menus
to assist supervisors in timely,
thorough, and appropriate employee
performance evaluations. We will
continue to work with all other
departments to develop coaching plans
and materials to help our workforce
attain excellent performance and
customer service.
b. Training: We continue training in
Supervisory Development, Harassment
Prevention, Ethics, HIPAA, Heat Illness
Prevention, other Safety training and
performance evaluation writing. We
have assisted with the development of
the first Employee Development
Academy which reaches out to the
entire workforce. This Academy allows
Yuba County employees to take control
of their own career paths.
c. Class Specifications: We need to
continue to update class specifications
to ensure our employees have the best
understanding of what is required to
provide the best services to the citizens
of Yuba County. a. Medical/Dental/Vision: With the
implementation of Health Care Reform,
we will take a lead role in
understanding the impacts of the
legislation on the County.
b. Retirement benefits: We will
continue to investigate the most costeffective
benefits available for County
retirees.
c. Safety: We will continue to identify,
evaluate and update safety policies and
programs across the County. HROS has
been and will continue to be pro-active
in identifying safety needs throughout
the County. Even in oppressive financial climates, it
is important for the County to ensure
that all employees know how important
they are to the organization. It is this
Department’s goal to keep the right
people in the right jobs for the right
amount of compensation. Employees
need to be given the training and tools
they need to succeed and the
opportunity to grow with and within
the organization.
We will continue to evaluate and
improve both the Annual Employee Recognition ceremonies and the
Employee Appreciation BBQ. We are helping to design, develop and
implement a Human Resources
Management System which will allow
HROS to manage projects and provide
detailed Human Resources
Management information consistent
with Federal, State and County audit
requirements. The new system will
greatly enhance our ability to maintain,
track and evaluate Employee Relations
activities, Performance Evaluations, Risk
Management functions, Applicant and
Employee Tracking, and Course
Management for our Training
programs. Continue to maintain robust equal
employment opportunities in Yuba
County. 
Community Outreach: HROS is
instrumental in allowing the County staff to
engage in outreach activities necessary for
economic development. Through our Yuba
Academy, we need to provide opportunities
for our employees to engage more with
Beale Air Force Base, Yuba College, and the
Yuba County Water Agency.
 Organizational Excellence: HROS
innovatively strives to provide a “best
practices” model for Organizational
Effectiveness and Employee Health and
Wellness. We need to identify critical
staffing needs in the County to ensure that
critical services are provided to our
residents. We also need to make programs
available to all employees that increase
awareness of personal health and to
encourage healthy lives.
 Responsible Growth: HROS is essential to
allow Yuba County to grow responsibly and
efficiently. We help tap into the valuable
resource that is our workforce and help our
employees develop their career paths here
in the County
 County Image and Opportunity: HROS
promotes a positive work environment
which improves the overall image of the
County. We encourage our employees to
volunteer in their communities to
strengthen the image of public employees
and to show that we embrace to concept of
true public service.
The IT Department needs to fully leverage the
new infrastructure and work towards a future
with the promise of easier access to
information and efficiency.
Specific initiatives and projects follow;
Migrate to E-government
 Update content management system and
content/interface for external website
 Enable more electronic document
management and imaging to minimize the
use and storage of paper
Leverage existing infrastructure
 Train IT team to fully utilize new network
and virtualization infrastructure
 Implement automated failover for key
services between data centers
Analyze and Reduce costs
 Evaluate and take advantage of new CalNet
and other discounted pricing plans for
services and equipment
 Define a service catalog with all associated
costs as a way to analyze and implement
possible cost reductions – both within IT
and within departments across the County
 Implement a new service desk system and
self-service tools to speed the time to
resolve technical issues and empower users
to understand and solve some routine
technical issues
Improve Security and Compliance
 Define Policy/Procedure/Control structure
to support NIST compliance (Security
Standard for Federal and California State)
We have received a recent notice that the State
of California may require a minimum retention
period of 12 months for videos captured within
Yuba County facilities. We have not fully
evaluated the alternatives and related cost of
compliance, but the fiscal impact could be
significant for additional storage.
Continue weeding of the adult nonfiction
area
 Complete inventory of the collection
 Continue to offer additional preschool
programs
 Continue digitalization of the California
Room historical archives to improve
access and searching capabilities of the
information.
 Prepare for the annual Summer Reading
Program 2014/2015 (theme yet to be
determined)
The Library is currently operating at
historically low funding and staffing levels,
while also operating in a transitional
environment where access to information is
transitioning from physical materials to
digital. When opportunities arise to
increase funding, the County needs to be
strategic with its investments in the Library
to ensure they are in line with this
transforming environment.
Continue to expand services offered to our
population, including mental health services
and intervention programs accessible while
still incarcerated.
 Incorporate Smart Justice program which
will be a valuable additional resource for
the probation officers assigned to offender
supervision.
 Expand use of adult case plans.
 Expand services at the Day Reporting
Center.
There are two major policy items that continue
to impact the Probation Department in 2013 –
2014.
 Public Safety Realignment Act (AB 109/AB
117): In an effort to address overcrowding
in California’s prisons and assist in
alleviating the state’s financial crisis, the
Public Safety Realignment Act (AB 109) was
signed into law on April 4, 2011. AB 109 transfers responsibility for supervising
specified lower level inmates and parolees
from the California Department of
Corrections and Rehabilitation to counties.
Implementation of the Public Safety Act
took effect October 1, 2011.
 Assembly Bill 12: AB 12 is an extension of
foster care. It allows the Courts to offer
continued services to youth in placement
that are over the age of 18 whether as a
602 W&I or 300 W&I. This will have a
substantial impact on our juvenile
placement officer and future juvenile
placements.
The principle legislative mandated tasks
accomplished by adult probation are the
preparation of investigative reports and
sentencing recommendations for the
Superior Court on criminal, diversion,
Proposition 36, and probation actions and the
supervision of offenders granted formal
probation, Proposition 36 treatment or
diversion. This division manages a variety of
specialized program elements including
Proposition 36 caseload management and the
Yuba County Drug Court program.
Continue to implement the continuous changes in AB12/AB212 – Extended Foster Care and Child
Welfare Systems/Case Management System.
 Continue to work with schools to enroll youth in an appropriate educational setting.
 Collaborate with fellow stakeholders regarding Title 4E requirements.
 Enhance family connections through Functional Family Therapy and Family Finding.
 Enhance programs offered to youth to ensure they are Evidenced Based Practice programs and
meets the needs of the youth
Continue to Improve the ADA compliance of
the Dan Avenue property in which the
Victim and Program Services unit is housed,
specifically, identify funding to bring into
compliance the entry doors and bathrooms.
 Continue to explore grant funding
opportunities to help with retention of
program staff and possible expansion.
 Conduct quarterly briefings with all local
law enforcement to further ensure victims’
rights and identify gaps/problems
surrounding victimization in Yuba County.
 Provide 12 community presentations
(Reduced by 12 from previous year)
throughout Yuba County addressing cultural
issues unique to Yuba County and services
offered at Victim Services.
 Continue the development of a three year
strategic plan for the Victim and Program
Services Unit with a focus on sustainable
funding through grants and a minimum of
45% general fund dollars over the next
three fiscal years.
 Update the Victim Services webpage and
add resources for victims to access online.
 Upgrade the audio/visual equipment in the
PCIT and Forensic Interview rooms
 Establish a protocol for local law
enforcement and community agencies to
deal with the issue of Commercially Sexual
Exploited Children (CSEC).
The following list of services has been identified
to either be eliminated and/or reduced if
additional funding is not secured for FY 14-15.
All proposed reductions will impact service
delivery to Yuba County residents:
 No transportation to appointments or
Forensic Interviews for any victim in the City
of Marysville due to distance, time and
construction. With the reduction in staff, it
now can take upwards of 30 minutes one
way, which results in a $90.00 loss to the
program for each transport.
 Only mandatory services will be offered.
VOCA has a list of mandatory and optional
services all V.W. programs offer.
Historically, Yuba County has always offered
both. 13/14 will be the first year only
mandatory services are offered and 14/15
will see a continuance of the optional
service elimination.
o Mandatory services:
Crisis Intervention
Emergency Assistance
Resource and Referral
Assistance
Direct Counseling
Victim of Crime Claims
Property Return Assistance
Orientation to the Criminal
Justice System
Court Escort
Presentations and Trainings for
Criminal justice Agencies
Public Presentations and
Publicity
Case Status/Case Disposition
Notification of
Family/Friends
Employer notification
/Intervention
Restitution
o Optional Services (eliminated):
Employer Intervention
Creditor Intervention
Child Care Assistance
Witness Notification
Funeral arrangements
Crime Prevention Information
Witness Protection
Temporary restraining Orders
Transportation Assistance
Court Waiting Area
 Currently the office has no full time
clerical staff. This has resulted in an
advocate, therapist or the Manager
sitting at the front desk on a rotating
basis. Probation has been able to send
one full time employee to Victim
Services two days a week to assist with
financial, payroll and other duties.
 Most Prevention services will be
eliminated; crime prevention, school
presentations and most crisis response
calls to the community.
 Loss of Hmong Advocate has resulted in
the program not being able to serve the
Hmong community effectively.
 Revenue for the 2013 year is down
about 39% for victim services.
 Reduce the number of Clinical Social
Workers currently employed by the
Probation Department from 3.5 FTE to
1.5 FTE.
 Net loss of money returning to Yuba
County by crime victims, through the
Victim Compensation Program, is down
41% over the past two years.
 One option to bridge the gap in revenue
and unit expenditures is to lay off 1 FTE
Clinical Social Worker II and .4FTE
Clinical Social Worker II.
The second option is to reduce all full
and part time Clinical Social Worker II
positions to permanent Part Time
positions.
 Third, we will un-fund one Clinical Social
Worker II (1FTE).
 The last option would involve utilizing
one time monies to fill the budget
shortfall and retain all Clinical Social
Worker II at their current FTE.
Continue to improve the evidence based model
of programming for minors.
 Place renewed emphasis on motivational
interviewing techniques with staff.
 Implement second phase of the Positive
Behavioral Interventions and Supports program
(PBIS) standards.
Further implement policy and procedures to
address the Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA)
standards.
 Institute state revisions of Title 15 and 24 of the
California Code of Regulations.
 Continue moving forward with the planning and
design phase of the new regional Juvenile
facility, which will include Yuba, Sutter and
Colusa counties.
Fill vacant Supervising Group Counselor and
Group Counselor positions in order to
achieve optimal programming goals.
 Continue to improve the evidenced based
model of programming for minors.
 Continue the effective utilization of
motivational interviewing techniques with
staff on minors during interventions.
 Further implement policy and procedures to
address the Prison Rape Elimination Act
(PREA) standards.
 Institute state revisions of Title 15 and 24 of
the California Code of Regulations and
update the current policy and procedures
manual.
 Seek funding sources and develop a fiscal
plan to move forward with modernization
projects to bring the Juvenile Hall into
compliance with Titles 15, 19 & 24 of the
California Code of Regulations.
Work with Multidisciplinary Team for outreach and
agency collaboration
 Attend training to meet PA/PG/PC requirements
 Secure funding through federal/state/local
resources
 Enhance data reporting procedures
 Utilize affordable training opportunities to enhance
staff skill level
 Maintain partnerships with community
organizations and businesses
Regulate response time for emergency services
 Participate in care conferences and complete
quarterly encounters for proper maintenance and
wellbeing of conservatees
 Eliminate barriers to least restrictive placement for
conservatees
 Finalize implementation of teleconference
communication for court proceedings
 Adhere to Yuba County Strategic Plan
Host a SWAT Sniper Challenge competition.
 Host our third annual Northern California
Canine Competition.
 Complete implementation a tactical
dispatcher program.
 Develop new strategies for the use of crime
analysis.
 Continue to work on plans for the new
Sheriff’s Department facility.
 Continue to work on strategies to enhance
our radio communication system.
 Work in partnership with local fire
departments and the District Attorney’s
Office to train new arson investigators.
 Add an additional Community Services
Officer position.
 Research the possibility of providing online
crime reporting to give citizens another
option to reporting criminal activity.
 Continue providing in-house training which
meets the POST compliant objectives
wherever possible.
 CA POST training for all peace officers is upto-
date.
 Continue to develop and improve the crime
analysis unit to provide even more timely
and pertinent information on crime trends
and patterns.
 Continue with upgrading all Department
computer related equipment for the move
from Windows XP to Windows 7.
 Expand SWAP and AOWP programs to
encompass additional public agency and
non-profit participation so that additional
court ordered work hours and inmates can
be involved in the program.
 Continue training program for two
additional Forensic Recovery Evidence
Device (FRED) deputies as well as providing
training for cell phone evidence recovery.
 Remodel Support Services Division office
space to include a work area specific to the
FRED device.
 Select and train an additional radio
programming deputy.
 Continue planning for the new Sheriff’s
Office facility.
 For the Crime Analysis Unit to continue
working closely with the Administration and
Operations Staff to develop as much
information and statistical data as possible
which will help identify the criminal
element and possible methods of
operation.
 Update to a new ADA compliant Live Scan
machine and train all personnel in its use.
 Complete training of additional forensic
evidence officers.
 The Operations Division continues to
function with 12 unfunded positions due to
recent budget constraints, and this creates
a hardship on remaining employees.
 The current Sheriff’s facility is grossly
undersized for our needs, in poor condition,
and staff is spread throughout the building
in an inefficient manner. A new Sheriff’s
facility is proposed and hopefully that
project will make great progress during the
next fiscal year to address this problem.
 The California Peace Officer’s Standard &
Training (POST) has historically reimbursed
law enforcement agencies for the costs of
much of our needed and mandatory
training. However, POST has terminated
that reimbursement and this has caused a
serious financial hardship to our agency
because the training is still required, but the
funding is gone for the immediate future.
 The radio communication system for the
Sheriff’s Department is in desperate need of
upgrade. Current communications to field
units is inconsistent at best and presents an
officer safety issue. An upgrade to this
system is part of the new Sheriff’s facility
project.
Complete the renovation of the patio boat
and get it online and in use.
 Complete the repair of our underwater
robot used in underwater recovery
operations.
 Provide water safety to the lakes and rivers
in Yuba County.
 Continue to provide water safety courses to
the public.
Continue the training of staff to improve
our technical skills.
 Patio boat renovation.
 Meeting the challenges of a drought year
and its impact on our waterways.
Continue the safe, humane, secure and
efficient operation of the county jail.
 Continue to maximize revenues through the
rental of excess bed space.
 Prepare prisoners, mentally and physically
for successful reintegration into the
community.
 Zero escapes and in-custody deaths.
 Continue reporting of all foreign-born
county prisoners, in custody on serious
charges, to ICE for criminal alien screening
and deportation.
 Maintain facility and various systems to
insure reliability, security and efficiency.
 Continue high standard of training for the
division via roll call training, monthly
training and off site training. Consider individual officer’s training
recommendation when developing training
plans.
 Assess facility systems such as graphic
panels, heating and air conditioning and
camera system and consider development
of a long-range plan that addresses system
upgrades.
 Continue the development of the
Correctional Reserve program through
recruiting hiring and training.
 Assess the jail division computer inventory
and develop a plan to replace computers
that are outdated and underpowered.
 Develop a space plan for the office space in
the courthouse that will be vacated by the
pending sheriff’s office move.
 Develop feasibility study for the expansion
of the Jail’s medical area.
 Continue to develop instructional
programming for the Jail’s new
television/video system that aids in the
education and development of the inmate /
detainee population.
 Assess the vehicle fleet of the
transportation unit and, if necessary,
develop a plan for transitioning to the
replacement vehicles.
 Work with the Probation Department in
developing the parameters for the County’s
new Intervention Counselor position.
 Like last year, Yuba County continues to
face economic struggles. It will be
imperative for the department to continue
development and enhancement of its
alternative sentencing and rehabilitative
programs to relieve jail overcrowding.
Simultaneously, the department is
developing plans to make improvements to
the facility.
 One concept that could help reduce the
daily population is a Pre-Trial Release
Program, which seeks to release
defendants, who meet certain criteria, prior
to trial. The program uses a system of
scientific data and a risk assessment tool to
identify those defendants who will most
likely complete program requirements,
appear in court, and not re-offend while
awaiting their court appearance.
 The Sheriff’s Department is working with
the Yuba County Probation Department in a
collaborative effort to devise and
implement such a program.
 In terms of facility improvements, the
department looks to renovate the area that
houses the medical unit. This undertaking
will include restructuring of the offices and
holding areas, and an overall expansion of
the square footage of the unit .
 The facility will soon be in need of replacing
the graphic panels that house the controls
the deputies use to operate the facilities
doors. The current system is dated and the
facility will look to upgrade to a more
modern design.
 There will be some focus on aesthetic
improvements to the facility also. Several
ceiling tiles in certain parts of the facility are
showing water damage and are in need of
replacement.
Continue training ACS staff on animal
disaster rescue procedures.
 Continue to hold periodic rabies clinics in
various areas of the County.
 Continue expansion of Animal Shelter
programs which benefit the health and
well-being of the animals.
 Upgrade the “get-acquainted outdoor area”
so people and animals have a place to bond.
 ACS non-emergency and emergency calls
for service remain high. Staff to call ratio is
high and staffing remains below 2007
levels.
 Shelter space/animal intake remains
extremely high and often requires creative
space management.
 The growth potential of Wheatland,
Marysville and the County (and the animal
ownership related to that growth) is of
future concern.
 ACS dispatching of calls for service and the
post-call narratives and reports are not as
efficient as they could be and will require
advanced software, radio, and possibly
personnel to upgrade.
 The ACS software program(s) will require
enhanced County IT infrastructure if in-car
technology is planned.
 Mobile and hand-held radios need
upgrades.
 The use of Sheriff’s Work Alternative
Program participants is not as efficient as
the former YCSO Jail Trustee program and
requires more staff hours to ensure
adequate staffing.
The civil unit will strive to maintain excellent
service to the public while minimizing the
turnaround service time for civil actions.
Due to the complexity of the responsibilities of
the Sheriff’s Civil Services Associate position,
the department began providing training to a
current civil unit employee as a backup.
Maintain the service to the public.
 Maintain the safety of the treasury pooled
investments.
 Continue to proactively find cost effective
methodologies to reduce banking
expenses utilizing electronic transfers and
economies of scale.
 Continue to expand e-payables for
treasury participants.
 Update the Treasurer & Tax Collector’s
website to make it a more effective tool
for communicating important information
about this office and the County.
 Pursue and monitor options for cash flow
management such as TRANs for all possible
jurisdictions.
 Assist in any and all County financing to
find the most cost effective option
available.
