Our goals are to provide a work environment
that enables innovation and efficiency, provides
a well maintained vehicle fleet, assures a safe
and clean workplace and well cared for
facilities, and to continue to enhance our
administrative practices.
Specific projects on the horizon for the coming
year include:
 Official ‘Project Establishment’ and to begin
actual construction of the Tri-County
Juvenile Rehabilitation Facility.
 See the construction of and transition to
the new Sheriff Facility in the winter of
2015.
 A thorough revision of the County’s
Purchasing and Contract Policy Manual with
the aid of a consultant.
 Greater purchasing ‘outreach’ to local
businesses to maximize our spending with
local merchants.

 We do not have any anticipated county
policy issues.
 As we complete our reorganization, we look
forward to the opportunity to reengineer
our internal policies and procedures.
Will host the 2015 Golden West Regional
Fly-in & Air Show on October 17, 2015
 Identify new revenues to maintain selfsufficiency
 Identify areas on the airport for solar farm
activities as a new revenue source and
potential energy savings for the airport and
its operators; OPUD and the County will be
constructing projects in this fiscal year in
non-aviation properties of the airport
proposed in FY 2014-2015
 Continue developing a series of visual
enhancement projects to clean up the
airport properties
 Maintain hangar occupancy at 100 percent
 Research new grant programs to continue
the Airport Capital Improvement Programs
 Continue to implement security procedures
to prepare for federal requirements
applying to general aviation airports
 Create a new airport logo, new marketing
brochure, and continue design ideas as
revenues allow
 Continue to review and determine revenue
for the implementation of airport
surveillance camera systems and gate
access control systems

 The Airport Maintenance Coordinator
position was transitioned to Administrative
Services - Buildings & Grounds in FY 2011-
2012. Costs continue to be shared for this
position between B&G and the Airport at 50
percent each. This action benefits the
Airport with both budget and labor
allocations. It will also result in greater
backup maintenance assistance when
needed across all locations.
 The FY 2011-2012 budget package included
an A-87 charge of $41,983 as opposed to
the FY 2010-11 budget with an A-87 charge
of $113,911. The airport received some
assistance from the Administrative Services
budget for FY 2010-2011 in the amount of
$50,000 to bring the Airport’s portion down
to $63,911. In this 2012-2013 budget
proposal, the airport had a credit of
$54,605, with FY 2013-2014 back with a
charge at $35,104, and 2014-2015 at
$8,782. FY 2015-2016 is charged at
$25,184.
 For FY 2010-2011, Reclamation District
assessments were billed to the airport at a
total of $33,746 which reflects fees similar
to FY 2008-2009 on which the airport owed
a balance of approximately $25,000. A
payment plan was created to pay these fees
and was finally paid in full during FY 2013-
2014. During FY 2008-2009, Reclamation
District 784 assessments were initially
determined to be $52,836 and were later
reduced to $33,639. The new levee fees of
approximately $9,000, adds a new annual
expense. It should be noted, the Airport
can only recover a small portion of the fees
charged from Lessees as the fees relate to
the entire property of the airport. There
are a total of 3 acres of buildings with 75
acres of airfield developed with 10 acres of
road; for a total of 13.39 percent or 88 of
the 657.2 acres of the airport developed.
The remaining properties are open space or
airport safety areas and thus RD 784 costs
must be borne by the Airport. RD 784 billed
the Airport in June 2014 for the past 2 years
in the amount of $53,543 covering FY 2012-
2013 ($34,048) and FY 2013-2014
($19,495), and again in December 2014
another $20,155 for FY 2014-2015. This has
resulted in a significant drain on the
Airport’s cash flow and will result in a tight
balance of revenue versus expenditures for the Airport’s budgeted activities.
 The Olivehurst Public Utility District (OPUD)
fire assessment fees are approximately
$4,594 annually. Unlike the RD 784 and the
levee fees that are based on the entire
airport developed areas, including runways
and taxiways, the majority of the OPUD and
light district fees are recovered from the
lease tenants utilizing the property.
 The security requirements for general
aviation airports, as a result of the 9-11
incident, continue to be discussed by the
Federal Aviation Administration. The
airport has completed 90 percent of the
fencing requirement. A new grant will be
requested to continue the security projects.
Remaining plans include fence completion
and installation of surveillance cameras at
key points. Funding for additional gate
systems and cameras will be pursued during
this fiscal year, pending the priorities set for
the Airport Improvement Program.
 During the construction of the new airport
pollution control facility at the main hangar
entry area, considerable soil contamination
was discovered both during a tank removal
process and preparation of the pad for the
control facility. A total of 410 tons of soil
are currently scheduled to be removed due
to a contamination of the pesticide
toxaphene. The airport continues to work
with the County hazmat team in proper
control of the contaminated soil area and
removal plans. The original estimated cost
to remove the soil was $142,000. The soil is
being managed on site and a plan will be
determined on how to phase out the
removal of the contaminated material.
 Completion of the updated Airport Master
Plan was accomplished in October 2008.
With the plan finalized, the airport will
continue to work on the next phase of
projects. The Airport is currently working
with the Yuba-Sutter Economic
Development Corporation for an EDA grant
that would build a taxiway to serve the
Skyway Drive industrial properties. This
project is considered as a potential project
within the current Airport Master Plan.
 The Airport has a pending grant application
that would allow the Airport to purchase 45
acres of a 90-acre parcel adjoining the
airport property to the south. This
acquisition would provide ‘encroachment
protection’ to the airport resulting from
residential development and will provide
the ability to extend the runway at a future
date. New FAA legislation has increased the
potential federal share to 95 percent. With
the state’s match, the Airport’s share of this
project is reduced to 2.5 percent. The
remaining 45 acres will be available to the
owner to market to new business. A
navigation easement will be developed for
this area to limit height and the types of
projects that can be developed in
compliance with the Airport’s land use plan.
The lot split has already been completed.
 The Master Plan preparation has
determined the need to consider
purchasing two additional 45-acre parcels
just east of the 90-acre parcel (above) that
will be in the path of the proposed 1,000 ft
main runway extension approach. These
funds are being reserved from the prior
year land sales to accomplish any grant
match requirement for this purchase. This
project has been added to the Airport’s
Capital Improvement Plan for grant
consideration after the initial 90 acres are
purchased.
 The Airport will continue to maintain a close
review of the airport’s cash flow and make
every effort to develop new airport revenue
streams to maintain self-sufficiency.
Install required backflow devices on
Courthouse water main lines.
 Upgrade AC units for MDF room at Packard
facility.
 Complete courts carpet
replacement/asbestos abatement project.
 Encapsulate exterior wall with new siding at
Government Center.
 Replace parking lot, west and north sides, at
Government Center.
 Replace basement exhaust fan at
Courthouse.
 Complete remodel of future Yuba-Works
space at Packard facility.
 Remodel print shop space for future IT
offices and lab at Government Center.
 Trim/remove North Annex elm trees.
 Complete ADA inspections for all required
facilities.
 Replace broken Airport control tower glass.
 Assist in remodeling of new Yuba Street
sheriff facility.
 Continue to support our customers and
complete work orders in a timely manner.
 Try to focus more attention on preventative
and planned maintenance rather than
“putting out fires.”
 Develop comprehensive tree maintenance
plan to ensure safety of public and
employees.
 The Custodial Services Division’s biggest
challenge is to continue to provide
acceptable services with the reduced
staffing levels we are continuing to deal
with. We are down four positions from
previous years, but support more office
space than ever before. Without more
resources our facilities will deteriorate in
appearance and our ability to ensure
sanitary conditions will decline. Having said
that, it will continue to be the objective of
the custodial staff to provide the best
possible housekeeping services to the
County with the staffing levels we are given,
and to maintain a teamwork approach
towards one another. Our main objective is
to keep all County facilities looking new,
presentable, sanitary, and safe, and to
preserve our structures from wear and tear
the best we can.
 Additional staff is requested. 
Completion of construction and move in for
the Sheriff is anticipated to occur by
January 2016.
 We expect to complete the preparatory
effort to officially ‘establish’ the Juvenile
Facility project in the coming year, with
actual construction to likely begin the
following year.
 And we anticipate completing the CASp
certified ADA inspections and reporting on
our facilities in the coming year.
As a result of AB-93, the State Enterprise
Zone Program was eliminated as of January
1, 2014. No goals and objectives are
proposed. The responsibilities of zone
managers officially ended on December 31,
2014.
 No further vouchers can be processed and
no revenue will be generated. The tax
credit voucher applications on file with the
Zone Manager are required to be
maintained for five years from the date of
issuance. During FY 2015-2016, the vouchers on file will be scanned and filed
for future reference as may be needed by
either the business community or the
Franchise Tax Board. The Airport Manager
will continue to provide zone management
services as needed. Remaining local zone
revenue will reimburse the services
provided by the Airport Manager.
Maintain airport field lighting, vegetation
control, and paved surfaces in order to
assure a safe operational environment for
the flying public
 Update the administration’s computer
systems to current standards
 Conduct regular T-hangar inspections and
conduct an annual review of all tenant files
to include implementation of a new hangar
rental agreement.
 All other goals listed under the airport’s
main budget unit also apply.

 The State budget has not placed any hold
on State Division of Aeronautics annual
funding to airports; however, these funds
will not be used until there is the assurance
of receipt.
Pursuing revenue sources that would
benefit the Department and the County,
while focusing on maintaining expenditures
at a minimum.
 Pursue a grant opportunity through CDFA
for a noxious weed detection program in
the mountainous areas of the county.
 Coordinate with Sutter and Nevada county
weights and measures officials to identify all
the specifications needed before the open
bidding process takes place to replace the
shared Heavy Capacity Truck.
 Work with all Federal State and Local
emergency agencies and departments to
best position Yuba County Agriculture to
become eligible for all drought relief that
will become available through the various
programs as the ongoing divesting drought
continues.
 Maintain an active role with the Technology
Advisory Committee (TAC) and the
California Commissioner and Sealers
Association (CACASA) in the development of
the CALPEATS pesticide inspection program.
 Continue to incorporate the new evolving
statewide permit system (CalAgPermits).
This will require working with the
development company, Department of
Pesticide Regulation, industry, growers,
Yuba County I.T. as well as other counties.
Provide training resources to staff as we
continue implementation of the
CalAgPermits program to encourage “online
reporting” with the regulated industry
and growers.
 Work with Yuba Sutter Farm Bureau, Farm
Services Agency, and Resource
Conservation District on agricultural related
issues that have the potential to affect Yuba
County. Drought effects being the primary
issue of concern.
 Make all necessary adjustments to the
department workload to assure as many
Agricultural Phytosanitary exports take
place, to help keep Yuba County exporters
be competitive world wide.
 Assure all our Licensed Biologists maintain
through federal exam, their qualifications as
a United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) ACO exporter accreditation.
 Continue working through CACASA to
negotiate increased funding through the
unclaimed gas tax distribution and the
Pesticide Mill Assessment.
 Administer the remaining Federal Forestry
Reserve Payment (HR 2389) Title III funds to
implement programs approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
 Continue working with area growers to
address agriculturally related water quality
issues and to represent Yuba County on the
Sacramento River Water Quality and the
Butte-Sutter-Yuba Sub-watershed Coalitions
 Serve as a resource to Board of Supervisors
and the Planning Department during the
updating of the County’s policies as per the
General Plan, County Use Permits (CUP) and
participate in various committees as
requested by the Board or County
Administrator.
 Secure additional funding through the Yuba
Sutter WMA, CDFA and private sources for
Hydrilla eradication project as well as
compete for statewide supplemental
funding for same.
Walnut theft in Yuba County continues to
be a problem to Walnut growers and
processors. The department in conjunction
with YS Farm Bureau, walnut industry and
the Yuba County Sherriff will review the
current “Walnut Theft Ordinance” to see if
any amendments are needed.
 The Department continues to provide
resources for facilitation of the Fish and
Game Advisory Commission. Should the
department continue in this capacity,
funding resources should be considered.
 The Agricultural Commissioner is working
with the Planning Department on providing
land use recommendations adjacent to
agriculture operations. Potential
agricultural buffers may be an issue that will
need to be addressed by the Board of
Supervisors.
 Provide training and resources for new
biologist that will start working in late
spring for the department.
 The “Fire Safe Coordinator” agreement will
end June 30th, 2015. The Board of
Supervisors will need to make a decision as
to whether “county funds” should be used
to extend the program for fiscal year
2015/16 or allow the “Fire Safe
Coordinator” position to end.
 USDA Wildlife Services Specialist (County
Trapper) provides for non-domestic animal
damage control including education and
outreach. This program has been on verge
of termination due to budget constraints. It
is recommended that the Board of
Supervisors consider this program’s priority
during the budget process.
Provide for Junior Pheasant Hunt in late
October/ early November pending state
decision and funding.
 Utilize YCWA grant funds for Frank Allen
Fishing Event.
 Fair Booth promoting Yuba County Fish and
Game Commission and Yuba County Water
Agency.
 Continue Boat Safety Day at Bullard’s Bar. Continue participation in the annual River
Cleanup Day.
 Complete Fish and Game Advisory
Commission bylaw process with Board of
Supervisors approval.
 Expand activities pending additional funding

 Seek Brown Act training for Fish and Game
Commissioners
Recruit and fill a new Real Property
Appraiser III position effective July 2015.
This position will, if approved, replace a
previous Auditor Appraiser III position that
had been lost to budget cuts in 2011.
 Continue to examine and adjust the
assessed values of approximately 6,000
properties currently assessed under the
provisions of Proposition 8.
 Fairly and accurately assess all taxable
properties in the county.
 Produce a quality assessment roll at the
most economical cost.
 Provide information and access to the
public.

 Real estate values are expected to increase
through 2015. Assessor staff will be
pressed to timely restore approximately
6,000 properties that have had their
assessments temporarily reduced under the
provisions of Proposition 8.
 It is essential that the assessor have
adequate staffing and budgeting resources
to accomplish this major objective. As staff
begins to restore assessments that were
temporarily reduced General Fund revenues
will increase. It is in the County’s best
financial interest to adequately fund the
assessor to maximize revenue to the
General Fund.
 Experience gained from the last economic
recovery, which occurred in the late 1990’s,
taught us to expect a substantial increase in
the number of assessment appeals likely to
be filed as assessments begin to be
recaptured. Staff can quickly become
overwhelmed defending assessment
appeals.
 The assessor desires to formulate a plan by
partnering with the County Administrative
Officer to negate any extra workload
associated with an increase in assessment
appeal activity. Consideration should
include measures such as authorizing
overtime, extra-help, and hiring additional
staff in 2015.
With the information gained from efforts in
fiscal year 2-14-2015 the Auditor-
Controller’s Office our goal is to reduce the
time required to complete the financial
audit even further. The overall objective is
to make sure county decision makers have
accurate and timely financial information
upon which to base fiscal policy and related
decisions.
 The Auditor-Controller’s Office will continue
efforts to train county staff in governmental
accounting procedures to establish a
common baseline for accounting
operations. The goal of improved financial
reporting can be more easily achieved as
county staff is of the same understanding.
The Office intends to meet with individual
departments to address specific knowledge
and policy needs in the coming year.
 The Office continues to see the need to
revise and improve existing county policies
and procedures related to accounting.
Additionally, there still remains a need for
implementing new policies to address areas
not currently covered by existing policies.
Efforts are ongoing in this area and are
expected to continue in fiscal year 2015-
2016.

 The resources in the Office of the Auditor-
Controller are sufficient to maintain the
current minimal service levels. Efforts to
improve on the minimal levels of service
currently provided will require an injection
of additional resources.
Consider approval of the updated
Development Code.
 Hold strategic planning workshops.
 Consider refinement of countywide policies
related to financial management and
administration.
 Oversee final completion of the new
Sheriff’s Facility.

 Monitor and address budget issues related
to health insurance and pension costs
increases.
 Monitor enforcement of the new marijuana
ordinance.
 Continue to advocate for repayment of inlieu
property taxes owed the County by the
State of California.
Continue meeting the various needs of
customers in the current economic
environment to ensure that families served
by the Yuba County Department of Child
Support Services meet the financial and
medical needs of their children
 Continue to improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of program performance so
that the children and families served by the
department benefit.
 Continue to operate as cost effectively as
possible despite increased costs.
 The foundation of performance
improvement efforts continues to be Early
Intervention. The objective of the Early
Intervention focus is to increase collections
through increased customer contact,
outreach, and education early in the life of
a case. The desire is that this will increase
the collection of support with consistent
and reliable payments and prevent and
reduce arrears while enhancing customer
service by engaging the customer early in
the child support process. Welcome
appointments and multiple phone calls
throughout the process are initiated by the
department to inform the customer of the
next steps and processes. The staff is
directed to be a proactive participant on
assigned cases.
YCDCSS has seen a decrease in the number
of cases due to a change in State policy that
excludes Medical Needy Only (MNO) cases
from being referred from Health and
Human Services. Consequently, the
department needs to perform outreach to
those customers as well as the Non IV-D
caseload to maintain our caseload counts
and collections.
 Collections of support remain a constant
challenge across the state. As the economy
struggles so do child support collections.
 Cost Effectiveness compares the total
amount of distributed collections to the
total amount of expenditures for the fiscal
year, expressed as a dollar amount. With
reduced collections and increased expenses
annually, this performance measure has
been a challenge. In order to improve Cost
Effectiveness the department has
attempted to reduced expenses resulting in
unspent allocation. Additional reductions
to spending could jeopardize the amount of
State and Federal funding that could be
received in the future. The Department
must spend all of the funding that is
received in order to maintain this level of
funding.
 This budget is essentially a status quo
budget request; the final state allocation
letter will not be received until the
governor signs the budget. YCDCSS expects
to receive a level of funding similar to the
flat level that we have received in prior
years. Although the allocation remains
constant, increased costs have an effect
over time of reducing funding for the
program. The Department has relied upon
attrition for cost savings in order to absorb
increases in the past. While we anticipate
being able to continue to provide essential
services this fiscal year, future changes may
be required. FY 14/15 allocations are being
used to prepare this budget. Below is how
the department proposes to use the
allocated funds.
Complete migration to LSX agenda
management system that will provide a
comprehensive paperless agenda which
may be accessed by tablet or computer
 Implement document imaging retrieval on
County website for database of Board
minutes, resolutions, ordinances, and
agendas. 
Provide training for departments on agenda
and committee submittal requirements
 Help facilitate a Brown Act and Public
Records Act training for Boards,
Commissions, and Committees
 Develop informational handout for Board
appointed representatives regarding
general roles and responsibilities
 Investigate live web streaming of Board of
Supervisors meetings
 Update office and agenda procedures due
to changes or upgrade in system
 Ascertain ways to streamline operations for
costs and time savings

 Migration to the new agenda management
program has been a challenge and ongoing
for two fiscal years which has delayed the
transition to new computers and Windows
2007. If migration is not accomplished,
funding will be required for agenda
management software. Funding is required
for software to manage Board Standing
Committee appointments as the current
program is not compatible with Windows
2007.
 With the real estate market recovery there
has been a decrease in assessment appeals
and subsequently processing fees have
decreased. Reimbursements from TRLIA
continue to decrease.
Complete cross training of all staff members
in the major components of the different
division functions of the
Clerk/Recorder/Registrar of Voters
divisions.

 Continue ongoing staff and managerial
training to comply with changing legislation
in order to maintain the high level of service
and operations to the citizens of Yuba
County.
In 2015 California will implement VoteCAL,
a statewide automated voter registration
system. Yuba County is scheduled to
convert in November 2015.
 Implement significant legislative changes
related to the voting process.
 Restructure poll worker training to increase
retention using more advanced learning
techniques.

 Successful implementation of the VoteCAL
system will trigger significant procedural
changes to include election day registration.
Possible changes to voting system approval
processes may impact the county by making
updates to existing systems or new systems
available. Current election equipment and
systems are aging but there have been no
viable options to update or replace
components since 2007 when changes to
the voting system re-certification process
severely restricted the approval process and
use procedures.
Facilitate business process updates to
provide more web-services to our
customers. A whole host of web based
services are envisioned across the CDSA Departments from enabling the public to be
able to find out more information about a
particular property’s zoning or past building
permits, to being able to apply for a
building permit, to being able to schedule
an inspection on a building permit, and so
on. Giving the public the option to use the
web to do business with us instead of
having to do business in person.
 Work on short and long term funding
solutions for Public Works to resolve the
fuel tax funding shortfalls.
 Identify a longer term management
solution for the Library through creation of
a mid-manager position to oversee
operations of the facility.

 CDSA contains nearly all of the County’s
land use regulatory departments in one
Agency. This is a purposeful arrangement
to ensure better coordination of land use
related issues. Each of the Agency’s
departments is tasked with various
regulations outside the County’s control,
such as the building code, CEQA, state map
act, food code, etc. that the County is
required to conform to and/or regulate to.
The Agency attempts to take these various
state and federal regulations and
implement them in a manner through
County ordinances that are consistent with
and conform to the Board’s adopted vision
and strategic priorities. The comprehensive
update of the County’s land use regulations
contained in the Development Code is a
great example of trying to balance local
direction with state and federal regulatory
constraints through the update of the
County’s land use ordinances. CDSA looks
forward to working with the Board of
Supervisors, and the public over FY 15 -16
on finding the right balance on the
comprehensive update of the County’s
Development Code.
The Planning Department is responsible for
maintenance and implementation of the
Yuba County General Plan and Specific
Plans. These plans and their goals and
guidelines are the constitution for all
development within the County and are
applied to all issues concerning economic
development, historic preservation, public
health & safety, housing, preservation of
natural resources, and overall quality of life
for our residents.
 With the completion of the Development
Code Update and Zoning Map, the Planning
Department intends to begin
implementation of other actions required
by the 2030 General Plan. This also includes
documenting any issues with the
Development Code or associated regulatory
documents (Design Guidelines, CEQA
Guidelines, etc…) and making
recommendations to the Board for a
technical update in the 2016/2017 fiscal
year to address any issues.
 Other major projects expected to be
completed include:
 Resource Efficiency Plan
 Magnolia Ranch Specific Plan
 Recology Green Rail Project
Other goals and objectives include:
 Continue to evaluate and improve internal
processes to increase efficiency;
 Develop additional hand-outs to assist the
public with the development review process
and improve website interface;
 Continue coordination with the Yuba
County Economic Development Coordinator
and YSEDC to attract businesses to our area
and assist them with the permitting
process;
 Continue to provide additional internal and
external training for staff; and,
 Represent Yuba County at regional, state
and national conferences (presentations)

 We are experiencing an increase in building
permit and current planning development
applications. In addition to completing the
projects listed above, there are several
action items in the 2030 General Plan that
Planning will need to begin implementing.
The Board has also identified several
strategic priorities that will directly involve
Planning. Therefore, one of the biggest
challenges facing the Planning Department
in 2015-2016 will be adequate staffing for
current and future demands. Due to the
cyclical nature of development activity, we
will be exploring the use of limited term,
extra help, interns, and/or Calworks to
augment staffing needs.
Provide continued quality customer service
to the general public as well as the
development community
 Complete first phase of software upgrades
 Provide continuing education to employees
as mandated by the State law
 Continue internal policy updates
 Continued support for Olivehurst Avenue
Underground Utility District project
 Provide training to new staff
 Continue re-prioritization of case load to
reduce officer workload

 Submit draft Ordinance for consideration by
the Board to comply with SB2188;
streamlining Solar Energy Permits
 Update/Amend existing manufactured
home ordinance to incorporate all premanufactured
structures and buildings
Continue to administer CSBG program
 Release Request for Proposals for
subcontracting services to low-income
households, enter into contracts with
successful applications
 Update Community Action Plan

 The programs provided by the Community
Services Commission, including the costs of
administering the program are provided by
CSBG funds. The level of services provided
including administration support vary year
to year depending on the amount of
funding received by the State. Due to the
elimination of the Housing Division, this
program is now being administered through
the Planning Department. In an effort to
reduce administrative costs, the Planning
Department is utilizing an extra-help staff
person for the day to day administration of
the program. If program administration
responsibilities and costs continue to
outweigh the funds received for
administration, the County may need to
consider other options for on-going
administration of the CSBG program.
Continue on prior successes of the program,
which includes a total of 40 homes that
have been rehabilitated and resold to
income eligible families since 2009.
 Rehabilitate, and resell 10 homes in fiscal
year 2015-2016 completing all remaining
inventory. Final count will be 50
rehabilitated.
Continue to define businesses in Yuba
County that are required to comply with
programs administered by the Certified
Unified Program Agency.
 Certify two new employees as ICC UST
inspectors and AST inspectors.
 Provide assistance to underground
storage tank (UST) facilities and
maintain inspection activities for UST
facilities pursuant to the approved Rural
UST Leak Prevention Program Grant.
 Implement AB2286 requirements to
transfer inspection and enforcement
data to the California Environmental
Reporting System (CERS).
 Implement electronic posting of food
inspections to the Yuba County website.
 Improve the review process for land use
projects that have a potential to create
future expansion problems in the septic
and well use areas.
 Implement a grey water ordinance.
 Develop a Local Area Management Plan
(LAMP) for the management and
monitoring of advanced septic systems
as required by AB885.

 AB885 requires establishment of a local
ordinance for the installation and
maintenance of on-site liquid waste
disposal systems and policy and procedures
for ongoing program implementation. This
issue has been in various forms of progress
over the past decade and it appears that
implementation may need to occur in FY
2015-16.
Construct Olivehurst Avenue complete
streets project between 7th Ave and
McGowan Parkway.
 Widening and overlay of Loma Rica Road
between Scott Grant Road and Los Verjeles
Road.
 Construct extension of Goldfields Parkway
from the Orchards Subdivision to N. Beale
Road.
 Begin constructing N. Beale Road complete
streets project between Lindhurst Ave and
Hammonton-Smartsville Road.
 Continue additional phases of Hammonton-
Smartsville Road shoulder widening safety
projects.
 Asphalt overlay of Mathews Lane and
Ramirez Road “Farm to Market” routes.
 Construct new corporation yard on Skyway
Drive and substantial improvements to
Loma Rica corporation yard.
 Begin construction of bridge replacement
on New York House Road at Dry Creek.
 Rehabilitate covered bridge on Alleghany
Road at Oregon Creek.

 The state is projecting an approximate 1/3
decline in gas tax revenues for fiscal year
15/16. This is by far the worst fiscal
scenario for the Road Fund in the past 10
years or more, putting the Road Fund in a
significant structural deficit. “One-time”
banked revenues can plug most of the gap
for fiscal year 15/16, limiting our General
Fund ask to address the remainder, but
ultimately a gas tax fix or alternative
funding source is needed to adequately
fund Public Works. Over the years, costs
have continued to rise, while our primary
revenue source (gas tax) has remained flat
or declined, putting us on an unsustainable
trajectory. Gas taxes have not kept pace
with inflation and cars utilize less gas with
increased efficiencies and number of
electric vehicles over time.
 Explore various proposals and options for
generating new transportation revenues,
both statewide and locally.
 Evaluate funding options for the increasing
costs associated with adhering to the new
Phase II Small MS4 General Permit (see
discussion under Drainage Budget).
Streamline processing of LLAs and COCs to
improve efficiency and expedite project
approvals for applicants. The proposed
new Development Code simplifies these approvals by eliminating the need for them
to be heard at a public hearing of the Staff
Development Committee.
 This budget houses the County’s new water
resources engineer, who has been tasked to
manage the County’s storm water quality
program required under the new Phase II
Small MS4 General Permit (see discussion
under Drainage Budget).
 The Drainage Budget does not include
employees, so this position is budgeted in
the Surveyor Budget.
Continue efforts addressing local drainage
problem areas, however, we do not
anticipate funding for storm drain
improvements over the coming fiscal year.
Continue with floodplain management
efforts at a high enough level to maintain a
CRS rating of 6, continuing to save property
owners money on flood insurance.
 Our primary goal over the next several
years will be to increase storm water quality
protection efforts to successfully implement
and adhere to the requirements of the
State’s new Phase II Small MS4 General
Permit. The requirements of the new
General Permit are onerous and failure to
comply can bring large fines. Our attention
this coming year will be focused on the year
3 General Permit requirements. Some of
the more important components include:
 Establishing an Enforcement Response
Plan;
 Conducting a public survey to gauge
public awareness and effectiveness of
education activities;
 Developing and distributing education
materials for construction site
operators;
 Conducting staff training;
 Conducting water quality sampling at
priority outfall areas;
 Conducting facility assessments;
 Inspecting the storm drain system;
 Assessing operations and maintenance
activities;
 Inventorying and inspecting all
structural post-construction Best
Management Practices; and
 Implementing Hydromodification
measures into drainage designs.
Going forward, the workload associated with
the General Permit compliance will require continued support from the General Fund,
unless an alternative funding mechanism can be
secured. This workload will require maintaining
the water resources engineer position, with
some supplemental consultant services.
During fiscal year 15/16, Public Works is
requesting $120,000 in funding from the Yuba
County Water Agency to make much needed
improvements to the pump station at the Erle
Road undercrossing. If the existing pump
(which is nearing the end of its useful lifespan)
fails, the undercrossing will flood without a
means to evacuate the standing water.
Pending Issues/Policy Considerations
FY 2015-2016
 Continue implementing the much more
stringent Phase II Small MS4 General
Permit, and the terms of this unfunded
mandate. Going forward, determine how
to fund the water resources engineer and
supplemental consulting costs required as a
result of the new General Permit. Currently
a Stormwater Funding Initiative is being
considered by the California legislature.
This would allow the California public the
opportunity to decide if “stormwater”
infrastructure and services should be
funded similar to the way Wastewater
Districts and Water Districts fund their
infrastructure and services. If California
voters approve the Stormwater Funding
Initiative, each city, county, or community
will decide how to implement the initiative
through a public process. After conducting
public hearings, some communities may
decide to fund all aspects of their
stormwater needs, some may only fund a
portion or certain elements of their needs,
and others may decide not to implement
any funding measures.
Pursue grant funding opportunities for
further improvements to County parks.
Further forge the collaboration with the Tsi-
Akim tribe to expand educational
opportunities regarding local cultural
heritage. Evaluate camp reservation
vendors so that patrons can reserve specific
sites for specific dates, which should
increase use of the campground and
associated revenues.
 Public Works is requesting to spend
$10,000 from Trust (Sycamore Ranch
camping fees) in FY 15/16 to purchase a
dump trailer. The dump trailer will be used
extensively in the maintenance of Hammon
Grove and Sycamore Ranch, saving many
labor hours pertaining to the pickup of
leaves and vegetative debris.
Pending Issues/Policy Considerations
FY 2015-2016
 Strive to make Sycamore Ranch self
supporting by increasing revenues (through
increased patronage) and decreasing
maintenance costs. Consider pursuing
partnership with the Yuba Sutter Economic
Development Corporation to spread the
word and advertise the availability of
Sycamore Ranch as a recreational
destination.
PUBLIC SAFETY AND HEALTH
 Continue to work with new Rideout
Hospital CEO in coordinating emergency
response efforts and partnering on health
initiatives.
 Work with the incoming Health Officer to
improve the County’s overall health
statistics and programs to assist residents.
 Work with Public Safety departments to
examine current and potential funding
sources to adequate fund their operations.
 Oversee successful completion of the new
Sheriff’s Facility.
 Oversee and continue to coordinate the
new three county Joint Powers Authority
for Juvenile Hall, as well as the initial design
and planning activities.
RESPONSIBLE GROWTH
 Further efforts to complete the
Development Code update.
 Work closely with Community Development
& Services Agency, the Board and
Legislative Affairs Coordinator to monitor
and support efforts to provide a sustainable
level of funding for local road repair and
enhancements.
ORGANIZATIONAL EXCELLENCE
 Develop new financial policies relating to
reserves and capital funds.
 Review and revise existing financial policies.
 Prepare for upcoming labor discussions
with three bargaining units.
 As our organization does year after year,
continue a theme of departments
collaborating with each other on numerous
initiatives and enhancing services to our
communities.
 Continue providing our development and
well being programs for our employees
(Yuba County Academy, Employee
Wellness, restart of the Supervisors
Development Program and Executive
Leadership Program).
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
 Coordinate with school districts, special
districts, and cities to further our economy
and develop our communities.
 Coordinate a recently adopted business
incentive program along with the
Community Development and Services
Agency.
 Continue to invest in our infrastructure for
readiness of economic development as
residential growth continues.
Continuing to monitor drought conditions
and regulations that are handed down from
state agencies.
 Staff allocations for the County
Administrator’s Office have remained at an
all time low for the last five years. Core
staff consists of the County Administrator
and one analyst. This is extremely low
when comparing to similarly sized counties.
The professional services budget which
allows administrative staff to undertake
special studies and analysis as required is
woefully inadequate. The lack of available
funding hampers the ability of the Board’s
key policy office to plan for the
organization, address community needs,
undertake new initiatives and, most
importantly, respond timely to the Board of
Supervisors.
Improve and continue focused business
attraction, retention and expansion
programs and activities that increase
employment levels and sales tax revenues,
and decrease unemployment numbers
 Strengthen strategic partnerships with key
stakeholder organizations including the
Yuba-Sutter EDC, UpState California EDC,
SACTO, Small Business Development Center
(SBDC), Chamber of Commerce, 1-Stop
Centers, WIB, Yuba College, etc.
 Leverage committee activities and
workshops to maximize business feedback
to the Board of Supervisors, including the
Economic Development Advisory
Committee and the Yuba County Alliance
for Development (YuCAD)
 Coordinate Business Perspectives 2015
luncheon and promote the selection of the
business “Champion of Yuba County”
 Update and publish collateral material
including the 2015 Economic Profile and
tourism guides to encourage business
development and visitors
 Coordinate effective methods to “tell the
story,” including the creation of a 2015
“Champion of Yuba County” business video
documentary and highway billboard, and
create complementary advertising material
to promote Yuba County opportunities
 Utilize media relations, social media, and
direct contact to promote an understanding
of Yuba County’s strengths and relative
business advantages
 Provide the community and Board of
Supervisors with regular economic
development announcements and updates
including public presentations, quarterly
Yuba County E-Note, annual Economic
Profile, reports and memos
 Take coursework as required to maintain
professional accreditation with the
International Economic Development
Council (IEDC’s CEcd certification)
 Maintain positive relationships and strong
partnerships with County departments,
businesses, developers, residents, and
community organizations
 Identify grants, partnerships and methods
to decrease marketing and program costs
and to increase efficiency
 Promote Yuba County benefits and state tax
credit programs
 Maintain and improve the economic
development website located at
www.chooseyuba.com
 Continue to report and present economic
development metrics that are measurable,
sustainable, and accountable
 Adhere to and actively promote the
County’s Strategic Plan
Economic Development is identified in the
Yuba County Strategic Plan, adopted August
18, 2009, as one of four identified strategic
priorities and directs staff to encourage a
business friendly environment and promote
policies to improve existing programs
 Supporting a robust business retention and
attraction program is critical to the current
and future health and financial success of
Yuba County residents and businesses
 Manufacturing jobs and related businesses
will require the commitment of new and
improved water, sewer, drainage and
related infrastructure in the areas of the
Yuba County Airport Industrial Park and
other identified planning areas, including
the Rancho Road Corridor and Employment
Village
 The elimination of redevelopment
programs and enterprise zones in California
has limited some business incentives in
Yuba County while creating new state tax
credit programs that staff will monitor and
promote as appropriate
 Staff continues to monitor and make
recommendations regarding the use of
Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG) funding for local business lending as
coordinated through the state’s Housing
and Community Development Department
where it potentially places General Fund
dollars at risk
 Staff will continue to partner with the Yuba-
Sutter EDC to identify grant funding for
Yuba County projects promoting jobs and
providing business attraction and expansion
opportunities
 The Yuba County Water Agency’s successful
application for full operation of the Colgate
hydro-electric facility may provide future
opportunities for business incentives
 Staff will be presenting a Business
Incentives Committee formation
consideration to the Board of Supervisors
 Staff is developing initiatives in partnership
with other local and regional organizations
to identify and encourage growth within
targeted industry sectors.
Provide updated emergency plans to
Disaster Council and forward to Board of
Supervisors for final approval.
 Work with Yuba County Public Health to
incorporate health related plans as annexes
to the County EOP.
Develop and provide on-going training and
exercises for EOC staff.
 Work with municipalities and districts to
further coordinate emergency management
planning.
 Work with EOC Management team
members to complete advanced EOC
training and work towards credentialing in
their assigned position per the NIMS
Training Plan.
 As a member of the YSHMRT Administrative
Group, work with the Members to help
insure the team’s long term success.
 Review and update all county emergency
plans.
 Continue the professional development of
OES staff.
 Develop secondary dispatch center / call
center.
 Conduct remodel and complete tech
refresh of EOC.

 For the FY 2015/16 budget year, the
Emergency Services base and requested
budget reflect a slight overall decrease in
the total allocation, due to a decreased
number of current grants being
administered. Emergency Services has no
increase to its general fund allocation,
having absorbed all increased costs.
Every member of the County Counsel’s
Office will strive to continue providing
superior legal services to the Board of
Supervisors, Commissions, County Boards,
County Departments and Special Districts of
Yuba County.
 Continue training and cross-training of
attorneys and para-professional staff.
Ideally any attorney on staff should be able
to handle most of the types of cases that
County Counsel deals with; it is our goal to
try to reach that ideal through crosstraining
and through a variety of
assignments. As in the past, the District
Attorney has agreed to cross designate
deputy County Counsels to handle selected
misdemeanor prosecutions in order to gain
jury trial experience.
 The dependency (Child Protection) caseload
continues to be a major function of the
County Counsel’s Office. The dedication of
more than a full time attorney position to
that caseload has brought stability to the
dependency caseload and a good deal of
“customer satisfaction” from the Health
and Human Services Department.
 It continues to be a major goal of County
Counsel’s Office to build a team approach
with CPS in order to effectively advocate for
child protection in the County.
The significant internal goals for FY 15/16
will be restoring and funding a Legal
Office Assistant position which was
vacated in April of 2012 and deleted in FY
13-14. The deletion reduced the legal
support staff to 3 positions, and required
the Legal Services Supervisor to assume
the misdemeanor support duties normally
handled by the deleted position. In CY
2014, this required her to input and
prepare 2,090 misdemeanor case files in
addition to her own supervision and
administrative duties, impacting the
efficiency of both.
 Providing comprehensive training to two
new prosecutors who have recently
passed the state bar and have joined the
office. The positions were held by two senior prosecutors, one of whom has
retired after 30 years of service and the
other who has taken a senior position
with Sacramento County after 16 years of
service. These new prosecutors are the
first new hires in over 8 years.
 Adapting to new case filing and
sentencing practices resulting from the
passage of Proposition 47.
 Update and refresh the Office Policy and
Procedures manual.
 Update, as resources permit, the office
web presence.
 The significant external goal will be to
review and coordinate law enforcement
policies regarding the anticipated use of
body cameras.
 Secondary goals will be to: 1) complete a
coordinated review with the Sutter
County District Attorney’s Office of officer
involved critical incident procedures; and
2) continue law enforcement education
regarding Brady discovery obligations and
procedures.

 The continued public safety impact of
Proposition 47 on case filing and
sentencing practices, offender supervision
and treatment options, and investigative
resources.
 Officer involved shooting/critical incident
related legislation from the State
legislature, including the investigation of
prosecution review of critical incidents
and the potential use of law enforcement
body cameras.
 The institution of pre-trial release
program to provide more jail capacity for
offenders sentenced to local prison under
Realignment.
Administrative Services
Work with County Building and Grounds on:
 Packard Facility Painting Project - Rear
Work with County Information Technology (IT)
on:
 Exterior Camera Replacement Project
 Benefit Issuance Laser Printer Project
 Lobby Document Upload Kiosk Project
 CWS Tablet Project
 Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) for Call
Centers
Adult Services
 APS staff will be seeking outreach
opportunities with local Law Enforcement
agencies during the coming year to increase
collaboration for the safety and well-being
of dependent adults and the elderly over 65
populations.
 Social workers will continue to perform IHSS
and APS duties to enhance the efficacy of
interventions used to improve the quality of
life of those we serve to continue to build
on the team approach to services.
 In the coming year, the IHSS program is
hoping to renew an annual Appreciation
Day for clients and providers, as well as
continuing to participate in the Immigration
Ceremony for new citizens to improve the
relationship between Adult Services, the
providers and the clients we serve.
 The MSSP program will continue to monitor
aging clients on the IHSS caseload for
transition to the MSSP program when
openings become available to allow them to
remain in their homes as long as possible,
avoiding the premature placement in a
nursing facility.
 The SNAC program has not been able to add
any new seniors to the program due to
funding issues. Adult Services will research grants and/or other funding sources to
continue to provide for the existing seniors
and expand the program to include the 25-
30 seniors on the waiting list.
Child Welfare Services
 Continue to refine and build on the
collaboration with Sutter-Yuba Mental
Health in reference to the Katie A. Core
Practice Model.
 Redesign and implement a Wraparound
Program to maintain high risk children in
the community.
 Implement strategies to improve Family
Finding process to locate potential relative
caregivers.
 Increase the number of county licensed
foster homes through recruitment and
outreach.
 Continue to implement and monitor
strategies outlined in the county’s SIP to
continually assess our practices, services,
and systemic factors to make
improvements and effectively plan to
improve outcomes for the children and
families of Yuba County.
 Establish a Continuous Quality
Improvement (CQI) process to evaluate
process to measure the county’s
performance on established state and
federal outcome measures.
 Implement Review, Evaluate and Direct
(RED) teams in Emergency Response (ER) to
improve assessment of families and
decision making as a team.
Employment Services
 Implement the State's Standardized
Assessment Tool.
 Implement recommendations received
from the State during the Field Monitoring
Visit, as related to those participants with
transportation barriers.
 Join the State and other counties’ efforts to
increase the State's overall Work
Participation Rate to avoid federal penalties
and improve the services we provide to
clients. Our strategy is to provide
continuous training and implement
recognition and incentives program for staff
reaching targeted WPR rates.
 Relocate the Employment and Training
Specialists and support staff from the One
Stop location to our main Packard Avenue
location. This move will allow us to offer all
job readiness activities/workshops on-site,
increase access to other services located at
this location for participants, and enhance
communication between the social workers
and instructors, enabling us to offer a more
seamless delivery of services.
 Transition all drug felons to eligible
CalWORKs status and reengagement into
Welfare-to-Work activities per ACL 14-100.
 Continue to expand our Family Stabilization
and Expanded Subsidized Employment (ESE)
programs which launched in 2014.
Public Assistance
 Continue to improve the lobby experience
and reduce wait times for customers visiting
the Health and Human Services office.
 Expand self-service options for customers,
including integrating a Document Upload
Kiosk (DUK) providing immediate assistance
and enhanced case control for customers.
 Integrating intake business processes into
the existing call center infrastructure,
expanding the options to customers
applying for benefits.
 Continue to assist customers with online
applications via the C4Yourself system and
provide information on any functionality
updates.
 Continue to monitor caseloads and make
necessary service level adjustments to
ensure high quality customer assistance.
 Enhance employee program knowledge by
conducting weekly meetings to provide
updates and changes to the various
programs administered by eligibility staff.
Enhance the community perception that
HHSD is an accessible public services
agency, and encourage division employees
to present the department in a professional
and positive light through community
outreach and presentations.

Adult Services
 The President’s FY 2015 budget request
included $25 Million for an Elder Justice
Initiative, which is the first time funding
has been requested since the Elder
Justice Act, approved by Congress in
2010. To date, the Senate has
appropriated $10 million of the
requested $25 million for the initiative,
but the process is not yet complete.
The Governor’s proposed FY 2015
budget allocates $5 million to Adult
Protective Services (APS) for additional
training. An APS advocate position at
the State level has also been approved,
and is awaiting the Governor’s
signature.
 Yuba County Adult Services is preparing
for its bi-annual audit of the
Multipurpose Senior Services Program
(MSSP) that includes a Fiscal audit in
June and a Program audit in September
2015.
 The critical issue in the coming year will
be the survival of the Community Care
Initiative (CCI). If the CCI fails to prove
its purported cost savings, the program
will be discontinued, and with it, the
Maintenance of Effort Agreement with
the State. This will affect the funding of
the In-Home Supportive Services
program, and impact the Adult Service’s
budget.
Children’s Services
 The Child Welfare Services (CWS) local
trends show an increase of activity in
caseload work. This is particularly true
in Emergency Response, which has filed
92 petitions this year. This number
translates into increased court reports,
home visits, and services to families;
including visitation program services,
home visits to foster caregivers and
biological family homes; increased
monetary costs for foster care and
services for children and parents. CWS
also takes on voluntary service cases
which increase the workload. CWS
adopted the Safety Organized Practice
model to increase engagement of
family. One of the goals of this practice
is to have the family involved and
engaged in as many aspects of their
cases as possible in order to assist in
shortening the time to permanency for
the child. CWS will be implementing
the Red Team model this year. This
practice will assist with increased
critical thinking and promote
consistency in our decision making on
CWS referrals, as the decisions are
made by a team consensus. CWS will be
increasing its efforts to find and
approve relative caregivers who are
willing and able to take placement of
foster children. The goal is to create
support networks and potential
permanency solutions for children if
reunification is not possible.
 The state and federal governments
have increased new and existing
mandates for CWS. These include the
New Continuous Quality Improvement
(CQI) process, to evaluate performance
of the System Improvement Plan
strategies. This includes the
implementation of a new case review
process to evaluate performance on the Child and Family Service Review
(CFSR) outcome measures.
Additionally, the state and federal
governments have been closely
monitoring the periodic visits to foster
homes by the social workers. For
almost five years, the target has been
for agencies to complete at least 90% of
these visits. Beginning in 2015 the
expectation is that 95% of these visits
are to be completed. As this will likely
increase the workload for individual
social workers, CWS is exploring the use
of mobile technology. CWS will
purchase mobile tablet devices for
social workers to use in the field,
allowing for increased accuracy in
reporting on client contacts.
Employment Services
 The State's overall CalWORKs caseload
has been declining since 2011-2012,
and this trend is projected to continue
into 2015-2016; however the
Employment Services caseloads
continue to increase as a result of
legislative and policy changes that have
been made in recent years and Yuba
County's statistics are similarly aligned
with these projections. If the State's
forecast is accurate, there will be a 3.8
percent increase in our Employment
Services caseload from last fiscal
year. As a result, we anticipate a
decrease in CalWORKs funds, but that
decrease will be offset by an increase to
our Employment Services funding.
 The Employment Services Team
continues to actively increase
Subsidized Employment and Family
Stabilization Programs, as well as
retraining and educating staff, on
guidelines that govern Work
Participation Rates (WPR).
 Previously scheduled to implement last
year, the State Department of Social
Services will begin implementing a
standardized appraisal tool for county
use statewide. Yuba County is
scheduled to implement within the first
quarter of 2016. This new appraisal
tool will require automation changes
and staff training. Each Welfare to
Work appraisal appointment is
expected to increase by one additional
hour; necessitating Social Workers
devote more time to completing the
complex and time-consuming Welfare
to Work appraisal process.
 As a result of AB 1468, all eligible drug
felons will need to be reengaged into
Welfare-to-Work activities.
Public Assistance
 Though the governor’s budget assumes
a Medi-Cal caseload growth rate of 2.1
percent, Yuba County has seen a
dramatic increase of over 30 percent
during 2014-2015. The Affordable Care
Act (ACA) implementation funding
included an augmentation in the
current year due to the increased
workload associated with a higher than
expected caseload and the ongoing
need for manual work associated with
the CalHEERS computer system. For the
budget year 2015-2016 administration
has proposed to continue the
augmentation counties received for
implementation of the ACA.
 The CalFresh caseload in Yuba County
has remained relatively stable in size,
but upcoming programmatic changes
suggest that the workload will grow at a
projected rate of 8.6 percent in 2015-
2016. CalFresh Modified Categorical
Eligibility (MCE) raises the gross income
limit to 200 percent of the federal
poverty level (FPL) for most CalFresh
applicants, while individuals with a prior
felony drug conviction are once again
eligible to CalFresh benefits. Both of these changes should result in an
expansion of the customer base for the
CalFresh program.
Initiate the Community Health Assessment
(CHA) for accreditation.
 Launch an obesity prevention program with
a “tool box” for community partners to
utilize.
 Promote and support the completion of
Yuba College’s smoke-free campus policy.
 Complete the MCAH 5-year action plan.
 Initiate a fluoride varnish program in
partnership with the school districts.
 Develop a “Back to School” immunization
campaign and an anti- tobacco advertising
campaign which targets youth.

 There are several bills pending which
pertain to tobacco products including
electronic cigarettes. If passed, there would
be impacts to the Tobacco program
including the need to develop new
educational materials and campaigns for
outreach activities.
 To continue monitoring the timely and
accurate invoicing of reimbursement to the
county for the Administrative services and
the Provider health insurance costs. Monitor
this budget unit’s cash flow and expenditure
line item appropriations.
The majority of the projects and objectives that
HROS focused on last year are ongoing, solely
based on the nature of the programs. We’re
implementing and maintaining best practices
and strive to be business partners with the
departments we serve.
 Labor & Employee Relations
Our contracts with the Deputy Sheriffs
Association (DSA), Management Sheriffs
Association (MSA) and Yuba County Probation
Peace Officers’ Association (YCPPOA) are all
expiring in June 2016. Our ongoing goal is to
continue to have productive contract
negotiations with these groups while preserving
the financial strength and fiscal responsibility of
the County.
Our office is also responsible for the
implementation of MOU/MLA contract
provisions in negotiated contracts. While some
items aren’t as time consuming, others, such as
sub-committees, require dedicated and
sustained effort.
 Recruitment and Selection
We will focus on the responsible use of social
networking sites such as LinkedIn and Facebook
for recruitment purposes.
 Employee Retention & Turnover
We will be doing a deep analysis of turnover
data and working with department
management to address identified trends.
 Training & Organizational Development
Using the management survey results we
obtained this year, and in collaboration with the
Organizational Excellence Committee, we plan
to continue offering the supervisory and
employee development series. However, we
will also prioritize gaps identified in the survey
such as succession planning and the creation of
individual development plans.
 Affordable Care Act Compliance
Compliance with the ACA will continue to be
one of our top priorities this fiscal year. 2016
brings the introduction of new IRS and
individual reporting requirements.
 Risk Management, Safety & Loss Prevention
After training departmental supervisors and
additional HROS employees on how to conduct
ergonomic evaluations of workstations, our goal
this fiscal year is to proactively provide
ergonomic evaluations for newly hired,
promoted or transferred employees as part of
the onboarding process. We hope to prevent
ergonomic injuries before they occur with this
model.
We will be creating a schedule for departmental
Risk & Loss Prevention Assessments to
determine where we may be able to improve
the program either through risk transfer, policy
development, training or engineering controls.
We plan to review losses with departments and
discuss trends that have been identified from
historical data.
 WinCAMS HRIS Implementation
We will continue with the phased
implementation of CAMS this fiscal year. Our
department is up against some critical deadlines
for compliance with Affordable Care Act which
rely heavily on the next phases of our CAMS
implementation. We are currently using some
redundant processes to audit calculations and
reports in the new system and eagerly
anticipate being able to eliminate many of the
duplicate processes this fiscal year.
As we complete phases of CAMS project, we
will need to develop and deliver countywide
departmental training and written procedures
on the use of the program and the related
work-flow processes.
 Metrics
We will begin to build strong metrics on data
housed in CAMS which will allow us to be more
proactive in assessing countywide trends and
benchmarks for the programs we manage.

 It is too early to tell how AB1522, the
Healthy Families, Health Workplaces –
Mandatory Paid Sick Leave law will impact
County departments, specifically
departments who rely heavily on extra help
employees. However, with the impacts of
both the Affordable Care Act and AB 1522,
we may see an increase in requests for
organizational assessments, a change in
staffing requirements and/or an increase in
recruitments. As regards the ACA, we
anticipate the need to monitor revisions
and interpretive guidance on the Cadillac
Tax Provision within the ACA slated to go
into effect in 2018.
 In 2011, Governor Brown consolidated the
State Personnel Board (SPB) and the Dept. of Personnel Administration to form the
California Dept of Human Resources
(CalHR). CalHR is currently working on a
revision to Title 2 which will create new
Merit System Services (MSS) regulations
that will govern the recruitment and
selection process for public agencies. We
are participating in the review and
comment process, and will continue to
monitor the Title 2 revisions. A change of
this magnitude will create significant
impacts to our processes, policies,
procedures and rules.
The IT Department needs to continue
expanding to meet the increasing needs for
automation across the county.
Specific initiatives and projects follow.
Expand capacity
 Work to expand Information Technology
physical space to accommodate additional
people – especially the new helpdesk team
 Add additional data storage required for
compliance with several state directives on
record retention (especially video/audio
retention)
Enable Secure Mobile Systems
 Evaluate Mobile Device Management
(MDM) systems to securely manage mobile
devices (tablets, smartphones) used in the
field for delivering county services
 Develop support plans for mobile devices
(tablets, smart phones)
Improve efficiency and integration
 Work to better integrate data and systems
used for Human Capital Management
(HCM) across the county. Tactically, we will
be supporting using the new HCM system
(WinCAMs) as the employee master for
other departments that use WinCAMs.
Improve Security and Compliance
 Educate users in ways to classify and
protect any personal or other classified data

 While the county is actively protecting all
critical data and has contingency plans in
place for Data Center loss, there is currently
no County wide Disaster Recovery or
Business Resumption plan. We plan to
evaluate the needs, alternatives, and costs
for such a plan in the upcoming year.
Continued weeding of the adult non-fiction
area (up and down stairs)
 Complete inventory of the collection
 Continue to offer additional preschool
programs
 Continue digitalization of the California
Room historical archives to improve access
and searching capabilities of the
information.
 Prepare for the annual Summer Reading
Program 2014/2015 (Read to the Rythm).
The Library is currently operating at
historically low funding and staffing levels
while also operating in a transitional
environment where access to information is
transitioning from physical materials to
digital. When opportunities arise to
increase funding, the County needs to be
strategic with its investments in the Library
to ensure they are in line with this
transforming environment.
Adult Supervision
 Expand availability of Moral Recognition
Therapy programming to include a
curriculum specific to domestic violence
offenders.
 Expand resources available at the Day
Reporting Center.
 Start Pre-trial release program staffed by
probation officers.
 Create new caseload for high-risk offenders.
This will reduce the size of each high-risk
caseload and allow for closer supervision.
Adult Court
 Maintain extremely high quality of Court
reports generated by the Adult Court unit.
Continue to have an experienced probation
officer present in Court for all major
sentencing and providing added assistance
to the Court as needed.
 Maintain frequent communication with the
presiding Judge and the felony sentencing
Judge to ensure we are meeting the needs
of the Court and sharing information
regarding any changes, trends, or new
developments.
 Educate the Court on the advantages of
utilizing the programs at the Day Reporting
Center.
Proposition 36 (Section 1210.1 PC)
 Continue to intensely supervise the clients
on probation pursuant to Section 1210.1 of the Penal Code, to better provide them with
guidance and referrals to programs that will
assist with their success.
 Continue to utilize motivational
interviewing techniques in our meetings
with the clients on probation pursuant to
Section 1210.1 of the Penal Code, to
successfully motivate them to follow
through with positive choices with their
lifestyle.
 Seek funding for residential treatment and
clean and sober living programs.
 Continue bi-weekly meetings with Yuba
County Probation Department drug
counselors
 Continue weekly meetings with the Yuba
County 1210.1 Penal Code Probation team.
Drug Court
 Continue to secure extra funding from
Comprehensive Drug Court Implementation
grant funding for the existing Adult Drug
Court program.
 The continued expansion of the Friends of
Drug Court program through acquisition of
greater resources so to better assist Drug
Court clients.
 Our goal is to continue to work closely with
Drug Court clients and provide services and
motivation to focus on their continued
recovery. The Drug Court team has a desire
to see a Dependency Court developed to
serve participants in the Drug Court
program with children that could be
involved with Child Protective Services.

 Proposition 47 (Nov. 2014): Reclassified
many theft and drug possession
offenses to misdemeanors. The
legislation also provided for the
resentencing of existing felons who
were eligible to have their convictions
reduced. The net effect will be a
significant portion of the supervised
population (10-15%) eligible for
resentencing, which may include
termination of supervision. 
Update programs provided to youth
and their families to meet their needs.
 Implement the new regulations of Title
IVE to ensure compliance.
 Implement Restorative Justice and
Parent Project.
 Continue to implement changes in
AB12/AB212.
 Work with CDSS to implement the new
case management system for probation
to ensure compliance with out of how
placement requirements.

 The reduction of Federal Title IV-E
money.
Continue to Improve the ADA compliance of
the Dan Avenue property in which the
Victim and Program Services unit is housed,
specifically, identify funding to bring into
compliance the entry doors and bathrooms.
 Priority will be to complete a strategic plan
as well as a business plan for Victim Services
in Yuba County.
 Explore grant possibilities falling in line with
the counties goal to not be dependent on
“one time monies” that allow for the
development of sustainable programs.
 Conduct quarterly briefings with all local
law enforcement to further ensure victims’
rights and identify gaps/problems
surrounding Victimization in Yuba County
 Provide 24 community presentations
throughout Yuba County addressing cultural
issues unique to Yuba County and services
offered at Victim Services.
 Update the Victim Services webpage and
add resources for victims to access online.
 Begin application and feasibility study for
the establishment of a Child Advocacy
Center in Yuba County to have a “one stop
shop” for all child advocacy and treatment
needs.
Continue to improve the evidence based
model of programming for youth.
 Implement third phase of the Positive
Behavioral Interventions and Supports
program (PBIS) in the juvenile hall school.
 Further implement policy and procedures to
address the Prison Rape Elimination Act
(PREA) standards.
 Institute final phase of state revisions of
Title 15 and 24 of the California Code of
Regulations.
 Complete the planning and design phase of
a new Tri County Juvenile Rehabilitation
Facility.
Awaiting final approval from the Board Of
State and Community Corrections for 9.6
million dollars for new Juvenile
Rehabilitation Facility.
Secure funding through federal/state/local
resources
 Fill the departments vacant Deputy Public
Guardian position 
Maintain partnerships with community
organizations and businesses
 Participate in care conferences and
complete quarterly encounters for proper
maintenance and wellbeing of Conservatees
 Eliminate barriers to least restrictive
placement for Conservatees
 Finalize implementation of teleconference
communication for court proceedings
 Adhere to Yuba County Strategic Plan
 Work with Multidisciplinary Team for
outreach and agency collaboration
 Attend training to meet PA/PG/PC
requirements
 Improve departments response time with
use of Telesec service
 Utilize affordable training opportunities to
enhance staff skill level
Host our fourth annual Northern California
Canine Competition.
 Develop new strategies for the use of
crime analysis.
 Begin construction on the new Sheriff’s
Department facility.
 Complete our radio communications
project.
 Work in partnership with local fire
departments and the District Attorney’s
Office to train new arson investigators.
 Expand our online reporting system to
streamline shoplifter investigations.
 Purchase and train a narcotics detection
dog for our canine team.
 Continue providing in-house training which
meets the POST compliant objectives
wherever possible.
 CA POST training for all peace officers is
up-to-date.
 Continue to work with the Patrol and
Detective Units to develop and improve
the crime analysis unit to provide even
more timely and pertinent information on
crime trends and patterns.
 Continue with upgrading all Department
computer related equipment for the move
from Windows XP to Windows 7.
 Expand SWAP and AOWP programs to
encompass additional public agency and
non-profit participation so that additional
court ordered work hours and inmates can
be involved in the program.
 Continue training program for two
additional Forensic Recovery Evidence
Device (FRED) deputies as well as providing
training for cell phone evidence recovery.
 For the Crime Analysis Unit to continue
working closely with the Administration
and Operations Staff to develop as much
information and statistical data as possible
which will help identify the criminal
element and possible methods of
operation.
 Complete training of additional forensic
evidence officers.

 The Operations Division continues to
function with 12 unfunded positions due
to recent budget constraints, and this
creates a hardship on remaining
employees.
 The current Sheriff’s facility is grossly
undersized for our needs, in poor
condition, and staff is spread throughout
the building in an inefficient manner. A
new Sheriff’s facility is proposed and
hopefully that project will make great
progress during the next fiscal year to
address this problem.
 The California Peace Officer’s Standard &
Training (POST) has historically reimbursed
law enforcement agencies for the costs of
much of our needed and mandatory
training. However, POST has terminated
that reimbursement and this has caused a
serious financial hardship to our agency
because the training is still required, but
the funding is gone for the immediate
future.
 The radio communication system for the
Sheriff’s Department is in desperate need
of upgrade. Current communications to
field units is inconsistent at best and
presents an officer safety issue. An
upgrade to this system is part of the new
Sheriff’s facility project.
Meet the challenges of another drought
year as it continues to impact local
waterways.
 The Deputy assigned to seasonal boat
patrol at Bullards Bar retired last year and
we have replaced him with an experienced
operator.
 Provide water safety to the lakes and rivers
in Yuba County.
 Continue to provide water safety courses to
the public.
 Continue the training of staff to improve
our technical skills.
Continue the safe, humane, secure and
efficient operation of the county jail.
 Continue to maximize revenues through the
rental of excess bed space.
 Prepare prisoners, mentally and physically
for successful reintegration into the
community.
 Zero escapes and in-custody deaths.
Continue to work with ICE for criminal alien
processing and deportation.
 Maintain facility and various systems to
insure reliability, security and efficiency.
 Continue high standard of training for the
division via roll call training, monthly
training and off site training.
 Consider individual officer’s training
recommendation when developing training
plans.
 Assess facility systems such as graphic
panels and the heating and air conditioning
system, with consideration of developing a
long-range plan that addresses system
upgrades.
 Continue the upgrade of the facilities
camera and communication systems, which
began in 2014.
 Continue the development of the
Correctional Reserve program through
recruiting hiring and training.
 Develop a space plan for the office space in
the courthouse that will be vacated by the
pending sheriff’s office move.
 Develop feasibility study for the expansion
of the Jail’s medical area.
 Continue to develop instructional
programming for the Jail’s television/video
system that aids in the education and
development of the inmate / detainee
population.
 Assess the vehicle fleet of the
transportation unit and, if necessary,
develop a plan for transitioning to the
replacement vehicles.
 Work with the Probation Department in
developing the parameters for the County’s
new Pre-Trial Release Program.

 Yuba County continues to face economic
struggles. The department will continue to
monitor and develop its alternative
sentencing and rehabilitative programs to
prevent jail overcrowding. Simultaneously,
the department is working with the Yuba
County Probation Department in
developing plans to implement a Pre-Trial
Release Program.
 The Pre-Trial Release Program seeks to
release defendants, who meet certain
criteria, prior to trial. The program uses a
system of scientific data and a risk
assessment tool to identify those
defendants who will most likely complete
program requirements, appear in court,
and not re-offend while awaiting their
court appearance.
 In terms of facility improvements, the
department is continuing to develop plans
for renovation of the medical unit. This
undertaking will include restructuring of
the offices and holding areas, and an
overall expansion of the square footage of
the unit.
 The facility will soon be in need of
replacing the graphic panels that house
the controls the deputies use to operate
the facilities doors. The current system is
dated and the facility will look to upgrade
to a more modern design.
 There will be continued focus on aesthetic
improvements to the facility also. Several
ceiling tiles in certain parts of the facility
were replaced due to showing water
damage. More remain in need of
replacement.
Continue training ACS staff on animal
disaster rescue procedures.
 Continue to hold periodic rabies clinics in
various areas of the County.
 Continue expansion of Animal Shelter
programs which benefit the health and
well-being of the animals.
 Upgrade the “get-acquainted outdoor area”
so people and animals have a place to bond.
 Expand the role of volunteers as necessary
to improve customer service.
 Examine ideas for front office for security
upgrades including a barrier for front office
staff and security cameras.
 Examine ways to expand the secure parking
lot for ACS vehicles.
 Examine ways to add more space for
horses, goats, and other animals.
 Add additional storage for feed and
equipment.
 Review potential of vehicle mounted
computers and software which would allow
calls for service to be viewed as well as the
ability to input call disposition from the
field.
 Upgrade hand held radios.
 Upgrade mobile radios as vehicles are
replaced.
 Fill an extra help ACS Officer position.
 ACS non-emergency and emergency calls
for service remain high. Staff to call ratio is
high and staffing remains below 2007
levels.
 Shelter space/animal intake remains
extremely high and often requires creative
space management.
 The growth potential of Wheatland,
Marysville and the County (and the animal
ownership related to that growth) is of
future concern.
 ACS dispatching of calls for service and the
post-call narratives and reports are not as
efficient as they could be and will require
advanced software, radio, and possibly
personnel to upgrade.
 The ACS software program(s) will require
enhanced County IT infrastructure if in-car
technology is planned.
 Mobile and hand-held radios need
upgrades.
 The use of Sheriff’s Work Alternative
Program participants is not as efficient as
the former YCSO Jail Trustee program and
requires more staff hours to ensure
adequate staffing.
